Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2019  with  funding  from 
Kahle/Austin  Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/earlygreekphilosOOOOburn 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


UNIFORM  WITH  THIS  BOOK 


STUDIES  OF  THE  GREEK  POETS 

by 

John  Addington  Symonds 
Third.  Edition 


ADAM  &  CHARLES  BLACK  :  LONDON 


EARLY 

GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


BY 

JOHN  BURNET 

M.A.,  LL.D.,  F.B.A. 

EMERITUS  PROFESSOR  OF  GREEK,  UNIVERSITY  OF  ST.  ANDREWS 


Ilfpi  fJLtv  twv  ovTo>v  TT)v  dXrjdfiav  f'aricojrovv,  rft  ft  'svra  vrrtKafittv 
aval  ra  alaOr/ra  fiovov. — ARISTOTLE. 


FOURTH  EDITION 


LONDON 

ADAM  &  CHARLES  BLACK 


Printed  tn  Great  Britain. 

First  Edition  published  April  1892. 

Second  Edition  June  1908.  Third  Edition  September  1920. 
Fourth  Edition  1930.  Reprinted  1945. 
Reprinted  1948,  1952,  1958  and  1963 

A.  AND  C.  BLACK  LTD 
4,  5  AND  6  SOHO  SQUARE  LONDON  W.  I 


NOTE  ON  THE  FOURTH  EDITION. 

The  present  is  a  reprint  of  the  third  edition,  but  the  oppor¬ 
tunity  has  been  taken  to  incorporate  a  couple  of  additional 
references  and  one  correction  which  the  author  had  noted  in  his 
own  copy  and  to  correct  some  misprints  and  trivial  slips. 

St.  Andrews,  March,  1930. 


W.  L.  LORIMER. 


PREFACE  TO  THIRD  EDITION 


As  a  third  edition  of  this  work  has  been  called  for,  and  as  it 
has  been  translated  into  German 1  and  into  French,2  it  must 
have  served  some  useful  purpose,  in  spite  of  its  imperfec¬ 
tions,  of  which  I  am  naturally  more  conscious  than  any  one. 
The  present  edition  was  prepared  under  the  stress  of  war 
conditions,  which  much  abridged  the  leisure  of  university 
teachers,  and  its  publication  has  been  delayed  longer  than 
I  could  have  wished  for  the  same  reason. 

My  aim  has  been  to  show  that  a  new  thing  came  into  the 
world  with  the  early  Ionian  teachers — the  thing  we  call 
science — and  that  they  first  pointed  the  way  which  Europe 
has  followed  ever  since,  so  that,  as  I  have  said  elsewhere, 
it  is  an  adequate  description  of  science  to  say  that  it  is 
“  thinking  about  the  world  in  the  Greek  way.”  That  is 
why  science  has  never  existed  except  among  peoples  who 
have  come  under  the  influence  of  Greece. 

When  the  first  edition  of  Early  Greek  Philosophy  was 
published,  twenty-eight  years  ago,  the  subject  was  still 
generally  treated  in  this  country  from  a  Hegelian  point  of 
view,  and  many  of  my  conclusions  were  regarded  as  para¬ 
doxes.  Some  of  these  are  now  accepted  by  most  people, 
but  there  are  two  which  still  provoke  opposition.  In  the 
first  place,  I  ventured  to  call  Parmenides  “  the  father  of 
Materialism,”  and  it  is  still  maintained  in  some  quarters 
that  he  was  an  Idealist  (a  modern  term,  which  is  most 

1  Die  Anf tinge  der  griechischen  Philosophic,  aus  dem  Englischen  ubersetzt  von 
Else  Schenkl  (Berlin,  Teubner,  1913). 

2  V A  urore  de  la  Philosophic  grecque ,  Edition  francaise,  par  Aug.  Reymond 
(Paris,  Payot,  1919). 

v 


1565? 


vi  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 

misleading  when  applied  to  Greek  philosophy)  on  the  ground 
that  “  the  very  essence  of  materialism  is  that  this  material 
world,  this  world  of  sense,  is  the  real  world,”1  and  that 
Parmenides  certainly  denied  all  reality  to  the  world  of  sense. 
Undoubtedly  he  did,  and,  if  I  had  used  the  term  Materialism 
in  the  sense  alleged,  I  should  have  been  talking  nonsense. 
As  I  understand  it,  however,  the  “  matter  ”  of  the  Materialist 
is  not  a  possible  object  of  sense  at  all ;  it  is  as  much,  or 
more,  an  ens  rationis  as  Spirit,  and  the  “  being  ”  of  Par¬ 
menides  is  the  first  clear  attempt  to  apprehend  this  non- 
sensuous  reality.  That  is,  in  fact,  the  main  thesis  of  my 
book,  and  the  vital  point  of  the  argument  is  my  insistence 
on  the  derivation  of  Atomism  (which  is  admittedly  material¬ 
istic)  from  Eleaticism,  in  accordance  with  the  express  state¬ 
ments  of  Aristotle  and  Theophrastos  (pp.  333  sqq.).  If  that 
is  wrong,  my  whole  treatment  of  the  subject  is  wrong. 

The  other  paradox  which  has  still  to  win  acceptance  is 
my  contention  that  the  opposite  view  which  finds  reality 
not  in  matter,  but  in  form,  the  Platonist  view  in  short,  goes 
back  to  the  Pythagoreans,  and  was  already  familiar  to 
Sokrates,  though  it  was  not  formulated  in  a  perfectly  clear 
way  till  the  days  of  the  Platonic  Academy.  I  am  convinced 
that  this  can  only  be  made  good  by  a  fresh  interpretation 
in  detail  of  the  Platonic  dialogues,  and  I  am  now  engaged 
on  that  task.  It  is  necessary  to  make  it  quite  clear  that 
the  interpretation  current  in  the  nineteenth  century  was 
based  on  certain  assumptions,  for  which  no  evidence  has 
ever  been  offered,  and  which  are  most  improbable  in  them¬ 
selves.  I  cannot  discuss  this  further  here,  but  I  hope  to 
have  an  early  opportunity  of  doing  so 

J.  B. 

St.  Andrews,/^  1920. 

1  W.  T.  Stace,  A  Critical  History  of  Greek  Philosophy  (London,  1920) 

DD.  An  xnrr  '  7  7  n 


CONTENTS 


Introduction  ..... 

. 

• 

PAGES 

i~3° 

Note 

on  the  Sources 

• 

bH 

1 

O-i 

GO 

CHAP. 

I. 

The  Milesian  School. 

• 

•  39-79 

II. 

Science  and  Religion  . 

• 

• 

.  80-129 

III. 

Herakleitos  of  Ephesos 

. 

• 

.  130-168 

IV. 

Parmenides  of  Elea 

• 

• 

.  169-196 

V. 

Empedokles  of  Akragas 

• 

• 

.  197-250 

VI. 

Anaxagoras  of  Klazomenai  . 

• 

• 

.  251-275 

VII. 

The  Pythagoreans 

• 

• 

.  276-309 

VIII. 

The  Younger  Eleatics 

• 

• 

.  3x0-329 

IX. 

Leukippos  of  Miletos 

• 

• 

•  330-349 

X. 

Eclecticism  and  Reaction  . 

• 

• 

•  350-361 

APPENDIX 

* 

• 

.  363-364 

INDEX  .... 

. 

365-375 

ABBREVIATIONS 


Arch. 

Beare. 

Diels  Dox. 
Diels  Vors. 

Gomperz. 

Jacoby. 

R.  P. 

Zeller. 


Archiv  fur  Geschichte  de?  Philosokhie.  Berlin,  1888- 
1920. 

Greek  Theories  of  Elementary  Cognition ,  by  John  I. 
Beare.  Oxford,  1906. 

Doxographi graeci.  Hermannus  Diels.  Berlin,  1879. 

Die  Fragmente  der  Vorsokratiker ,  von  Hermann  Diels, 
Dritte  Auflage.  Berlin,  1912. 

Greek  Thinkers ,  by  Theodor  Gomperz,  Authorised 
(English)  Edition,  vol.  i.  London,  1901. 

Apollo  dors  Chronik ,  von  Felix  Jacoby  {Philol.  Unters. 
Heft  xvi.).  Berlin,  1902. 

Historia  Philosophiae  Graecae ,  H.  Ritter  et  L.  Preller. 
Editio  octava,  quam  curavit  Eduardus  Wellmann. 
Gotha,  1898. 

Die  Philosophie  der  Griechen,  dargestellt  von  Dr.  Eduard 
Zeller.  Erster  Theil,  Fiinfte  Auflage.  Leipzig,  1892. 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


INTRODUCTION 

I.  It  was  not  till  the  traditional  view  of  the  world  and  the  The  cos- 
customary  rules  of  life  had  broken  down,  that  the  Greeks  ^aracter 
began  to  feel  the  needs  which  philosophies  of  nature  and  °£ree^ly 
of  conduct  seek  to  satisfy.  Nor  were  those  needs  felt  p^10' 

J  _  sophy. 

all  at  once.  The  ancestral  maxims  of  conduct  were  not 
seriously  questioned  till  the  old  view  of  nature  had  passed 
away  ;  and,  for  this  reason,  the  earliest  philosophers  busied 
themselves  mainly  with  speculations  about  the  world 
around  them.  In  due  season,  Logic  was  called  into  being 
to  meet  a  fresh  want.  The  pursuit  of  cosmological  inquiry 
had  brought  to  light  a  wide  divergence  between  science  and 
common  sense,  which  was  itself  a  problem  that  demanded 
solution,  and  moreover  constrained  philosophers  to  stud}7 
the  means  of  defending  their  paradoxes  against  the  pre¬ 
judices  of  the  unscientific.  Later  still,  the  prevailing 
interest  in  logical  matters  raised  the  question  of  the  origin 
and  validity  of  knowledge  ;  while,  about  the  same  time, 
the  break-down  of  traditional  morality  gave  rise  to  Ethics. 

The  period  which  precedes  the  rise  of  Logic  and  Ethics  has 
thus  a  distinctive  character  of  its  own,  and  may  fitly  be 
treated  apart.1 

1  It  will  be  observed  that  Demokntos  falls  outside  the  period  thus 
defined.  The  common  practice  of  treating  this  younger  contemporary  of 
Sokrates  along  with  the  “  Pre-Socratics  ”  obscures  the  historical  develop¬ 
ment  altogether.  Demokritos  comes  after  Protagoras,  and  he  has  to  face 
the  problems  of  knowledge  and  conduct  far  more  seriously  than  his  pre¬ 
decessors  had  done  (see  Brochard,  “  Protagoras  et  Democrite,  Arch.  ii. 
p.  368). 


2 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


The  II.  It  must,  however,  be  remembered  that  the  world 

view  ofna  was  already  very  old  when  science  and  philosophy  began, 
the  world.  jn  particular,  the  Aegean  Sea  had  been  the  seat  of  a  high 
civilisation  from  the  Neolithic  age  onwards,  a  civilisation 
as  ancient  as  that  of  Egypt  or  of  Babylon,  and  superior  to 
either  in  most  things  that  matter.  It  is  becoming  clearer 
every  day  that  the  Greek  civilisation  of  later  days  was 
mainly  the  revival  and  continuation  of  this,  though  it  no 
doubt  received  certain  new  and  important  elements  from 
the  less  civilised  northern  peoples  who  for  a  time  arrested 
its  development.  The  original  Mediterranean  population 
must  have  far  outnumbered  the  intruders,  and  must  have 
assimilated  and  absorbed  them  in  a  few  generations,  except 
in  a  state  like  Sparta,  which  deliberately  set  itself  to  resist 
the  process.  At  any  rate,  it  is  to  the  older  race  we  owe 
Greek  Art  and  Greek  Science.1  It  is  a  remarkable  fact 

See  Sir  Arthur  Evans,  "  The  Minoan  and  Mycenean  Element  in 
Hellenic  Life  ”  (. J.H.S.  xxxii.  277  sqq.),  where  it  is  contended  (p.  278) 
that  "  The  people  whom  we  discern  in  the  new  dawn  are  not  the  pale¬ 
skinned  northerners— the  ‘yellow-haired  Achaeans  ’  and  the  rest— but 
essentially  the  dark-haired,  brown-complexioned  race  ...  of  whom  we 
find  the  earlier  portraiture  in  the  Minoan  and  ' Tycenean  wall-paintings.” 
But,  if  the  Greeks  of  historical  times  were  the  same  people  as  the 
“  Mmoans,”  why  should  Sir  Arthur  Evans  hesitate  to  call  the  “  Minoans  ” 
Greeks  ?  The  Achaians  and  Dorians  have  no  special  claim  to  the  name  • 
for  the  Graes  of  Boiotia,  who  brought  it  to  Cumae,  were  of  the  older  race! 

I  can  attach  no  intelligible  meaning  either  to  the  term  ”  pre-Hellenic.” 

If  it  means  that  the  Aegean  race  was  there  before  the  somewhat  un¬ 
important  Achaian  tribe  which  accidentally  gave  its  name  later  to  the 
whole  nation,  that  is  true,  but  irrelevant.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  it  implies 
that  there  was  a  real  change  in  the  population  of  the  Aegean  at  any  time 
since  the  end  of  the  Neolithic  age,  that  is  untrue,  as  Sir  Arthur  Evans 
himself  maintains.  If  it  means  (as  it  probably  does)  that  the  Greek 
language  was  introduced  into  the  Aegean  by  the  northerners,  there  is  no 
evidence  of  that,  and  it  is  contrary  to  analogy.  The  Greek  language 
as  we  know  it,  is  in  its  vocabulary  a  mixed  speech,  like  our  own  ’but  its 
essential  structure  is  far  liker  that  of  the  Indo-Iranian  languages  than  that 
of  any  northern  branch  of  Indo-European  speech.  For  instance  the 
augment  is  common  and  peculiar  to  Sanskrit,  Old  Persian  and  Greek 
The  Greek  language  cannot  have  differed  very  much  from  the  Persian 
m  the  second  millennium  b.c.  The  popular  distinction  between  centum 
and  satem  languages  is  wholly  misleading  and  based  on  a  secondarv 
phenomenon,  as  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  the  Romance  languages  have 
become  satem  languages  in  historical  times.  It  would  be  more  to  the 
point  to  note  that  Greek,  like  Old  Indian  and  Old  Persian,  represents  the 


INTRODUCTION 


3 


that  every  one  of  the  men  whose  work  we  are  about  to 
study  was  an  Ionian,  except  Empedokles  of  Akragas,  and 
this  exception  is  perhaps  more  apparent  than  real.  Akragas 
was  founded  from  the  Rhodian  colony  of  Gela,  its  ohciuTr)^ 
was  himself  a  Rhodian,  and  Rhodes,  though  officially 
Dorian,  had  been  a  centre  of  the  early  Aegean  civilisation. 
We  may  fairly  assume  that  the  emigrants  belonged  mainly 
to  the  older  population  rather  than  to  the  new  Dorian 
aristocracy.  Pythagoras  founded  his  society  in  the  Achaian 
city  of  Kroton,  but  he  himself  was  an  Ionian  from 
Samos. 

This  being  so,  we  must  be  prepared  to  find  that  the 
Greeks  of  historical  times  who  first  tried  to  understand  the 
world  were  not  at  all  in  the  position  of  men  setting  out  on 
a  hitherto  untrodden  path.  The  remains  of  Aegean  art 
prove  that  there  must  have  been  a  tolerably  consistent 
view  of  the  world  in  existence  already,  though  we  cannot 
hope  to  recover  it  in  detail  till  the  records  are  deciphered. 
The  ceremony  represented  on  the  sarcophagus  of  Hagia 
Triada  implies  some  quite  definite  view  as  to  the  state  of 
the  dead,  and  we  may  be  sure  that  the  Aegean  people  were 
as  capable  of  developing  theological  speculation  as  were 
the  Egyptians  and  Babylonians.  We  shall  expect  to  find 
traces  of  this  in  later  days,  and  it  may  be  said  at  once  that 
things  like  the  fragments  of  Pherekydes  of  Syros  are  in¬ 
explicable  except  as  survivals  of  some  such  speculation. 
There  is  no  ground  for  supposing  that  this  was  borrowed 
from  Egypt,  though  no  doubt  these  early  civilisations  all 
influenced  one  another.  The  Egyptians  may  have  borrowed 
from  Crete  as  readily  as  the  Cretans  from  Egypt,  and  there 
was  a  seed  of  fife  in  the  sea  civilisation  which  was  somehow 
lacking  in  that  of  the  great  rivers. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  clear  that  the  northern  invaders 
must  have  assisted  the  free  development  of  the  Greek 


sonant  n  in  the  word  for  “hundred”  ( eKar6v  =  satam ,  satem )  by  a,  and  to 
classify  it  with  them  as  a  satem  language  on  that  ground. 


4 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


i.  Homer. 


genius  by  breaking  up  the  powerful  monarchies  of  earlier 
days  and,  above  all,  by  checking  the  growth  of  a  super¬ 
stition  like  that  which  ultimately  stifled  Egypt  and  Babylon. 
That  there  was  once  a  real  danger  of  this  is  suggested  by 
certain  features  in  the  Aegean  remains.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  worship  of  Apollo  seems  to  have  been  brought  from 
the  North  by  the  Achaians,1  and  indeed  what  has  been  called 
the  Olympian  religion  was,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  derived 
mainly  from  that  source.  Still,  the  artistic  form  it  assumed 
bears  the  stamp  of  the  Mediterranean  peoples,  and  it  was 
chiefly  in  that  form  it  appealed  to  them.  It  could  not 
become  oppressive  to  them  as  the  old  Aegean  religion 
might  very  possibly  have  done.  It  was  probably  due  to 
the  Achaians  that  the  Greeks  never  had  a  priestly  class, 
and  that  may  well  have  had  something  to  do  with  the  rise 
of  free  science  among  them. 


III.  We  see  the  working  of  these  influences  clearly  in 
Homer.  Though  he  doubtless  belonged  to  the  older  race 
himself  and  used  its  language,2  it  is  for  the  courts  of  Achaian 
princes  he  sings,  and  the  gods  and  heroes  he  celebrates  are 
mostly  Achaian.3  That  is  why  we  find  so  few  traces  of  the 
traditional  view  of  the  world  in  the  epic.  The  gods  have 
become  frankly  human,  and  everything  primitive  is  kept 
out  of  sight.  There  are,  of  course,  vestiges  of  the  early 


!  5,eC  Farne11*  Cults  of  the  Greek  States ,  vol.  iv.  pp.  98  sqq. 

This  is  surely  a  simpler  hypothesis  than  that  of  Sir  Arthur  Evans 

d!a,P'A88)  "  “  eadiCr  Mi”“"  ”ve 

"fp  ^  epi^  dialect  has  most  points  of  contact  with  Arcadian 

fromCtSrN  rth"1 T^e  "  ^  that  the  Arcadians  carS 

irom  the  North.  There  are  sufficient  parallels  for  the  prowess  of  the 
conqueror  being  celebrated  by  a  bard  of  the  conquered  raceTSdfw^ 

^hostage ’’'f  '  ™l-  P'  D°“  -a™ 


Which  was  going  on  everywhere  *  "  Pr°CeSS  °f  assimilation 


INTRODUCTION 


5 


beliefs  and  practices,  but  they  are  exceptional.1  It  has 
often  been  noted  that  Homer  never  speaks  of  the  primitive 
custom  of  purification  for  homicide.  The  dead  heroes  are 
burned,  not  buried,  as  the  kings  of  the  older  race  were. 

Ghosts  play  hardly  any  part.  In  the  Iliad  we  have,  to  be 
sure,  the  ghost  of  Patroklos,  in  close  connexion  with  the 
solitary  instance  of  human  sacrifice  in  Homer.  There  is 
also  the  Nekyia  in  the  Eleventh  Book  of  the  Odyssey ,2 
Such  things,  however,  are  rare,  and  we  may  fairly  infer  that, 
at  least  in  a  certain  society,  that  of  the  Achaian  princes  for 
whom  Homer  sang,  the  traditional  view  of  the  world  was 
already  discredited  at  a  comparatively  early  date,3  though 
it  naturally  emerges  here  and  there. 

IV.  When  we  come  to  Hesiod,  we  seem  to  be  in  another  2.  Hesiod, 
world.  We  hear  stories  of  the  gods  which  are  not  only 
irrational  but  repulsive,  and  these  are  told  quite  seriously. 

Hesiod  makes  the  Muses  say  :  “  We  know  how  to  tell  many 
false  things  that  are  like  the  truth  ;  but  we  know  too,  when 
we  will,  to  utter  what  is  true.”  4  This  means  that  he  was 
conscious  of  the  difference  between  the  Homeric  spirit  and 
his  own.  The  old  light-heartedness  is  gone,  and  it  is 
important  to  tell  the  truth  about  the  gods.  Hesiod  knows, 
too,  that  he  belongs  to  a  later  and  a  sadder  time  than 
Homer.  In  describing  the  Ages  of  the  World,  he  inserts  a 
fifth  age  between  those  of  Bronze  and  Iron.  That  is  the 
Age  of  the  Heroes,  the  age  Homer  sang  of.  It  was  better 
than  the  Bronze  Age  which  came  before  it,  and  far  better 
than  that  which  followed  it,  the  Age  of  Iron,  in  which  Hesiod 

1  There  are  traces  of  cosmogonical  ideas  in  the  Ai6s  aird.Tr)  (II.  xiv.). 

2  Od.  xi.  has  been  referred  to  a  late  date  because  it  is  supposed  to 
contain  Orphic  ideas.  In  the  light  of  our  present  knowledge,  such  a 
hypothesis  is  quite  unnecessary.  The  ideas  in  question  are  primitive, 
and  were  probably  generally  accepted  in  the -Aegean.  Orphicism  was 
essentially  a  revival  of  primitive  beliefs. 

3  On  all  this,  see  especially  Rohde,  Psyche3,  i.  pp.  37  sqq.  (=Ps.1 
pp.  34  sqq.). 

4  Hes.  Theog.  27  (the  words  of  the  first  verse  are  borrowed  from 
Od.  xix.  203).  The  Muses  are  the  same  as  those  who  inspired  Homer, 
which  means  that  Hesiod  wrote  in  hexameters  and  used  the  Epic  dialect. 


6 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


lives.1  He  also  feels  that  he  is  singing  for  another  class. 
It  is  to  shepherds  and  husbandmen  of  the  older  race  he 
addresses  himself,  and  the  Achaian  princes  for  whom  Homer 
sang  have  become  remote  persons  who  give  “  crooked 
dooms.”  The  romance  and  splendour  of  the  Achaian 
Middle  Ages  meant  nothing  to  the  common  people.  The 
primitive  view  of  the  world  had  never  really  died  out  among 
them  ,  so  it  was  natural  for  their  first  spokesman  to  assume 
it  in  his  poems.  That  is  why  we  find  in  Hesiod  these  old 
savage  tales,  which  Homer  disdained. 


Yet  it  would  be  wrong  to  see  in  the  Theogony  a  mere 
revival  of  the  old  superstition.  Hesiod  could  not  help  being 
affected  by  the  new  spirit,  and  he  became  a  pioneer  in  spite 
of  himself.  The  rudiments  of  what  grew  into  Ionic  science 
and  history  are  to  be  found  in  his  poems,  and  he  really  did 
more  than  any  one  to  hasten  that  decay  of  the  old  ideas 
which  he  was  seeking  to  arrest.  The  Theogony  is  an  attempt 
to  reduce  all  the  stories  about  the  gods  into  a  single  system, 
and  system  is  fatal  to  so  wayward  a  thing  as  mythology. 
Moreover,  though  the  spirit  in  which  Hesiod  treats  his  theme 
is  that  of  the  older  race,  the  gods  of  whom  he  sings  are  for 
the  most  part  those  of  the  Achaians.  This  introduces  an 
element  of  contradiction  into  the  system  from  first  to  last. 
Herodotos  tells  us  that  it  was  Homer  and  Hesiod  who  made 
a  theogony  for  the  Hellenes,  who  gave  the  gods  their  names, 
and  distributed  among  them  their  offices  and  arts,2  and  it 
is  perfectly  true.  The  Olympian  pantheon  took  the  place 
of  the  older  gods  in  men’s  minds,  and  this  was  quite  as 
much  the  doing  of  Hesiod  as  of  Homer.  The  ordinary  man 
would  hardly  recognise  his  gods  in  the  humanised  figures, 
detached  from  all  local  associations,  which  poetry  had 
substituted  for  the  older  objects  of  worship.  Such  gods 
were  incapable  of  satisfying  the  needs  of  the  people,  and 


1  There  is  great  historical  insight  here.  It 
modern  historians,  who  first  pointed  out  that  the 
were  a  break  in  the  normal  development. 

2  Herod,  ii.  53. 


was  Hesiod,  not  our 
"  Greek  Middle  Ages  " 


INTRODUCTION 


7 

that  is  the  secret  of  the  religious  revival  we  shall  have  to 
consider  later. 

V.  Nor  is  it  only  in  this  way  that  Hesiod  shows  himself  Cosmo- 
a  child  of  his  time.  His  Theogony  is  at  the  same  time  a  g°ny 
Cosmogony,  though  it  would  seem  that  here  he  was  following 
the  older  tradition  rather  than  working  out  a  thought  of  his 
own.  At  any  rate,  he  only  mentions  the  two  great  cosmo- 
gonical  figures,  Chaos  and  Eros,  and  does  not  really  bring 
them  into  connexion  with  his  system.  They  seem  to  belong, 
in  fact,  to  an  older  stratum  of  speculation.  The  conception 
of  Chaos  represents  a  distinct  effort  to  picture  the  beginning 
of  things.  It  is  not  a  formless  mixture,  but  rather,  as  its 
etymology  indicates,  the  yawning  gulf  or  gap  where  nothing 
is  as  yet.1  We  may  be  sure  that  this  is  not  primitive. 
Primitive  man  does  not  feel  called  on  to  form  an  idea  of 
the  very  beginning  of  all  things  ;  he  takes  for  granted  that 
there  was  something  to  begin  with.  The  other  figure,  that 
of  Eros,  was  doubtless  intended  to  explain  the  impulse  to 
production  which  gave  rise  to  the  whole  process.  These  are 
clearly  speculative  ideas,  but  in  Hesiod  they  are  blurred  and 
confused. 

We  have  records  of  great  activity  in  the  production  of 
cosmogonies  during  the  whole  of  the  sixth  century  b.c., 
and  we  know  something  of  the  systems  of  Epimenides, 
Pherekydes,2  and  Akousilaos.  If  there  were  speculations  of 
this  kind  even  before  Hesiod,  we  need  have  no  hesitation 
in  believing  that  the  earliest  Orphic  cosmogony  goes  back 
to  that  century  too.3  The  feature  common  to  all  these 
systems  is  the  attempt  to  get  behind  the  Gap,  and  to  put 
Kronos  or  Zeus  in  the  first  place.  That  is  what  Aristotle 
has  in  view  when  he  distinguishes  the  “  theologians  ”  from 

1  The  word  x<i°s  certainly  means  the  "  gape-”  or  "  yawn,”  the 

w eXiipiov  of  the  Rhapsodic  Theogony  (fr.  52).  Grimm  compared  it  with 
the  Scandinavian  Ginnunga-Gap. 

2  For  the  remains  of  Pherekydes,  see  Diels,  Vorsokratiker,  71  b,  and 
the  interesting  account  in  Gomperz,  Greek  Thinkers,  vol.  i.  pp.  85  sqq. 

3  This  was  the  view  of  Lobeck  with  regard  to  the  so-called  "  Rhapsodic 
Theogony  ”  described  by  Damaskios. 


8 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


General 
character¬ 
istics  of 
Greek  cos¬ 
mology. 


those  who  were  half  theologians  and  half  philosophers,  and 
who  put  what  was  best  in  the  beginning.1  It  is  obvious, 
however,  that  this  process  is  the  very  reverse  of  scientific, 
and  might  be  carried  on  indefinitely  ;  so  we  have  nothing 
to  do  with  the  cosmogonists  in  our  present  inquiry,  except 
so  far  as  they  can  be  shown  to  have  influenced  the  course  of 
more  sober  investigations. 

VI.  The  Ionians,  as  we  can  see  from  their  literature, 
were  deeply  impressed  by  the  transitoriness  of  things. 
There  is,  in  fact,  a  fundamental  pessimism  in  their  outlook 
on  fife,  such  as  is  natural  to  an  over-civilised  age  with 
no  very  definite  religious  convictions.  We  find  Mimnermos 
of  Kolophon  preoccupied  with  the  sadness  of  the  coming 
of  old  age,  while  at  a  later  date  the  lament  of  Simonides, 
that  the  generations  of  men  fall  like  the  leaves  of  the  forest, 
touches  a  chord  that  Homer  had  already  struck.2  Now 
this  sentiment  always  finds  its  best  illustrations  in  the 
changes  of  the  seasons,  and  the  cycle  of  growth  and  decay 
is  a  far  more  striking  phenomenon  in  Aegean  lands  than  in 
the  North,  and  takes  still  more  clearly  the  form  of  a  war 
of  opposites,  hot  and  cold,  wet  and  dry.  It  is,  accordingly, 
from  that  point  of  view  the  early  cosmologists  regard  the 
world.  The  opposition  of  day  and  night,  summer  and 
winter,  with  their  suggestive  parallelism  in  sleep  and 
waking,  birth  and  death,  are  the  outstanding  features  of 
the  world  as  they  saw  it.3 


The  changes  of  the  seasons  are  plainly  brought  about 
by  the  encroachments  of  one  pair  of  opposites,  the  cold  and 
the  wet,  on  the  other  pair,  the  hot  and  the  dry,  which  in 


1  Arist.  Met.  N,  4.  1091  b  8. 

*  See  Butcher,  “  The  Melancholy  of  the  Greeks,”  in  Some  Aspects  of 
tne  Greek  Genius,  pp.  130  sqq.  J 

..  *  !S  wel1  b^ght  out  by  Prof.  J.  L.  Myres  in  a  paper  entitled 
The  Background  of  Greek  Science  ”  ( University  of  Chicago  Chronicle 
vol.  xvi.  No.  4).  There  is  no  need  to  derive  the  doctrine  of  the  "  opposites  '* 
from  a  religious  representation  "  as  Mr.  Cornford  does  in  the  first  chapter 
oi  From  Rehgxon  to  Phrlosophy.  In  Greece  these  force  themselves  upon 
our  attention  quite  apart  from  anything  of  the  sort.  Of  course  they  are 
also  important  in  agrarian  magic  for  practical  reasons.  V 


INTRODUCTION 


9 


their  turn  encroach  on  the  other  pair.  This  process  was 
naturally  described  in  terms  borrowed  from  human  society  ; 
for  in  early  days  the  regularity  and  constancy  of  human 
life  was  far  more  clearly  realised  than  the  uniformity  of 
nature.  Man  lived  in  a  charmed  circle  of  social  law  and 
custom,  but  the  world  around  him  at  first  seemed  lawless. 
That  is  why  the  encroachment  of  one  opposite  on  another 
was  spoken  of  as  injustice  (aSiKia)  and  the  due  observ¬ 
ance  of  a  balance  between  them  as  justice  (Si/cTj).  The 
later  word  /cocr^o?  is  based  on  this  notion  too.  It  meant 
originally  the  discipline  of  an  army,  and  next  the  ordered 
constitution  of  a  state. 

That,  however,  was  not  enough.  The  earliest  cosmo- 
logists  could  find  no  satisfaction  in  the  view  of  the  world 
as  a  perpetual  contest  between  opposites.  They  felt  that 
these  must  somehow  have  a  common  ground,  from  which 
they  had  issued  and  to  which  they  must  return  once  more. 
They  were  in  search  of  something  more  primary  than  the 
opposites,  something  which  persisted  through  all  change, 
and  ceased  to  exist  in  one  form  only  to  reappear  in  another. 
That  this  was  really  the  spirit  in  which  they  entered  on  their 
quest  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  they  spoke  of  this  something 
as  “  ageless  ”  and  “  deathless.”  1  If,  as  is  sometimes  held, 
their  real  interest  had  been  in  the  process  of  growth  and 
becoming,  they  would  hardly  have  applied  epithets  so 
charged  with  poetical  emotion  and  association  to  what  is 
alone  permanent  in  a  world  of  change  and  decay.  That 
is  the  true  meaning  of  Ionian  “  Monism.”  2 

1  Ar.  Phys.  r,  4.  203  b  14  adavarov  yap  Kai  aviiXeffpov  (SC.  rd  ttireipov), 

tpyjffiv  ’ Avat'ljLavfipos  Kai  oi  TrXe'cffrot  tCjv  toX6yojv  t  Hipp.  Ref,  i.  6,  I  <pv<riv 

Tivi.  tou  aireLpov  .  .  .  tcu.’ttjv  5’  aLdiov  elvai  kclI  ayTjpov,  Tbe  epithets  come  from 
the  Epic,  where  adavaros  Kai  dyijpojs  is  a  standing  phrase  to  mark  the 
difference  between  gods  and  men. 

2  As  it  has  been  suggested  that  the  Monism  ascribed  by  later  writers 
to  the  early  cosmologists  is  only  based  on  Aristotle’s  distinction  between 
those  who  postulated  one  apxv  and  those  who  postulated  more  than  one 
(Phys.  A,  2.  184  b  15  sqq.),  and  is  not  therefore  strictly  historical,  it  will 
be  well  to  quote  a  pre-Aristotelian  testimony  for  it.  In  the  Hippokratean 
Ilepl  (ptiaios  avdpwTroii  (Littre,  vi.  32)  we  read  <pa<rl  re  yhp  iv  ti  ehai  8ti 


10 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


fillClS. 


VII.  Now,  Ionian  science  was  introduced  into  Athens 
by  Anaxagoras  about  the  time  Euripides  was  born,  and 
there  are  sufficient  traces  of  its  influence  on  him.* 1  It  is, 
therefore,  significant  that,  in  a  fragment  which  portrays 
the  blessedness  of  a  life  devoted  to  scientific  research 
(taro p [a), 2  he  uses  the  very  epithets  “  ageless  and  deathless  ” 
which  Anaximander  had  applied  to  the  one  primary  sub¬ 
stance,  and  that  he  associates  them  with  the  term  (pvcris . 
The  passage  is  so  important  for  our  present  purpose  that 
I  quote  it  in  full : 

o'A/Jios  ocrrts  rrjs  IcrToplas 
eo-ye  p,ddrj<jiv,  pir/Te  iroAiroiv 
f7rt  TT'fjjj.o(Tvyas  /xr/T  €i’s  dotKOUS 
7rpa^ets  dpfxCxv, 

dAA’  dOavarov  KaOopuiv  </>ucrecos 
Ko<rjxov  dyr/pui,  tis  re  crvvecm) 

Kal  07 rp  Kai  oVtos  • 

TOt?  T010VT01S  OvSiTTOT  alcT^piOV 

epyoxv  p.iXirrjp.a  wpocri^eifi 

This  fragment  is  clear  evidence  that,  in  the  fifth  century  B.C., 
the  name  (fxvcrt ?  was  given  to  the  everlasting  something  of 
which  the  world  was  made.  That  is  quite  in  accordance 
with  the  history  of  the  word,  so  far  as  we  can  make  it  out. 
Its  original  meaning  appears  to  be  the  “  stuff  ”  of  which 


Kai  tout  dvai  tS  h>  Kal  to  wav,  Kara  8£  ra  ovi/xara  ovk  opoXoyiovoi  ’  Xiyei  8’  avrCiv 
6  /xiv  ns  (p&tTKCov  aipa  dvai  tovto  tS  ?v  Kal  rd  wav,  6  Si  wvp,  6  Si  OSup,  6  Si  yrjv,  Ka'. 
iwiXiyei  iKacrros  Tip  iwuTou  XSyip  papTvpid  T€  Kai  TeKpuf/pia,  &  ye  twTiv  ovSev. 

1  See  below,  §  123. 


Cf.  Plato,  Phaedo,  96  a  7  ravr^s  tt) r  aoiplas  -r)v  Sr)  KaXovai  wepl  (puaews 
iaroplav.  This  is  the  oldest  and  most  trustworthy  statement  as  to  the 
name  originally  given  to  science.  I  lay  no  stress  on  the  fact  that  the 
books  of  the  early  cosmologists  are  generally  quoted  under  the  title  Tlepl 
Ipuaeus,  as  such  titles  are  probably  of  later  date. 

3)(^tur'  *r-  *nc-  9JO.  The  word  k6ct/xos  here  means,  of  course,  "  order- 

1jlg’  ”  f-rrangement,”  and  dy i)pw  is  genitive.  The  object  of  research  is 
firstly  what  is  “  the  ordering  of  immortal  ageless  fiSais,"  and  secondly,  how 
it  arose.  Anaxagoras,  who  introduced  Ionian  science  to  Athens'  had 

belonged  to  the  school  of  Anaximenes  (§  122).  We  know  from  Aristotle 
{loc.  cit  p.  9  n.  I)  that  not  only  Anaximander,  but  most  of  the  fivaioXoyoi 
applied  epithets  like  this  to  the  Boundless.  * 


INTRODUCTION 


ii 


anything  is  made,  a  meaning  which  easily  passes  into  that 
of  its  make-up,”  its  general  character  or  constitution. 
Those  early  cosmologists  who  were  seeking  for  an  “  undying 
and  ageless  something,  would  naturally  express  the  idea 
by  saying  there  was  ‘‘one  cpvcrts”1  of  all  things.  When 
that  was  given  up,  under  the  influence  of  Eleatic  criticism, 
the  old  word  was  still  used.  Empedokles  held  there  were 
four  such  primitive  stuffs,  each  with  a  </>A of  its  own, 
while  the  Atomists  believed  in  an  infinite  number,  to  which 
they  also  applied  the  term.2 

The  term  apyrj,  which  is  often  used  in  our  authorities,  is 
in  this  sense  3 4  purely  Aristotelian.  It  is  very  natural  that 
it  snould  have  been  adopted  by  Theophrastos  and  later 
writers  ;  for  they  all  start  from  the  well-known  passage 
of  the  Physics  in  which  Aristotle  classifies  his  predecessors 
according  as  they  postulated  one  or  more  apyai.x  But  Plato 
never  uses  the  term  in  this  connexion,  and  it  does  not  occur 
once  in  the  genuine  fragments  of  the  early  philosophers, 
which  would  be  very  strange  on  the  assumption  that  they 
employed  it. 

Now,  if  this  is  so,  we  can  understand  at  once  why  the 
Ionians  called  science  Hepl  (pvaecos  laropir].  We  shall  see 

1  Anst.  Phys.  A,  6.  189  b  2  oi  p.iav  rtv a  (pbtriv  Aval  \iyovres  rb  Tav ,  otov 
iiSdip  r)  Trup  f)  rb  neratju  toOtoiv,  B,  I.  1 93  a  21  oi  pilv  trCp,  oi  Si  yrjv,  oi  S’  aipa 
<pa<rlv,  oi  Si  SSup,  oi  S’  ii/ia  toutojv  (Parmenides),  oi  oi  iravra  ravra  (Empedokles) 
TTJJ'  <f>U<TW  elvai  TT}V  toiv  Svtoiv. 

2  For  the  history  of  the  term  cfiSms,  see  Appendix  I. 

3  Professor  W.  A.  Heidel  has  shown  that  the  cosmologists  might  have 
used  apxfi  in  a  sense  different  from  Aristotle’s,  that,  namely,  of  "  source,” 
"  store,”  or  "  collective  mass,”  from  which  particular  things  are  derived 
(Class.  Phil.  vii.  pp.  217  sqq.).  I  should  be  quite  willing  to  accept  this 
account  of  the  matter  if  I  could  find  any  evidence  that  they  used  the 
term  at  all.  It  is  only  in  the  case  of  Anaximander  that  there  is  even  a 
semblance  of  such  evidence,  and  I  believe  that  to  be  illusory  (p.  54,  n.  2). 
Moreover,  Diels  has  shown  that  the  first  book  of  Theophrastos’s  great 
work  dealt  with  the  &pxv  the  Aristotelian  sense,  and  it  is  very  unlikely 
that  the  word  should  have  been  used  in  one  sense  of  Anaximander  and 
in  another  of  the  rest. 

4  Phys.  A,  2.  184  b  15  sqq.  It  is  of  great  importance  to  remember 
that  Theophrastos  and  his  followers  simply  adopted  the  classification  of 
this  chapter,  which  has  no  claim  to  be  regarded  as  historical. 


12 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Motion 
and  Rest. 


that  the  growing  thought  which  may  be  traced  through  the 
successive  representatives  of  any  school  is  always  that 
which  concerns  the  primary  substance,1  whereas  the  astro¬ 
nomical  and  other  theories  are,  in  the  main,  peculiar  to  the 
individual  thinkers.  The  chief  interest  of  all  is  the  quest 
for  what  is  abiding  in  the  flux  of  things.2 

VIII.  According  to  Aristotle  and  his  followers,  the  early 
cosmologists  believed  also  in  an  “  eternal  motion  ”  (dt'Sto? 
KLV71<TI<;),  but  that  is  probably  their  own  way  of  putting  the 
thing.  It  is  not  at  all  likely  that  the  Ionians  said  anything 
about  the  eternity  of  motion  in  their  writings.  In  early 
times,  it  is  not  movement  but  rest  that  has  to  be  accounted 
for,  and  it  is  unlikely  that  the  origin  of  motion  was  discussed 
till  its  possibility  had  been  denied.  As  we  shall  see,  that 
was  done  by  Parmenides  ;  and  accordingly  his  successors, 
accepting  the  fact  of  motion,  were  bound  to  show  how  it 
originated.  I  understand  Aristotle’s  statement,  then,  as 
meaning  no  more  than  that  the  early  thinkers  did  not  feel 
the  need  of  assigning  an  origin  for  motion.  The  eternity  of 
motion  is  an  inference,  which  is  substantially  correct,  but 
is  misleading  in  so  far  as  it  suggests  deliberate  rejection  of 
a  doctrine  not  yet  formulated.3 


1  I  am  conscious  of  the  unsatisfactory  character  of  the  phrase 
primary  substance  {irpQrrov  viroKeifievov),  but  it  is  hard  to  find  a  better. 
The  German  Urstoff  is  less  misleading  in  its  associations,  but  the  English 
"  stuff  ”  is  not  very  satisfactory. 


The  view  of  O.  Gilbert  {Die  meteorologischen  Theorien  des  griechischen 
A  Uertums,  Leipzig,  1907)  that  the  early  cosmologists  started  from  the 
traditional  and  popular  theory  of  “  the  four  elements  ”  derives  all  its 
plausibility  from  the  ambiguity  of  the  term  "  element."  If  we  only  mean 
the  great  aggregates  of  Fire,  Air,  Water  and  Earth,  there  is  no  doubt 
that  these  were  distinguished  from  an  early  date.  But  that  is  not  what 
is  meant  by  an  "element"  {<jtoiXA ov)  in  cosmology,  where  it  is  always  an 
irreducible  something  with  a  of  its  own.  The  remarkable  thing 

really  is  that  the  early  cosmologists  went  behind  the  theory  of  "  elements  " 
in  the  popular  sense,  and  it  was  only  the  accident  that  Empedokles,  the 
first  to  maintain  a  plurality  of  elements,  selected  the  four  that  have 
ecome  traditional  that  has  led  to  the  loose  use  of  the  word  "  element  " 
for  the  great  aggregates  referred  to. 

3  This  way  of  thinking  is  often  called  Hylozoism,  but  that  is  stiff  more 
misleading.  No  doubt  the  early  cosmologists  said  things  about  the 
world  and  the  primary  substance  which,  from  our  point  of  view,  imply 


INTRODUCTION  I3 

A  more  important  question  is  the  nature  of  this  motion. 
It  is  clear  that  it  must  have  existed  before  the  beginning 
of  the  world,  since  it  is  what  brought  the  world  into  being. 
It  cannot,  therefore,  be  identified  with  the  diurnal  revolu¬ 
tion  of  the  heavens,  as  it  has  been  by  many  writers,  or 
with  any  other  purely  mundane  motion.'*'  The  Pythagorean 
doctrine,  as  expounded  in  Plato’s  Timaeus,* 1 2  is  that  the 
original  motion  was  irregular  and  disorderly,  and  we  shall 
see  reason  for  believing  that  the  Atomists  ascribed  a  motion 
of  that  kind  to  the  atoms.  It  is  safer,  then,  not  to  attribute 
any  regular  or  well-defined  motion  to  the  primary  substance 
of  the  early  cosmologists  at  this  stage.3 

IX.  In  all  this,  there  is  no  trace  of  theological  speculation. 
We  have  seen  that  there  had  been  a  complete  break  with 
the  early  Aegean  religion,  and  that  the  Olympian  poly¬ 
theism  never  had  a  firm  hold  on  the  Ionian  mind.  It  is 
therefore  quite  wrong  to  look  for  the  origins  of  Ionian 
science  in  mythological  ideas  of  any  kind.  No  doubt  there 
were  many  vestiges  of  the  older  beliefs  and  practices  in 


that  they  are  alive  ;  but  that  is  a  very  different  thing  from  ascribing 
a  “  plastic  power  "  to  “  matter.”  The  concept  of  “  matter  ”  did  not 
yet  exist,  and  the  underlying  assumption  is  simply  that  everything, 
life  included,  can  be  explained  mechanically,  as  we  say,  that  is,  by 
body  in  motion.  Even  that  is  not  stated  explicitly,  but  taken  for 
granted. 

1  It  was  Aristotle  who  first  took  the  fateful  step  of  identifying  the 
"  eternal  motion  ”  with  the  diurnal  revolution  of  the  heavens. 

2  Plato,  Tim.  30  a. 

3  As  I  understand  him,  Prof.  W.  A.  Heidel  regards  the  "  eternal 
motion  ”  as  a  rotary  or  vortex  motion  (SIpti),  on  the  ground  that  it  is 
hazardous  to  assume  that  an  early  thinker,  such  as  Anaximenes,  “  dis¬ 
tinguished  between  the  primordial  motion  of  the  infinite  Air  and  the 
original  motion  in  the  cosmos  "  (see  his  article,  "  The  Sivy  in  Anaximenes 
and  Anaximander,"  Classical  Philology,  i.  p.  279).  It  seems  to  me,  on 
the  other  hand,  that  any  one  who  held  the  world  had  come  into  being 
must  have  made  such  a  distinction,  especially  if  he  also  held  the  doctrine 
of  innumerable  worlds.  As  will  be  seen  later,  I  adopt  Prof.  Heidel’s 
view  that  the  "  original  motion  of  the  cosmos  "  was  a  rotary  one  in  the 
earliest  cosmological  systems,  but  it  was  certainly  not  "  eternal,"  and  I 
do  not  think  we  can  infer  anything  from  it  as  to  the  pre-mundane  motion, 
except  that  it  must  have  been  of  such  a  nature  that  it  could  give  rise  to 
the  dlvT). 


The 
secular 
character 
of  Ionian 
science. 


14 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


those  parts  of  Greece  which  had  not  come  under  the  rule 
of  the  Northerners,  and  we  shall  see  presently  how  they 
reasserted  themselves  in  the  Orphic  and  other  mysteries, 
but  the  case  of  Ionia  was  different.  It  was  only  after  the 
coming  of  the  Achaians  that  the  Greeks  were  able  to  establish 
their  settlements  on  the  coast  of  Asia  Minor,  which  had 
been  closed  to  them  by  the  Hittites,1  and  there  was  no 
traditional  background  there  at  all.  In  the  islands  of  the 
Aegean  it  was  otherwise,  but  Ionia  proper  was  a  country 
without  a  past.  That  explains  the  secular  character  of  the 
earliest  Ionian  philosophy. 

We  must  not  be  misled  by  the  use  of  the  word  deos  in 
the  remains  that  have  come  down  to  us.  It  is  quite  true 
that  the  Ionians  applied  it  to  the  “  primary  substance  ” 
and  to  the  world  or  worlds,  but  that  means  no  more  and  no 
less  than  the  use  of  the  divine  epithets  “  ageless  ”  and 
deathless  to  which  we  have  referred  already.  In  its 
religious  sense  the  word  “  god  ”  always  means  first  and 
foremost  an  object  of  worship,  but  already  in  Homer  that 
has  ceased  to  be  its  only  signification.  Hesiod’s  Theogony 
is  the  best  evidence  of  the  change.  It  is  clear  that  many 
of  the  gods  mentioned  there  were  never  worshipped  by 
any  one,  and  some  of  them  are  mere  personifications  of 
natural  phenomena,  or  even  of  human  passions.2  This 
non-religious  use  of  the  word  "  god  ”  is  characteristic  of 
the  whole  period  we  are  dealing  with,  and  it  is  of  the  first 
importance  to  realise  it.  No  one  who  does  so  will  fall  into 
the  error  of  deriving  science  from  mythology.3 

We  see  this,  above  ah,  from  the  fact  that,  while  primitive 


1  See  Hogarth,  Ionia  and  the  East,  pp.  68  sqq 

2  No  one  worshipped  Okeanos  and  Tethys,  or  even  Ouranos,  and  still 
less^can  Phobos  and  Deimos  be  regarded  as  gods  in  the  religious  sense. 

This  is,  I  venture  to  think,  the  fundamental  error  of  Mr.  Cornford’s 
interesting  book,  From  Religion  to  Philosophy  (1912).  He  fails  to  realise 

“pr^? oid.:  c.tiective  hS  s  tLrSd 

+0  h  T  S6e  that  hlS  method  is  more  applicable  when  he  comes 

to  dea!  with  the  western  regions,  but  even  there  he  does  not  recognise 
sufficiently  the  contrast  between  Ionian  science  and  the  old  tradition.5 


INTRODUCTION 


15 

religion  regards  the  heavenly  bodies  and  the  heavens 
themselves  as  divine,  and  therefore  of  a  wholly  different 
nature  from  anything  on  this  earth,  the  Ionians  from  the 
very  first  set  their  faces  against  any  such  distinction,  though 
it  must  have  been  perfectly  familiar  to  them  from  popular 
beliefs.  Aristotle  revived  the  distinction  at  a  later  date, 
but  Greek  science  began  by  rejecting  it.1 

X.  We  have  also  to  face  the  question  of  the  nature  and 
extent  of  the  influence  exercised  by  what  we  call  Eastern 
wisdom  on  the  Greek  mind.  It  is  a  common  idea  even 
now  that  the  Greeks  in  some  way  derived  their  philosophy 
from  Egypt  and  Babylon,  and  we  must  therefore  try  to 
understand  as  clearly  as  possible  what  such  a  statement 
really  means.  To  begin  with,  we  must  observe  that  the 
question  wears  a  very  different  aspect  now  that  we  know 
the  great  antiquity  of  the  Aegean  civilisation.  Much  that 
has  been  regarded  as  Oriental  may  just  as  well  be  native. 
As  for  later  influences,  we  must  insist  that  no  writer  of  the 
period  during  which  Greek  philosophy  flourished  knows 
anything  of  its  having  come  from  the  East.  Herodotos 
would  not  have  omitted  to  say  so,  had  he  heard  of  it ;  for  it 
would  have  confirmed  his  own  belief  in  the  Egyptian  origin 
of  Greek  religion  and  civilisation.2  Plato,  who  had  a  great 
respect  for  the  Egyptians  on  other  grounds,  classes  them  as 
a  business-like  rather  than  a  philosophical  people.3  Aristotle 
speaks  only  of  the  origin  of  mathematics  in  Egypt4  (a  point 

1  The  importance  of,  this  point  can  hardly  be  exaggerated.  See 
Prof.  A.  E.  Taylor,  Aristotle,  p.  58. 

2  All  he  can  say  is  that  the  worship  of  Dionysos  and  the  doctrine  of 
transmigration  came  from  Egypt  (ii.  49,  123).  We  shall  see  that  both  these 
statements  are  incorrect,  and  in  any  case  they  dp  not  imply  anything 
directly  as  to  philosophy. 

3  In  Rep.  435  e,  after  saying  that  Tb  6vp.oei8h  is  characteristic  of  the 
Thracians  and  Scythians,  and  to  <pi\o/j.adh  of  the  Hellenes,  he  refers  us  to 
Phoenicia  and  Egypt  for  rd  pCkoxp'pp-a.Tov .  In  the  Laws  he  says  (747  b  6) 
that  arithmetical  studies  are  valuable  only  if  we  remove  all  d> ’eXevdepla 
and  <pt\oxpvP-°-TLa  from  the  souls  of  the  learners.  Otherwise,  we  produce 
iravovpyla  instead  of  <io<pta,  as  we  can  see  that  the  Phoenicians,  the  Egyptians, 
and  many  other  peoples  do. 

4  Arist.  Met.  A,  1.  981  b  23. 


Alleged 
Oriental 
origin  of 
philo¬ 
sophy. 


i6 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


to  which  we  shall  return),  though,  if  he  had  known  of  an 
Egyptian  philosophy,  it  would  have  suited  his  argument 
better  to  mention  that.  It  is  not  till  later,  when  Egyptian 
priests  and  Alexandrian  Jews  began  to  vie  with  one  another 
in  discovering  the  sources  of  Greek  philosophy  in  their 
own  past,  that  we  have  definite  statements  to  the  effect 
that  it  came  from  Phoenicia  or  Egypt.  But  the  so-called 
Egyptian  philosophy  was  only  arrived  at  by  a  process  of 
turning  primitive  myths  into  allegories.  We  are  still  able 
to  judge  Philo’s  Old  Testament  interpretation  for  ourselves, 
and  we  may  be  sure  that  the  Egyptian  allegorists  were  even 
more  arbitrary  ;  for  they  had  far  less  promising  material 
to  work  on.  The  myth  of  Isis  and  Osiris,  for  instance,  is  first 
interpreted  according  to  the  ideas  of  later  Greek  philosophy, 
and  then  declared  to  be  the  source  of  that  philosophy. 

This  method  of  interpretation  culminated  with  the 
Neopythagorean  Noumenios,  from  whom  it  passed  to  the 
Christian  Apologists.  It  is  Noumenios  who  asks,  “  What  is 
Plato  but  Moses  speaking  Attic  ?  ”  1  Clement  and  Eusebios 
give  the  remark  a  still  wider  application.2  At  the  Renais¬ 
sance,  this  farrago  was  revived  along  with  everything  else, 
and  certain  ideas  derived  from  the  Praeparatio  Evangelica 
continued  for  long  to  colour  accepted  views.3  Cud  worth 
speaks  of  the  ancient  “  Moschical  or  Mosaical  philosophy  ” 
taught  by  Thales  and  Pythagoras.4  It  is  important  to 
realise  the  true  origin  of  this  prejudice  against  the  originality 
of  the  Greeks.  It  does  not  come  from  modern  researches 


1  Noumenios,  fr.  13  (R.  P.  624),  T/  ydp  hr „  nxdri*.  7)  Mwwi )s  6.ttik1^v  ; 

2  Clement  {Strom,  i.  p.  8,  5,  Stahlin)  calls  Plato  6  <£'E jSpaW  <f>i\6ao<p0s. 

3  Exaggerated  notions  of  Oriental  wisdom  were  popularised  by  the 
Encyclopedic,  which  accounts  for  their  diffusion  and  persistence.  Bailly 
(■ Lettres  sur  I’origine  des  sciences )  assumed  that  the  Orientals  had  received 
fragments  of  highly  advanced  science  from  a  people  which  had  disappeared, 
but  which  he  identified  with  the  inhabitants  of  Plato's  Atlantis  ! 

4  We  learn  from  Strabo  (xvi.  p.  757)  that  it  was  Poseidonios  who 

introduced  Mochos  of  Sidon  into  the  history  of  philosophy.  He  attributes 
the  atomic  theory  to  him.  His  identification  with  Moses,  however,  is  a 
later  tour  de  force  due  to  Philon  of  Byblos,  who  published  a  translation 
of  an  ancient  Phoenician  history  by  Sanchuniathon,  which  was  used  bv 
Porphyry  and  afterwards  by  Eusebios.  y 


INTRODUCTION 


*7 

into  the  beliefs  of  ancient  peoples  ;  for  these  have  disclosed 
nothing  in  the  way  of  evidence  for  a  Phoenician  or  Egyptian 
philosophy.  It  is  a  mere  residuum  of  the  Alexandrian 
passion  for  allegory. 

Of  course  no  one  nowadays  would  rest  the  case  for 
the  Oriental  origin  of  Greek  philosophy  on  the  evidence 
of  Clement  or  Eusebios ;  the  favourite  argument  in  recent 
times  has  been  the  analogy  of  the  arts.  We  are  seeing  more 
and  more,  it  is  said,  that  the  Greeks  derived  their  art  from 
the  East ;  and  it  is  urged  that  the  same  will  in  all  proba- 
bility  prove  true  of  their  philosophy.  That  is  a  specious 
argument,  but  not  at  all  conclusive.  It  ignores  the  difference 
in  the  way  these  things  are  transmitted  from  people  to 
people.  Material  civilisation  and  the  arts  may  pass  easily 
from  one  people  to  another,  though  they  have  not  a  common 
language,  but  philosophy  can  only  be  expressed  in  abstract 
language,  and  can  only  be  transmitted  by  educated  men, 
whether  by  means  of  books  or  oral  teaching.  Now  we 
know  of  no  Greek,  in  the  times  we  are  dealing  with,  who 
could  read  an  Egyptian  book  or  even  listen  to  the  discourse 
of  an  Egyptian  priest,  and  we  never  hear  till  a  late  date  of 
Oriental  teachers  who  wrote  or  spoke  in  Greek.  The  Greek 
traveller  in  Egypt  would  no  doubt  pick  up  a  few  words  of 
Egyptian,  and  it  is  taken  for  granted  that  the  priests  could 
make  themselves  understood  by  the  Greeks.1  But  they 
must  have  made  use  of  interpreters,  and  it  is  impossible  to 
conceive  of  philosophical  ideas  being  communicated  through 
an  uneducated  dragoman.2 

But  really  it  is  not  worth  while  to  ask  whether  the 
communication  of  philosophical  ideas  was  possible  or  not, 
till  some  evidence  has  been  produced  that  any  of  these 

1  Herod,  ii.  143  (where  they  boast  to  Hekataios  of  their  superior 
antiquity)  ;  Plato,  Tim.  22  b  3  (where  they  do  the  same  to  Solon). 

2  Gomperz's  “  native  bride,”  who  discusses  the  wisdom  of  her  people 
with  her  Greek  lord  ( Greek  Thinkers,  vol.  i.  p.  95),  does  not  convince  me 
either.  She  would  probably  teach  her  maids  the  rites  of  strange  goddesses  ; 
but  she  would  not  be  likely  to  talk  theology  with  her  husband,  and  still 
less  philosophy  or  science. 


i8 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Egyptian 

mathe¬ 

matics. 


peoples  had  a  philosophy  to  communicate.  No  such 
evidence  has  yet  been  discovered,  and,  so  far  as  we  know, 
the  Indians  were  the  only  ancient  people  besides  the  Greeks 
who  ever  had  anything  that  deserves  the  name.  No  one 
now  will  suggest  that  Greek  philosophy  came  from  India, 
and  indeed  everything  points  to  the  conclusion  that  Indian 
philosophy  arose  under  Greek  influence.  The  chronology 
of  Sanskrit  literature  is  an  extremely  difficult  subject ;  but, 
so  far  as  we  can  see,  the  great  Indian  systems  are  later  in 
date  than  the  Greek  philosophies  they  most  nearly  resemble. 
Of  course  the  mysticism  of  the  Upanishads  and  of  Buddhism 
was  of  native  growth  ;  but,  though  these  influenced  philo- 
sophy  in  the  strict  sense  profoundly,  they  were  related  to 
it  only  as  Hesiod  and  the  Orphics  were  related  to  Greek 
scientific  thought. 

XI.  It  would,  however,  be  another  thing  to  say  that 
Greek  philosophy  originated  quite  independently  of  Oriental 
influences.  The  Greeks  themselves  believed  their  mathe¬ 
matical  science  to  be  of  Egyptian  origin,  and  they  must 
have  known  something  of  Babylonian  astronomy.  It 
cannot  be  an  accident  that  philosophy  originated  just  at 
the  time  when  communication  with  these  two  countries 
was  easiest,  and  that  the  very  man  who  was  said  to  have 
introduced  geometry  from  Egypt  is  also  regarded  as  the  first 
philosopher.  It  thus  becomes  important  for  us  to  discover 
what  Egyptian  mathematics  meant.  We  shall  see  that, 
even  here,  the  Greeks  were  really  original. 

The  Rhind  papyrus  in  the  British  Museum  1  gives  us  a 
glimpse  of  arithmetic  and  geometry  as  they  were  understood 
on  the  banks  of  the  Nile.  It  is  the  work  of  one  Aahmes, 


1  I  am  indebted  for  most  of  the  information  which  follows  to  Cantor’s 
Voriesungen  iiber  Geschichte  der  Mathematik,  vol.  i.  pp.  46-63  See  also 
Gows  Short  History  of  Greek  Mathematics,  §§  73-80  ;  and  Mlhaud  La 
Science  grecque,  pp.  9i  Sqq.  The  discussion  in  the  last-named  wort  is 
of  special  value  because  it  is  based  on  M  Rodet’s  naner  in  the  r  nr 

stS  s“*  f vol.  v,..  which  ta  sc^Tmp  "tit  Xl £ 
supplements  the  mterpretation  of  Eisealohr.  on  which  the  earlier  accounts 


INTRODUCTION 


19 


and  contains  rules  for  calculations  both  of  an  arithmetical 
and  a  geometrical  character.  The  arithmetical  problems 
mostly  concern  measures  of  corn  and  fruit,  and  deal  parti¬ 
cularly  with  such  questions  as  the  division  of  a  number  of 
measures  among  a  given  number  of  persons,  the  number  of 
loaves  or  jars  of  beer  that  certain  measures  will  yield,  and 
the  wages  due  to  the  workmen  for  a  certain  piece  of  work. 
It  corresponds  exactly,  in  fact,  to  the  description  of  Egyptian 
arithmetic  Plato  gives  us  in  the  Laws,  where  he  tells  us  that 
children  learnt  along  with  their  letters  to  solve  problems  in 
the  distribution  of  apples  and  wreaths  to  greater  or  smaller 
numbers  of  people,  the  pairing  of  boxers  and  wrestlers,  and 
so  forth.1  This  is  clearly  the  origin  of  the  art  which  the 
Greeks  called  XoyiariKri,  and  they  probably  borrowed  that 
from  Egypt,  where  it  was  highly  developed  ;  but  there  is 
no  trace  of  what  the  Greeks  called  apidfapriKp,  the  scientific 
study  of  numbers. 

The  geometry  of  the  Rhind  papyrus  is  of  a  similar 
character,  and  Herodotos,  who  tells  us  that  Egyptian 
geometry  arose  from  the  necessity  of  measuring  the  land 
afresh  after  the  inundations,  is  clearly  far  nearer  the  mark 
than  Aristotle,  who  says  it  grew  out  of  the  leisure  enjoyed 
by  the  priestly  caste.2  The  rules  given  for  calculating  areas 
are  only  exact  when  these  are  rectangular.  As  fields  are 
usually  more  or  less  rectangular,  this  would  be  sufficient  for 
practical  purposes.  It  is  even  assumed  that  a  right-angled 
triangle  can  be  equilateral.  The  rule  for  finding  what  is 
called  the  seqt  of  a  pyramid  is,  however,  on  a  rather  higher 
level,  as  we  should  expect.  It  comes  to  this.  Given  the 
“  length  across  the  sole  of  the  foot,”  that  is,  the  diagonal 
of  the  base,  and  that  of  the  fiiremus  or'”  ridge,”  to  find  a 
number  which  represents  the  ratio  between  them.  This  is 

1  Plato,  Laws,  819  b  4  p-f)Xwv  ri  tlvcov  Si.avop.al  /ecu  mcrpdvwv  irXdocnv  apa 

Kal  iX&TTOdV  appOTTOVTOJV  dpid pwV  TUTV  aVTUJV,  Kal  TTXJKTOJV  Kal  7T(lX(XL(TTCOl'  6<pc8p€LaS 
re  Kal  avXX^eois  ev  pApei  Kal  etpetfs  Kal  £5  iretpvKaoi  ylyveadai.  Kal  Sr)  Kal 
Tralfovres,  rpr&Xas  apa  xPvaoS  Kai  X“XkoC  Kal  apyvpov  Kal  toloStwv  tlvuiv  dXXwv 
KepavvvvTes,  ol  Si  Kal  SXas  7rtos  5radi86yres. 

1  Herod,  ii.  109  ;  Arist.  Met.  A,  1.  981  b  23. 


20 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


done  by  dividing  half  the  diagonal  of  the  base  by  the 
ridge,  and  it  is  obvious  that  such  a  method  might  quite 
well  be  discovered  empirically.  It  seems  an  anachronism 
to  speak  of  elementary  trigonometry  in  connexion  with 
a  rule  like  this,  and  there  is  nothing  to  suggest  that  the 
Egyptians  went  any  further.1  That  the  Greeks  learnt  as 
much  from  them  is  highly  probable,  though  we  shall  see 
also  that,  from  the  very  first,  they  generalised  it  so  as  to 
make  it  of  use  in  measuring  the  distances  of  inaccessible 
objects,  such  as  ships  at  sea.  It  was  probably  this  generali¬ 
sation  that  suggested  the  idea  of  a  science  of  geometry, 
which  was  really  the  creation  of  the  Pythagoreans,  and  we 
can  see  how  far  the  Greeks  soon  surpassed  their  teachers 
from  a  remark  attributed  to  Demokritos.  It  runs  (fr.  299)  : 

I  have  listened  to  many  learned  men,  but  no  one  has  yet 
surpassed  me  in  the  construction  of  figures  out  of  fines 
accompanied  by  demonstration,  not  even  the  Egyptian  arpe- 
donapts,  as  they  call  them.”  2  Now  the  word  dpireBovdimp 
is  not  Egyptian  but  Greek.  It  means  “  cord-fastener,”  3 
and  it  is  a  striking  coincidence  that  the  oldest  Indian 
geometrical  treatise  is  called  the  Sulvasutras  or  “  rules  of 
the  cord.”  These  things  point  to  the  use  of  the  triangle 
of  which  the  sides  are  as  3,  4,  5,  and  which  has  always  a 
right  angle.  We  know  that  this  was  used  from  an  early 
date  among  the  Chinese  and  the  Hindus,  who  doubtless  got 
it  from  Babylon,  and  we  shall  see  that  Thales  probably 
learnt  the  use  of  it  in  Egypt.*  There  is  no  reason  for 


1  For  a  fuller  account  of  this  method  see  Gnw  c;;—,,  v  , 

MatMcs  pp.  ;  and  Milhaud,  Science  e„oque.  p.  ^T 

n,»t  sp„pri„t  “t  t  co,nsiders  this  fa*- 

Alexandrian  forgery  intended  to  show  the  derikti'^ch^to  <rf “g  “t 

“0““'  ”,  ‘°SiSti"g  h°”  k'S  However  that  may  bftht 

“  “al  a”d  «*  ta*n  item 

out  by  ca”tor- 

She  "  arpedonapts."  ™e  m°dern  representative  of 

4  See  Milhaud,  Science  grecque,  p.  103. 


INTRODUCTION 


21 


supposing  that  any  of  these  peoples  had  troubled  themselves 
to  give  a  theoretical  demonstration  of  its  properties,  though 
Demokritos  would  certainly  have  been  able  to  do  so.  As 
we  shall  see,  however,  there  is  no  real  evidence  that  Thales 
had  any  mathematical  knowledge  which  went  beyond  the 
Rhind  papyrus,  and  we  must  conclude  that  mathematics 
in  the  strict  sense  arose  in  Greece  after  his  time.  It  is 
significant  in  this  connexion  that  all  mathematical  terms 
are  purely  Greek  in  their  origin.1 

XII.  The  other  source  from  which  the  Ionians  were 
supposed  to  have  derived  their  science  is  Babylonian 
astronomy.  It  is  certain,  of  course,  that  the  Babylonians 
had  observed  the  heavens  from  an  early  date.  They  had 
planned  out  the  fixed  stars,  and  especially  those  of  the 
zodiac,  in  constellations.2  That  is  useful  for  purposes  of 
observational  astronomy,  but  in  itself  it  belongs  rather  to 
mythology  or  folklore.  They  had  distinguished  and  named 
the  planets  and  noted  their  apparent  motions.  They  were 
well  aware  of  their  stations  and  retrograde  movements, 
and  they  were  familiar  with  the  solstices  and  equinoxes. 

1  Cf.  t-g-  kijk\os,  KiXivSpos.  Very  often  these  terms  are  derived  from 
the  names  of  tools,'  e.g.  yvu>p.uv,  which  is  the  carpenter’s  square,  and  to/xcvs, 

sector,  which  is  a  cobbler’s  knife.  The  word  irvpap.ls  is  sometimes 
supposed  to  be  an  exception  and  has  been  derived  from  the  term  piremus 
used  in  the  Rhind  papyrus,  which,  however,  does  not  mean  “  pyramid  " 
(p.  19)  ;  but  it  too  is  Greek.  Ilvpa/xis  (or  irvpap.ovi)  means  a  “  wheat- 
cake,  and  is  formed  from  irvpoi  on  the  analogy  of  (n/<x<x/x/s  (or  citcr a/iou v) . 
The  Greeks  had  a  tendency  to  give  jocular  names  to  things  Egyptian. 
Cf.  KpoK68ei\os,  6j3e\L<rKo s,  arpovdos,  KarapaKrqi  (lit.  “sluice”).  We  seem  to 
hear  an  echo  of  the  slang  of  the  mercenaries  who  cut  their  names  on  the 
colossus  at  Abu-Simbel. 

2  That  is  not  quite  the  same  thing  as  dividing  the  zodiac  into  twelve 
signs  of  30°  each.  There  is  no  evidence  of  this  before  the  sixth  century 
b.c.  It  is  also  to  be  noted  that,  while  a  certain  number  of  names  for 
constellations  appear  to  have  reached  the  Greeks  from  Babylon,  most  of 
them  are  derived  from  Greek  mythology,  and  from  its  oldest  stratum, 
which  became  localised  in  Crete,  Arkadia,  and  Boiotia.  That  points  to 
the  conclusion  that  the  constellations  were  already  named  in  "  Minoan  " 
times.  The  disproportionate  space  occupied  by  Andromeda  and  her 
relatives  points  to  the  time  when  Crete  and  Philistia  were  in  close  contact. 
There  is  a  clue  here  which  has  been  obscured  by  the  theory  of  "  astral 
mythology.” 


Baby¬ 

lonian 

astro¬ 

nomy. 


22 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


They  had  also  noted  the  occurrence  of  eclipses  with  a  view 
to  predicting  their  return  for  purposes  of  divination.  But 
we  must  not  exaggerate  the  antiquity  or  accuracy  of  these 
observations.  It  was  long  before  the  Babylonians  had  a 
satisfactory  calendar,  and  they  kept  the  year  right  only  by 
intercalating  a  thirteenth  month  when  it  seemed  desirable. 
That  made  a  trustworthy  chronology  impossible,  and 
therefore  there  were  not  and  could  not  be  any  data  avail¬ 
able  for  astronomical  purposes  before  the  so-called  era  of 
Nabonassar  (747  b.c.).  The  oldest  astronomical  document 
of  a  really  scientific  character  which  had  come  to  fight  up 
to  1907  is  dated  523  b.c.,  in  the  reign  of  Kambyses,  when 
Pythagoras  had  already  founded  his  school  at  Kroton. 
Moreover,  the  golden  age  of  Babylonian  observational 
astronomy  is  now  assigned  to  the  period  after  Alexander  the 
Great,  when  Babylon  was  a  Hellenistic  city.  Even  then, 
though  great  accuracy  of  observation  was  attained,  and 
data  were  accumulated  which  were  of  service  to  the  Alexan¬ 
drian  astronomers,  there  is  no  evidence  that  Babylonian 
astronomy  had  passed  beyond  the  empirical  stage.1 

We  shall  see  that  Thales  probably  knew  the  cycle  by 
means  of  which  the  Babylonians  tried  to  predict  eclipses 
(§  3)  ;  but  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  pioneers 
of  Greek  science  had  any  detailed  knowledge  of  Babylonian 


1  A11  lhls  has  been  placed  beyond  doubt  by  the  researches  of  Father 
Bugler  ( Sternkunde  und  Sterndienst  in  Babel,  1907).  There  is  a  most  in¬ 
teresting  account  and  discussion  of  his  results  by  Schiaparelli  in  Scientia 

°  ‘  PP-  2I4,5?9  ' and  voL  lv'  PP-  24  sqq.,  the  last  work  of  the  great 
astronomer  These  discussions  were  not  available  when  I  published  my 
second  edition,  and  I  made  some  quite  unnecessary  concessions  as  to 

of  r°n0my  th<;re‘  In  Particular-  1  was  led  by  some  remarks 

Ginzel  (I< ho,  1.  p.  205)  to  admit  that  the  Babylonians  might  have 

in  nTh  ht6  PfCreSS1°n  °f  thG  eclulnoxes'  but  this  is  practically  impossible 
in  the  light  of  our  present  knowledge.  There  is  a  good  note  on  the 
subject  in  Schiaparelli’s  second  article  ( Scientia ,  iv.  p  34)  The  chief 
reason  why  the  Babylonians  could  have  no  records  of  astronomical  records 
rom  an  early  date  is  that  they  had  „„  method  of  keeprng  the  lunar “  nd 
the  solar  year  together,  nor  was  there  any  control  such  as  is  furnished  by 
the  Egyptian  Sothis  period.  Neither  the  6KraerVpi5  or  the  imaKcuSeKarnol 
was  known  to  them  ,11,  the  close  o,  the  sixth  century  B  c  ^ey  are 
purely  Greek  inventions.  rney  are 


INTRODUCTION 


23 

observations.  The  Babylonian  names  of  the  planets  do 
not  occur  earlier  than  the  writings  of  Plato’s  old  age.1  We 
shall  find,  indeed,  that  the  earliest  cosmologists  paid  no 
attention  to  the  planets,  and  it  is  hard  to  say  what  they 
thought  about  the  fixed  stars.  That,  in  itself,  shows  that 
they  started  for  themselves,  and  were  quite  independent 
of  Babylonian  observations,  and  the  recorded  observations 
were  only  made  fully  available  in  Alexandrian  times.2  But, 
even  if  the  Ionians  had  known  them,  their  originality  would 
remain.  The  Babylonians  recorded  celestial  phenomena 
for  astrological  purposes,  not  from  any  scientific  interest. 
There  is  no  evidence  that  they  attempted  to  account  for 
what  they  saw  in  any  but  the  crudest  way.  The  Greeks, 
on  the  other  hand,  made  at  least  three  discoveries  of  capital 
importance  in  the  course  of  two  or  three  generations.  In 
the  first  place,  they  discovered  that  the  earth  is  a  sphere 
and  does  not  rest  on  anything.3  In  the  second  place,  they 
discovered  the  true  theory  of  lunar  and  solar  eclipses  ; 
and,  in  close  connexion  with  that,  they  came  to  see,  in 
the  third  place,  that  the  earth  is  not  the  centre  of  our 
system,  but  revolves  round  the  centre  like  the  planets. 
Not  much  later,  certain  Greeks  took,  at  least  tentatively, 
the  final  step  of  identifying  the  centre  round  wdiich  the 
earth  and  planets  revolve  with  the  sun.  These  dis¬ 
coveries  will  be  discussed  in  their  proper  place ;  they  are 
only  mentioned  here  to  show  the  gulf  between  Greek 
astronomy  and  everything  that  had  preceded  it.  On  the 

1  In  classical  Greek  literature,  no  planets  buf'Emrepos  and  ’Eow06pos  are 
mentioned  by  name  at  all.  Parmenides  (or  Pythagoras)  first  identified 
these  as  a  single  planet  (§  94).  Mercury  appears  for  the  first  time  by 
name  in  Tim.  38  e,  and  the  other  divine  names  are  given  in  Epin.  987  b  sq., 
where  they  are  said  to  be  "  Syrian.”  The  Greek  names  ’kc.lvwv,  QatQuv, 
Ilvpoeis,  <Pwcrip6pos,  2n'A/Su>i',  are  no  doubt  older,  though  they  do  not  happen 
to  occur  earlier. 

2  The  earliest  reference  to  them  is  in  Plato’s  Epinomis,  987  a.  They 
are  also  referred  to  by  Aristotle,  De  caelo,  B,  12.  292  a  8. 

3  The  view  of  Berger  ( Erdkunde ,  pp.  171  sqq .)  that  the  sphericity  of  the 
earth  was  known  in  Egypt  and  Babylon  is  flatly  contradicted  by  all  the 
evidence  known  to  me. 


24 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


The 

scientific 
character 
of  the 
early 

Greek  cos¬ 
mology. 


other  hand,  the  Greeks  rejected  astrology,  and  it  was  not  till 
the  third  century  b.c.  that  it  was  introduced  among  them.1 

We  may  sum  up  all  this  by  saying  that  the  Greeks  did 
not  borrow  either  their  philosophy  or  their  science  from  the 
East.  They  did,  however,  get  from  Egypt  certain  rules 
of  mensuration  which,  when  generalised,  gave  birth  to  geo¬ 
metry  ;  while  from  Babylon  they  learnt  that  the  phenomena 
of  the  heavens  recur  in  cycles.  This  piece  of  knowledge 
doubtless  had  a  great  deal  to  do  with  the  rise  of  science  ; 
for  to  the  Greek  it  suggested  further  questions  such  as 
no  Babylonian  ever  dreamt  of.2 

XIII.  It  is  necessary  to  insist  on  the  scientific  character 
of  the  philosophy  we  are  about  to  study.  We  have  seen 
that  the  Eastern  peoples  were  considerably  richer  than  the 
Greeks  in  accumulated  facts,  though  these  facts  had  not 
been  observed  for  any  scientific  purpose,  and  never  suggested 
a  revision  of  the  primitive  view  of  the  world.  The  Greeks, 
however,  saw  in  them  something  that  could  be  turned  to 
account,  and  they  were  never  as  a  people  slow  to  act  on 
the  maxim,  Chacun  prend  son  bien  partout  ou  il  le  trouve. 
The  visit  of  Solon  to  Croesus  which  Herodotos  describes, 
however  unhistorical  it  may  be,  gives  us  a  good  idea  of  this 


p,_.  Th7e.earllest  reference  to  astrology  among  the  Greeks  appears  to  be 
lato,  iim.  40  c  9  (of  conjunctions,  oppositions,  occultations,  etc.) 

V°M  Kal  T?  ^  TaCT“  toIs  oil  8wap.hois  \oylfa9at 

cfvh™'  Th  13  qmte  genera1’  but  Theophrastos  was  more  definite 
Cf.  the  commentary  of  Proclus  on  the  passage:  Oai ^nurd-rip,  eh  at  pv<nv  h 
rois  ko.to.vt6v  XP6Ms  ttjv  tQv  XaXSalw  Bewplav  rd  re  dXXa  rrpoXtyovoar  Kal  row 
?T*  Ka‘  row  6o.v6.Tovs  Kal  oil  rd  koiv6  pbvov.  The  Stoics,  and  especially 

Poseidomos,  were  responsible  for  the  introduction  of  astrology  into  Greece 

fn  1 J  reCently  been  shown  that  the  fully  developed  system  known 

n  later  days  was  based  on  the  Stoic  doctrine  of  elp.apu.hr,.  See  the  verv 
important  article  by  Boll  in  Neue  Jahrb.  xxi.  (1908),  p.  108. 

q86  e  q  aCC°Unt  °f  thiS  matt6r  iS  t0  be  f0und  in  the  Epinomis, 

"EWnves  ^  UP  by  the  WOrds  Ufiu/ter  Si  Cos  ot  creep  hv 

T;  ’  .  ’  reapaXa^ae,  kSXXcov  tovto  els  tCXos  dreepydtovTai  (987  d  9) 

Sa£  of  the?healdPUt  *  E*  P  *>  nSer.  w^o 

tIs  U  OM  the^haldaeans)  and  Egyptians  as  dvev  fivmoXoylas  OTeXels  reocovpevoc 

ix^lT’  ^  ^  T° ™  ol  rrapd  Tois 

.  v  ,  ^P^rn^avres  ereecpurvTO  reoceh,  rds  reapd  Toirrwv  XapovTes  dpX as  Kal  tCvv 
4’OivopJvorv  TVpVaecs  This  gives  the  view  taken  at  Alexandria,  Jhere  the 
facts  were  accurately  known. 


INTRODUCTION 


25 

spirit.  Croesus  tells  Solon  that  he  has  heard  much  of  “  his 
wisdom  and  his  wanderings,”  and  how.  from  love  of  know- 
ledge  (<pt\oao(pewv),  he  has  travelled  over  much  land  for 
the  purpose  of  seeing  what  was  to  be  seen  ( dewpL 775  €LV€K€V) . 
The  words  dewpt 77,  ^LKoao^ip,  and  iaropir)  are,  in  fact,  the 
catchwords  of  the  time,  though  they  had,  no  doubt,  a 
somewhat  different  meaning  from  that  they  were  afterwards 
made  to  bear  at  Athens.1  The  idea  that  underlies  them  all 
mayf  perhaps,  be  rendered  in  English  by  the  word  Curiosity  ; 
and  it  was  just  this  great  gift  of  curiosity,  and  the  desire  to 
see  all  the  wonderful  things — pyramids,  inundations,  and 
so  forth  that  were  to  be  seen,  which  enabled  the  Ionians 
to  pick  up  and  turn  to  their  own  use  such  scraps  of  know¬ 
ledge  as  they  could  come  by  among  the  barbarians.  No 
sooner  did  an  Ionian  philosopher  learn  half-a-dozen  geo¬ 
metrical  propositions,  and  hear  that  the  phenomena  of  the 
heavens  recur  in  cycles,  than  he  set  to  work  to  look  for 
law  everywhere  in  nature,  and,  with  an  audacity  almost 
amounting  to  v/3pis,  to  construct  a  system  of  the  universe. 
We  may  smile  at  the  medley  of  childish  fancy  and 
scientific  insight  which  these  efforts  display,  and  sometimes 
we  feel  disposed  to  sympathise  with  the  sages  of  the  day 
who  warned  their  more  daring  contemporaries  “  to  think 
the  thoughts  befitting  man  s  estate  ”  ( avdptoTrova  (fipovelv) . 
But  we  shall  do  well  to  remember  that  even  now  it  is  just 
such  hardy  anticipations  of  experience  that  make  scientific 
progress  possible,  and  that  nearly  every  one  of  these  early 
inquirers  made  some  permanent  addition  to  positive  know¬ 
ledge,  besides  opening  up  new  views  of  the  world  in  every 
direction. 

There  is  no  justification  either  for  the  idea  that  Greek 
science  was  built  up  by  more  or  less  lucky  guesswork, 
instead  of  by  observation  and  experiment.  The  nature 

1  Still,  the  word  deupia  never  lost  its  early  associations,  and  the  Greeks 
always  felt  that  the  deup-priKbs  /Si os  meant  literally  "  the  life  of  the 
spectator.”  Its  special  use  and  the  whole  theory  of  the  "  three  lives  " 
seem  to  be  Pythagorean.  (See  §  45.) 


26 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


of  our  tradition,  which  mostly  consists  of  Placita — that  is, 
of  what  we  call  “  results  ” — tends,  no  doubt,  to  create  this 
impression.  We  are  seldom  told  why  any  early  philosopher 
held  the  views  he  did,  and  the  appearance  of  a  string 
of  “  opinions  ”  suggests  dogmatism.  There  are,  however, 
certain  exceptions  to  the  general  character  of  the  tradition  ; 
and  we  may  reasonably  suppose  that,  if  the  later  Greeks 
had  been  interested  in  the  matter,  there  would  have  been 
many  more.  We  shall  see  that  Anaximander  made  some 
remarkable  discoveries  in  marine  biology,  which  the  re¬ 
searches  of  the  nineteenth  century  have  confirmed  (§  22), 
and  even  Xenophanes  supported  one  of  his  theories  by 
referring  to  the  fossils  and  petrifactions  of  such  widely 
separated  places  as  Malta,  Paros,  and  Syracuse  (§  59).  This 
is  enough  to  show  that  the  theory,  so  commonly  held  by 
the  earlier  philosophers,  that  the  earth  had  been  originally 
in  a  moist  state,  was  not  purely  mythological  in  origin,  but 
based  on  biological  and  palaeontological  observations.  It 
would  surely  be  absurd  to  imagine  that  the  men  who  could 
make  these  observations  had  not  the  curiosity  or  the  ability 
to  make  many  others  of  which  the  memory  is  lost.  Indeed, 
the  idea  that  the  Greeks  were  not  observers  is  ludicrously 
wrong,  as  is  proved  by  the  anatomical  accuracy  of  their 
sculpture,  which  bears  witness  to  trained  habits  of  observa¬ 
tion,  while  the  Hippokratean  corpus  contains  models  of 
scientific  observation  at  its  best.  We  know,  then,  that  the 
Greeks  could  observe  well,  and  we  know  that  they  were 
curious  about  the  world.  Is  it  conceivable  that  they  did  not 
use  their  powers  of  observation  to  gratify  that  curiosity  ? 
It  is  true  that  they  had  not  our  instruments  of  precision  ; 
but  a  great  deal  can  be  discovered  by  the  help  of  very  simple 
apparatus.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  Anaximander 
erected  his  gnomon  merely  that  the  Spartans  might  know 
the  seasons.1 

1  As  we  saw,  the  word  yvA/xuv  properly  means  a  carpenter’s  square 
(p.  21,  ».  1)  and  we  learn  from  Proclus  (in  End.. I.  p.  283,  7)  that  Oinopides 
of  Chios  used  it  in  the  sense  of  a  perpendicular  (Udero s).  The  instrument 


INTRODUCTION 


27 


Nor  is  it  true  that  the  Greeks  made  no  use  of  experiment. 
The  rise  of  the  experimental  method  dates  from  the  time 
when  the  medical  schools  began  to  influence  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  philosophy,  and  accordingly  we  find  that  the  first 
recorded  experiment  of  a  modern  type  is  that  of  Empedokles 
with  the  klepsydra.  We  have  his  own  account  of  this  (fr.  100), 
and  we  can  see  how  it  brought  him  to  the  verge  of  anticipating 
Harvey  and  Torricelli.  It  is  inconceivable  that  an  inquisitive 
people  should  have  applied  the  experimental  method  in  a 
single  case  without  extending  it  to  other  problems. 

Of  course  the  great  difficulty  for  us  is  the  geocentric 
hypothesis  from  which  science  inevitably  started,  though 
only  to  outgrow  it  in  a  surprisingly  short  time.  So  long  as 
the  earth  is  supposed  to  be  in  the  centre  of  the  world, 
meteorology,  in  the  later  sense  of  the  word,  is  necessarily 
identified  with  astronomy.  It  is  difficult  for  us  to  feel  at 
home  in  this  point  of  view,  and  indeed  we  have  no  suitable 
word  to  express  what  the  Greeks  at  first  called  an  ovpavos. 
It  will  be  convenient  to  use  the  term  “  world  ”  for  it ;  but 
then  we  must  remember  that  it  does  not  refer  solely,  or 
even  chiefly,  to  the  earth,  though  it  includes  that  along 
with  the  heavenly  bodies. 

The  science  of  the  sixth  century  was  mainly  concerned, 
therefore,  with  those  parts  of  the  world  that  are  “  aloft  ” 
(to,  /xerecopa),  and  these  include  such  things  as  clouds,  rain¬ 
bows,  and  lightning,  as  well  as  the  heavenly  bodies.* 1  That 
is  how  the  latter  came  sometimes  to  be  explained  as  ignited 

so  called  was  simply  an  upright  erected  on  a  flat  surface,  and  its  chief 
use  was  to  indicate  the  solstices  and  the  equinoxes  by  means  of  its  shadow. 
It  was  not  a  sundial  ;  for  it  aflorded  no  means  of  dividing  the  day  into 
equal  hours,  though  the  time  of  day  would  be  approximately  inferred 
from  the  length  of  the  shadow  cast  by  it.  For  the  geometrical  use  of 
the  term,  see  below,  p.  103,  n.  1. 

1  The  restricted  sense  of  perea  poXoyta  only  arose  when  Aristotle  intro¬ 
duced  for  the  first  time  the  fateful  distinction  between  the  ovpavos  and 
the  "  sublunary  "  region,  to  which  it  was  now  confined.  In  so  far  as 
they  make  no  such  distinction,  the  early  cosmologists  were  more  scientific 
than  Aristotle.  Their  views  admitted  of  correction  and  development  ; 
Aristotle’s  theory  arrested  the  growth  of  science. 


28 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Schools 
of  philo¬ 
sophy. 


clouds,  an  idea  which  seems  astonishing  to  us.1  But  even 
that  is  better  than  to  regard  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  as 
having  a  different  nature  from  the  earth,  and  science  in¬ 
evitably  and  rightly  began  with  the  most  obvious  hypothesis, 
and  it  was  only  the  thorough  working  out  of  this  that  could 
show  its  inadequacy.  It  is  just  because  the  Greeks  were 
the  first  people  to  take  the  geocentric  hypothesis  seriously 
that  they  were  able  to  go  beyond  it.  Of  course  the  pioneers 
of  Greek  thought  had  no  clear  idea  of  the  nature  of  scientific 
hypothesis,  and  supposed  themselves  to  be  dealing  with 
ultimate  reality,  but  a  sure  instinct  guided  them  to  the  right 
method,  and  we  can  see  how  it  was  the  effort  to  “  save 
appearances  ”  2  that  really  operated  from  the  first.  It  is 
to  those  men  we  owe  the  conception  of  an  exact  science  which 
should  ultimately  take  in  the  whole  world  as  its  object. 
They  fancied  they  could  work  out  this  science  at  once.  We 
sometimes  make  the  same  mistake  nowadays,  and  forget 
that  all  scientific  progress  consists  in  the  advance  from  a 
less  to  a  more  adequate  hypothesis.  The  Greeks  were  the 
first  to  follow  this  method,  and  that  is  their  title  to  be 
regarded  as  the  originators  of  science. 

XIV.  Theophrastos,  the  first  writer  to  treat  the  history 
of  Greek  philosophy  in  a  systematic  way,3  represented  the 
early  cosmologists  as  standing  to  one  another  in  the  relation 
of  master  and  scholar,  and  as  members  of  regular  societies. 
This  has  been  regarded  as  an  anachronism,  and  some  have 
even  denied  the  existence  of  "  schools  ”  of  philosophy 
altogether.  But  the  statements  of  Theophrastos  on  such  a 
subject  are  not  to  be  lightly  set  aside.  As  this  point  is  of 


1  It  is  well,  however,  to  remember  that  Galileo  himself  regarded  comets 
as  meteorological  phenomena. 

2  This  phrase  originated  in  the  school  of  Plato.  The  method  of 
research  in  use  there  was  for  the  leader  to  "  propound  ”  tirporelvecv 
i rpopaXkcffOai)  it  as  a  “  problem  ”  {wpbfiXrpm)  to  find  the  simplest  "  hypo¬ 
thesis  JHpup  Woredivruv)  on  which  it  is  possible  to  account  for  and  do 
justice  to  all  the  observed  facts  (crtfeiv  tA  <po.ivbp.eva).  Cf.  Milton,  Paradise 
Lost,  vm.  8i,  how  build,  unbuild,  contrive  |  To  save  appearances  ” 

3  See  Note  on  Sources,  §  7. 


INTRODUCTION  2Q 

great  importance,  it  will  be  necessary  to  elucidate  it  before 
we  enter  on  our  story. 

In  almost  every  department  of  life,  the  corporation  at 
first  is  everything  and  the  individual  nothing.  The  peoples 
of  the  East  hardly  got  beyond  this  stage  ;  their  science, 
such  as  it  is,  is  anonymous,  the  inherited  property  of  a  caste 
or  guild,  and  we  still  see  clearly  in  some  cases  that  it  was 
once  the  same  among  the  Greeks.  Medicine,  for  instance 
was  originally  the  "  mystery  ”  of  the  Asklepiads.  What 
distinguished  the  Greeks  from  other  peoples  was  that  at  an 
early  date  these  crafts  came  under  the  influence  of  out¬ 
standing  individuals,  who  gave  them  a  fresh  direction  and 
a  new  impulse.  But  this  does  not  destroy  the  corporate 
character  of  the  craft ;  it  rather  intensifies  it.  The  guild 
becomes  what  we  call  a  “  school,"  and  the  disciple  takes 
the  place  of  the  apprentice.  That  is  a  vital  change.  A 
close  guild  with  none  but  official  heads  is  essentially  conser¬ 
vative,  while  a  band  of  disciples  attached  to  a  master  they 
revere  is  the  greatest  progressive  force  the  world  knows. 

It  is  certain  that  the  later  Athenian  schools  were  legally 
recognised  corporations,  the  oldest  of  which,  the  Academy, 
maintained  its  existence  as  such  for  some  nine  hundred 
years,  and  the  only  question  we  have  to  decide  is  whether 
this  was  an  innovation  made  in  the  fourth  century  b.c.,  or 
^3-fher  the  continuance  of  an  old  tradition.  Now  we  have 
the  authority  of  Plato  for  speaking  of  the  chief  early  systems 
as  handed  down  in  schools.  He  makes  Sokrates  speak  of 
the  men  of  Ephesos,  the  Herakleiteans,  as  forming  a 
strong  body  in  his  own  day,1  and  the  stranger  of  the  Sophist 
and  the  Statesman  speaks  of  his  school  as  still  in  existence  at 
Elea.2  We  also  hear  of  “  Anaxagoreans,”  3  and  no  one,  of 

?  Theaet.  179  e  4,  adroh  .  .  .  rdl s  rrepl  ttjp  "Eptaov.  The  humorous 
denial  that  the  Herakleiteans  had  any  disciples  (180  b  8,  Uotois  pad-tp-ah, 

Cl  Sai/xovte  ;)  implies  that  this  was  the  normal  and  recognised  relation. 

Soph.  242  d  41  rb  .  .  .  Trap  pplv  E\earti;6v  cdvos.  Cf.  ib.  216  a  3, 
iraipov  Se  tQv  dp.pl  RappeidSpr  Kal  Zr/ruira  [eralpiov]  (where  eraipwv  is  probably 
interpolated,  but  gives  the  right  sense)  ;  217  a  1,  ol  wepl  top  iKet  t6tov. 

3  Crat.  409  b  6,  direp  aXridrj  oi  ’Ava£ay6peioi  Xeyovmv.  Cf.  also  the  At  enrol 


30 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


course,  can  doubt  that  the  Pythagoreans  were  a  society. 
In  fact,  there  is  hardly  any  school  but  that  of  Miletos  for 
which  we  have  not  external  evidence  of  the  strongest  kind  ; 
and  even  as  regards  it,  we  have  the  significant  fact  that 
Theophrastos  speaks  of  philosophers  of  a  later  date  as 
having  been  “  associates  of  the  philosophy  of  Anaximenes.” *  1 
We  shall  see  too  in  the  first  chapter  that  the  internal  evidence 
in  favour  of  the  existence  of  a  Milesian  school  is  very  strong 
indeed.  It  is  from  this  point  of  view,  then,  that  we  shall 
now  proceed  to  consider  the  men  who  created  Greek  science. 


\6yoi  (Diels,  Vors.3  ii.  p.  343)  ri  Si  '  Ava£ay6peioc  Kal  Tlvdayipeioi  fjev  ;  This  is 
independent  of  Plato. 

1  Cf.  Ghap.  VI.  §  122. 


NOTE  ON  THE  SOURCES 
A . — PHILOSOPHERS 

i.  It  is  not  very  often  that  Plato  allows  himself  to  dwell  on  Plato, 
the  history  of  philosophy  as  it  was  before  the  rise  of  ethical 
and  epistemological  inquiry  ;  but  when  he  does,  he  is  always 
illuminating.  His  artistic  gift  and  his  power  of  entering 
into  the  thoughts  of  other  men  enabled  him  to  describe  the 
views  of  early  philosophers  in  a  sympathetic  manner,  and 
he  never,  except  in  a  playful  and  ironical  way,  sought  to  read 
unthought-of  meanings  into  the  words  of  his  predecessors. 

He  has,  in  fact,  a  historical  sense,  which  was  a  rare  thing  in 
antiquity. 

The  passage  of  the  Phaedo  (96  a  saq.)  where  he  describes 
the  state  of  scientific  opinion  at  Athens  in  the  middle  of  the 
fifth  century  is  invaluable  for  our  purposes. 

2.  As  a  rule,  Aristotle’s  statements  about  early  philoso-  Aristotle, 
phers  are  far  less  historical  than  Plato’s.  He  nearly  always 
discusses  the  facts  from  the  point  of  view  of  his  own  system, 
and  that  system,  resting  as  it  does  on  the  deification  of  the 
apparent  diurnal  revolution  of  the  heavens,  made  it  very 
hard  for  him  to  appreciate  more  scientific  views.  He  is 
convinced  that  his  own  philosophy  accomplishes  what  all 
previous  philosophers  had  aimed  at,  and  their  systems  are 
therefore  regarded  as  “  lisping  ”  attempts  to  formulate  it 
(Met.  A,  10,  993  a  15).  It  is  also  to  be  noted  that  Aristotle 
regards  some  systems  in  a  much  more  sympathetic  way 
than  others.  He  is  distinctly  unfair  to  the  Eleatics,  for 

31 


32 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Stoics. 


Skeptics. 


Neo- 

platonists. 


instance,  and  in  general,  wherever  mathematical  considera¬ 
tions  come  into  play,  he  is  an  untrustworthy  guide. 

It  is  often  forgotten  that  Aristotle  derived  much  of  his 
information  from  Plato,  and  we  must  specially  observe  that 
he  more  than  once  takes  Plato’s  humorous  remarks  too 
literally. 

3.  The  Stoics,  and  especially  Chrysippos,  paid  great 
attention  to  early  philosophy,  but  their  way  of  regarding  it 
was  simply  an  exaggeration  of  Aristotle’s.  They  did  not 
content  themselves  with  criticising  their  predecessors  from 
their  own  point  of  view  ;  they  seem  really  to  have  believed 
that  the  early  poets  and  thinkers  taught  doctrines  hardly 
distinguishable  from  their  own.  The  word  awouceiovv,  which 
Cicero  renders  by  accommodare,  was  used  by  Philodemos 
to  denote  this  method  of  interpretation,1  which  has  had 
serious  results  upon  our  tradition,  especially  in  the  case  of 
Herakleitos. 

4.  The  same  remarks  apply  mutatis  mutandis  to  the 
Skeptics.  The  interest  of  such  a  writer  as  Sextus  Empiricus 
in  early  philosophy  is  mainly  to  exhibit  its  contradictions. 
But  what  he  tells  us  is  often  of  value  ;  for  he  frequently 
quotes  early  views  as  to  knowledge  and  sensation  in  support 
of  his  thesis. 

5.  Under  this  head  we  have  chiefly  to  consider  the 
commentators  on  Aristotle  in  so  far  as  they  are  independent 
of  the  Theophrastean  tradition.  Their  chief  characteristic 
is  what  Simplicius  calls  evyvcopoavvrj,  that  is,  a  liberal  spirit 
of  interpretation,  which  makes  all  early  philosophers  agree 
with  one  another  in  upholding  the  doctrine  of  a  Sensible 
and  an  Intelligible  World.  It  is,  however,  to  Simplicius 

1  Cf.  Cic.  De  nat.  d.  i.  15,  41  :  Et  haec  quidem  (Chrysippus)  in  primo 
libro  de  natura  deorum,  in  secundo  autem  vult  Orphei,  Musaei,  Hesiodi 
Homerique  fabellas  accommodare  ad  ea  quae  ipse  primo  libro  de  deis 
immortalibus  dixerat,  ut  etiam  veterrimi  poetae,  qui  baec  ne  suspicati 
quidem  sunt,  Stoici  fuisse  videantur.”  Cf.  Philod.  De  piet.fr.  c.  13,  iv  Si 
TV  Sevripip  rd  re  e/s  ’Opipia  Kal  ’Mowaiov  ava<pepop.eva  Kal  tcl  Trap  'Oppptp  Kal 
'Eai68VKal  Kal  Troojrats  dMois,  (is  Kal  K \edr6Vs,  Tupdrai  avyoiKUoOy  rait 

56£(us  airr&v. 


NOTE  ON  THE  SOURCES  33 

more  than  any  one  else  that  we  owe  the  preservation  of  the 
fragments.  He  had,  of  course,  the  library  of  the  Academy 
at  his  disposal,  at  any  rate  up  to  a.d.  529. 


B. — DOXOGRAPHERS 

6.  The  Doxographi  Graeci  of  Professor  Hermann  Diels 
(1879)  threw  an  entirely  new  light  upon  the  filiation  of  the 
later  sources  ;  and  we  can  only  estimate  justly  the  value 
of  statements  derived  from  these  if  we  bear  constantly  in 
mind  the  results  of  his  investigation.  Here  it  will  only  be 
possible  to  give  an  outline  which  may  help  the  reader  to 
find  his  way  in  the  Doxographi  Graeci  itself. 

7.  By  the  term  doxographers  we  understand  all  those 
writers  who  relate  the  opinions  of  the  Greek  philosophers, 
and  who  derive  their  material,  directly  or  indirectly,  from  the 
great  work  of  Theophrastos,  <t>va uc&v  Bo%wv  nj'  (Diog.  v.  46). 
Of  this  work,  one  considerable  chapter,  that  entitled  Tlepl 
aladrjcrecov ,  has  been  preserved  ( Dox .  pp.  499-527).  And 
Usener,  following  Brandis,  further  showed  that  there  were 
important  fragments  of  it  contained  in  the  commentary 
of  Simplicius  -(sixth  cent,  a.d.)  on  the  First  Book  of 
Aristotle’s  <Pvcwcr)  a/cpoaat ,9  (Usener,  Analecta  Theophrastea, 
pp.  25  sqq.).  These  extracts  Simplicius  seems  to  have 
borrowed  in  turn  from  Alexander  of  Aphrodisias  (c.  a.d.  200) ; 
cf.  Dox.  p.  112  sqq.  We  thus  possess  a  very  considerable 
portion  of  the  First  Book,  which  dealt  with  the  dpxal,  as 
well  as  practically  the  whole  of  the  last  Book. 

From  these  remains  it  clearly  appears  that  the  method 
of  Theophrastos  was  to  discuss  in  separate  books  the  leading 
topics  which  had  engaged  the  attention  of  philosophers 
from  Thales  to  Plato.  The  chronological  order  was  not 
observed ;  the  philosophers  were  grouped  according  to  the 
affinity  of  their  doctrine,  the  differences  between  those  who 
appeared  to  agree  most  closely  being  carefully  noted.  The 
First  Book,  however,  was  in  some  degree  exceptional ;  for 


The  Doxo¬ 
graphi 
Graeci. 


The 

“  Opinions  ” 
of  Theo¬ 
phrastos. 


3 


34 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Doxo- 

graphers. 


The 

Placita 

and 

Stobaios. 


Aetios. 


in  it  the  order  was  that  of  the  successive  schools,  and  short 
historical  and  chronological  notices  were  inserted. 

8.  A  work  of  this  kind  was,  of  course,  a  godsend  to  the 
epitomators  and  compilers  of  handbooks,  who  flourished 
more  and  more  as  the  Greek  genius  declined.  These  either 
followed  Theophrastos  in  arranging  the  subject-matter 
under  heads,  or  else  they  broke  up  his  work,  and  rearranged 
his  statements  under  the  names  of  the  various  philosophers 
to  whom  they  applied.  This  latter  class  form  the  natural 
transition  between  the  doxographers  proper  and  the  bio¬ 
graphers,  so  I  have  ventured  to  distinguish  them  by  the 
name  of  biographical  doxographers. 

I.  Doxographers  Proper 

9.  These  are  now  mainly  represented  by  two  works,  viz. 
the  Placita  Philosophorum,  included  among  the  writings 
ascribed  to  Plutarch,  and  the  Eclogae  Physicae  of  John 
Stobaios  (c.  a.d.  470).  The  latter  originally  formed  one 
work  with  the  Florilegium  of  the  same  author,  and  includes 
a  transcript  of  some  epitome  substantially  identical  with  the 
pseudo-Plutarchean  Placita.  It  is,  however,  demonstrable 
that  neither  the  Placita  nor  the  doxography  of  the  Eclogae 
is  the  original  of  the  other.  The  latter  is  usually  the  fuller 
of  the  two,  and  yet  the  former  must  be  earlier  ;  for  it  was 
used  by  Athenagoras  for  his  defence  of  the  Christians  in 
a.d.  1 77  ( Dox .  p.  4).  It  was  also  the  source  of  the  notices  in 
Eusebios  and  Cyril,  and  of  the  History  of  Philosophy  ascribed 
to  Galen.  From  these  writers  many  important  corrections 
of  the  text  have  been  derived  {Dox.  pp.  5  sqq.). 

Another  writer  who  made  use  of  the  Placita  is  Achilles 
{not  Achilles  Tatius).  For  his  Elaaywyi]  to  the  Phaenomena 
of  Aratos  see  Maass,  Commentariorum  In  Aratum  reliquiae, 

PP-  25-75.  His  date  is  uncertain,  but  probably  he  belongs 
to  the  third  century  a.d,  {Dox.  p.  18). 

10.  What,  then,  was  the  common  source  of  the  Placita 


NOTE  ON  THE  SOURCES 


35 


and  the  Eclogue  ?  Diels  has  shown  that  Theodoret  (c. 
a.d.  445)  had  access  to  it ;  for  in  some  cases  he  gives  a  fuller 
form  of  statements  made  in  these  two  works.  Not  only 
so,  but  he  also  names  that  source  ;  for  he  refers  us  ( Gr .  aff. 

CUT.  iv.  31)  to  ’A €tlov  t rjv  7 repl  dpea/covrctiv  avva'ya><yr)v.  Diels 
has  accordingly  printed  the  Placita  in  parallel  columns  with 
the  relevant  parts  of  the  Eclogue,  under  the  title  of  Aetii 
Plucitu.  The  quotations  from  “  Plutarch  ”  by  later  writers, 
and  the  extracts  of  Theodoret  from  Aetios,  are  also  given 
at  the  foot  of  each  page. 

11.  Diels  has  shown  further,  however,  that  Aetios  did  The 

.  Vetusta 

not  draw  directly  from  Theophrastos,  but  from  an  inter-  piatita. 
mediate  epitome  which  he  calls  the  Vetustu  Plucitu,  traces 
of  which  may  be  found  in  Cicero  ( infru ,  §  12),  and  in 
Censorinus  ( De  die  nutuli),  who  follows  Varro.  The  Vetustu 
Plucitu  were  composed  in  the  school  of  Poseidonios,  and 
Diels  now  calls  them  the  Poseidonian  ’Apea/covra  ( Uber  dus 
phys.  System  des  Struton,  p.  2).  There  are  also  traces  of 
them  in  the  “  Homeric  Allegorists.” 

It  is  quite  possible,  by  discounting  the  somewhat  unin¬ 
telligent  additions  which  Aetios  made  from  Epicurean  and 
other  sources,  to  form  a  pretty  accurate  table  of  the  contents 
of  the  Vetustu  Plucitu  ( Dox .  pp.  181  sqq.),  and  this  gives  us 
a  fair  idea  of  the  arrangement  of  the  original  work  by 
Theophrastos. 

12.  So  far  as  what  he  tells  us  of  the  earliest  Greek  Cicero, 
philosophy  goes,  Cicero  must  be  classed  with  the  doxo- 
graphers,  and  not  with  the  philosophers  ;  for  he  gives  us 
nothing  but  extracts  at  second  or  third  hand  from  the  work 

of  Theophrastos.  Two  passages  in  his  writings  fall  to  be 
considered  under  this  head,  namely,  “  Lucullus  ( Acud .  ii.), 

1 18,  and  De  naturu  deorum,  i.  25-41. 

(u)  Doxogyuphy  of  the  “  Lucullus.” — This  contains  a 
meagre  and  inaccurately-rendered  summary  of  the  various 
opinions  held  by  philosophers  with  regard  to  the  dPXv  {Dox. 
pp.  119  sqq.),  and  would  be  quite  useless  if  it  did  not  in.  one 


36 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


case  enable  us  to  verify  the  exact  words  of  Theophrastos 
(Chap.  I.  p.  50,  n.  4).  The  doxography  has  come  through 
the  hands  of  Kleitomachos,  who  succeeded  Karneades  in 
the  headship  of  the  Academy  (129  b.c.). 

(b)  Doxography  of  the  "  Be  natura  deonm”—A  fresh 
light  was  thrown  upon  this  important  passage  by  the  dis¬ 
covery  at  Herculaneum  of  a  roll  containing  fragments  of  an 
Epicurean  treatise,  so  like  it  as  to  be  at  once  regarded  as  its 
original.  This  treatise  was  at  first  ascribed  to  Phaidros, 
on  the  ground  of  the  reference  in  Epp.  ad  Att.  xiii.  39.  2 ; 
but  the  real  title,  ^1X08^00  7 repl  evaefielas,  was  afterwards 
restored  ( Dox .  p.  530).  Diels,  however,  has  shown  (Dox. 
pp.  122  sqq .)  that  there  is  much  to  be  said  for  the  view  that 
Cicero  did  not  copy  Philodemos,  but  that  both  drew  from  a 
common  source  (no  doubt  Phaidros,  Oe&v)  which  itself 
went  back  to  a  Stoic  epitome  of  Theophrastos.  The  passage 
of  Cicero  and  the  relevant  fragments  of  Philodemos  are 
edited  in  parallel  columns  by  Diels  [Dox.  pp.  531  sqq.). 


Hippolytos 


The 

Stromateis. 


II.  Biographical  Doxographers 

13-  Of  the  “  biographical  doxographies,”  the  most 
important  is  Book  I.  of  the  Refutation  of  all  Heresies  by 
Hippolytos.  This  had  long  been  known  as  the  Philosophou- 
mena  ol  Origen  ;  but  the  discovery  of  the  remaining  books, 
w  ich  were  first  published  at  Oxford  in  1854,  showed  finally 
that  it  could  not  belong  to  him.  It  is  drawn  mainly  from 
some  good  epitome  of  Theophrastos,  in  which  the  matter 
was  already  rearranged  under  the  names  of  the  various 
philosophers  We  must  note,  however,  that  the  sections 
ea  ng  with  Thales,  Pythagoras,  Herakleitos,  and  Empe- 
dokles  come  from  an  inferior  source,  some  merely  Wo- 

StuSr  fUU  °f  ™al 

cmntM  hhS L£rag™ents  of  the  Pseudo-Plutarchean  Stromateis. 
quoted  by  Eusebios  in  his  Praeparatio  Evangelica.  come  from 


NOTE  ON  THE  SOURCES 


37 


a  source  similar  to  that  of  the  best  portions  of  the  Philo- 
sophoumena.  So  far  as  we  can  judge,  they  differ  chiefly  in 
two  points.  In  the  first  place,  they  are  mostly  taken  from 
the  earliest  sections  of  the  work,  and  therefore  most  of  them 
deal  with  the  primary  substance,  the  heavenly  bodies  and 
the  earth.  In  the  second  place,  the  language  is  a  much  less 
faithful  transcript  of  the  original. 

15.  The  scrap-book  which  goes  by  the  name  of  Diogenes 
Laertios,  or  Laertios  Diogenes  (cf.  Usener,  Epicurea,  pp.  1 
sqq.),  contains  large  fragments  of  two  distinct  doxographies. 
One  is  of  the  merely  biographical,  anecdotic,  and  apophtheg- 
matic  kind  used  by  Hippolytos  in  his  first  four  chapters  ; 
the  other  is  of  a  better  class,  more  like  the  source  of  Hippo¬ 
lytos’  remaining  chapters.  An  attempt  is  made  to  disguise 
this  r<  contamination  ”  by  referring  to  the  first  doxography 
as  a  “  summary  ”  (>ce</>aA<ua>S?7?)  account,  while  the  second  is 
called  “  particular  ”  (eVl  yu .epovs). 

16.  Short  doxographical  summaries  are  to  be  found  in 
Eusebios  ( P .  E.  x.,  xiv.,  xv.),  Theodoret  (Gr.  aff.  cur.  ii.  9-11), 
Irenaeus  (C.  haer.  ii.  14),  Arnobius  ( Adv .  nat.  ii.  9),  Augustine 
{Civ.  Dei,  viii.  2).  These  depend  mainly  upon  the  writers  of 
“  Successions,”  whom  we  shall  have  to  consider  in  the  next 
section. 

C.— BIOGRAPHERS 

17.  The  first  to  write  a  work  entitled  Successions  of  the 
Philosophers  was  Sotion  (Diog.  ii.  12  ;  R.  P.  4  a),  about 
200  b.c.  The  arrangement  of  his  work  is  explained  in 
Dox.  p.  147.  It  was  epitomised  by  Herakleides  Lembos. 
Other  writers  of  A laSo^al  were  Antisthenes,  Sosikrates,  and 
Alexander.  All  these  compositions  were  accompanied  by  a 
very  meagre  doxography,  and  made  interesting  by  the 
addition  of  unauthentic  apophthegms  and  apocryphal 
anecdotes. 

18.  The  peripatetic  Hermippos  of  Smyrna,  known  as 
KaA?u/i.a^eto9  (c.  200  b.c.),  wrote  several  biographical  works 


“  Diogenes 
Laertios." 


Patristic 

doxo¬ 

graphies. 


Succes¬ 

sions. 


Her¬ 

mippos. 


38 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


which  are  frequently  quoted.  The  biographical  details  are 
very  untrustworthy  ;  but  sometimes  bibliographical  infor¬ 
mation  is  added,  which  doubtless  rests  upon  the  TLlvcuces  of 
Kallimachos. 

Satyros.  19.  Another  peripatetic,  Satyros,  the  pupil  of  Aristarchos, 
wrote  (c.  160  b.c.)  Lives  of  Famous  Men.  The  same  remarks 
apply  to  him  as  to  Hermippos.  His  work  was  epitomised 
by  Herakleides  Lembos. 

Laerttos!”S  .  2°’  The  WOrk  which  Soes  by  the  name  of  Laertios 
Diogenes  is,  in  its  biographical  parts,  a  mere  patchwork  of 

all  earlier  learning.  It  has  not  been  digested  or  composed 
by  any  single  mind  at  all,  but  is  little  more  than  a  collection 
of  extracts  made  at  haphazard.  But,  of  course,  it  contains 
much  that  is  of  the  greatest  value. 

D. — CHRONOLOGISTS 

thenes"  21 '  The  founder  of  ancient  chronology  was  Eratosthenes 
A^oiio  ^rene  (275-i94  b-c-)  >  but  his  work  was  soon  supplanted 
doros.  by  the  metrical  version  of  Apollodoros  (c.  140  b.c.),  from 
which  most  of  our  information  as  to  the  dates  of  early 
philosophers  is  derived.  See  Diels’  paper  on  the  XpovtKd  of 

Apollodoros  in  Rhein.  Mus.  xxxi.  ;  and  Jacoby,  Afollodors 
Chronik  (1902). 

The  method  adopted  is  as  follows  If  the  date  of  some 
striking  event  in  a  philosopher’s  life  is  known,  that  is  taken 
as  his  floruit  {d/crf),  and  he  is  assumed  to  have  been  forty 
years  old  at  that  date.  In  default  of  this,  some  historical 
era  is  taken  as  the  floruit.  Of  these  the  chief  are  the  eclipse 
of  Thales  586/5  b.c.,  the  taking  of  Sardeis  in  546/5  b.c.,  the 
accession  of  Polykrates  in  532/1  b.c.,  and  the  foundation  of 
Thounoi  in  444/3  B.c.  It  is  usual  to  attach  far  too  much 
weight  to  these  combinations,  and  we  can  often  show  that 
Apollodoros  is  wrong  from  our  other  evidence.  His  dates 

can  only  be  accepted  as  a  makeshift,  when  nothing  better 
is  available. 


CHAPTER  I 


THE  MILESIAN  SCHOOL 

i.  It  was  at  Miletos  that  the  earliest  school  of  scientific  Miletos 
cosmology  had  its  home,  and  it  is  not,  perhaps,  without  andLy< 
significance  that  Miletos  is  just  the  place  where  the  con¬ 
tinuity  of  Aegean  and  Ionian  civilisation  is  most  clearly 
marked.1  The  Milesians  had  come  into  conflict  more  than 
once  with  the  Lydians,  whose  rulers  were  bent  on  extending 
their  dominion  to  the  coast ;  but,  towards  the  end  of  the 
seventh  century  b.c.,  the  tyrant  Thrasyboulos  succeeded 
in  making  terms  with  King  Alyattes,  and  an  alliance  was 
concluded  which  secured  Miletos  against  molestation  for 
the  future.  Even  half  a  century  later,  when  Croesus, 
resuming  his  father’s  forward  policy,  made  war  upon  and 
conquered  Ephesos,  Miletos  was  able  to  maintain  the  old 
treaty- relation,  and  never,  strictly  speaking,  became  subject 
to  the  Lydians  at  all.  The  Lydian  connexion,  more¬ 
over,  favoured  the  growth  of  science  at  Miletos.  What 
was  called  at  a  later  date  Hellenism  seems  to  have  been 
traditional  in  the  dynasty  of  the  Mermnadai,  and  Herodotos 
says  that  all  the  “  sophists  ”  of  the  time  flocked  to  the  court 
of  Sardeis.2  The  tradition  which  represents  Croesus  as 

1  See  Introd.  §  II.  Ephoros  said  that  Old  Miletos  was  colonised  from 
Milatos  in  Crete  at  an  earlier  date  than  the  fortification  of  the  new  city 
by  Neleus  (Strabo,  xiv.  p.  634),  and  recent  excavation  has  shown  that 
the  Aegean  civilisation  passed  here  by  gradual  transition  into  the  early 
Ionic.  The  dwellings  of  the  old  Ionians  stand  on  and  among  the  debris 
of  the  "  Mycenean  ”  period.  There  is  no  "  geometrical  "  interlude. 

2  Herod,  i.  29.  See  Radet,  La  Lydie  et  le  monde  gvec  au  temp  de-s 
Mermnades  (Paris,  1893). 


39 


40 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Origin. 


the  “  patron  ”  of  Greek  wisdom  was  fully  developed  in  the 
fifth  century  ;  and,  however  unhistorical  its  details  may 
be,  it  must  clearly  have  some  foundation  in  fact.  Particu¬ 
larly  noteworthy  is  “  the  common  tale  among  the  Greeks,” 
that  Thales  accompanied  Croesus  on  his  luckless  campaign 
against  Pteria,  apparently  in  the  capacity  of  military 
engineer.  Iierodotos  disbelieves  the  story  that  he  diverted 
the  course  of  the  Halys,  but  only  because  he  knew  there 
were  bridges  there  already.  It  is  clear  that  the  Ionians 
were  great  engineers,  and  that  they  were  employed  as  such 
by  the  eastern  kings.1 

It  should  be  added  that  the  Lydian  alliance  would 
facilitate  intercourse  with  Babylon  and  Egypt.  Lydia  was 
an  advanced  post  of  Babylonian  culture,  and  Croesus 
was  on  friendly  terms  with  the  kings  of  Egypt  and 
Babylon.  Amasis  of  Egypt  had  the  same  Hellenic  sym¬ 
pathies  as  Croesus,  and  the  Milesians  possessed  a  temple 
of  their  own  at  Naukratis. 


I.  Thales 


2.  The  founder  of  the  Milesian  school,  and  therefore  the 
first  man  of  science,  was  Thales  ;  2  but  ah  we  can  really 
be  said  to  know  of  him  comes  from  Herodotos,  and  the  Tale 


1  Her°d-  i-  75-  It  is  important  for  a  right  estimate  of  Ionian  science 
to  remember  the  high  development  of  engineering  in  these  days.  Man- 
drokles  of  Samos  built  the  bridge  over  the  Bosporos  for  King  Dareios 
(  erod.  lv.  88),  and  Harpalos  of  Tenedos  bridged  the  Hellespont  for 
ST8  'v,h,en  the  Egypbans  and  Phoenicians  had  failed  in  the  attempt 
L16  S'  q  Berl ■  Akad ■■  I9°4-  P-  8).  The  tunnel  through  the  hill 

Gbp™ennSamOS  fCnbed  by  Herodotos  (iif-  6°)  has  been  discovered  by 
German  excavators.  It  is  about  a  kilometre  long,  but  the  levels  are 

S3Sk~  w°“  the  ,WhA°Ie  SubJect  see  D^s,  »  Wissenschaft  und 
.  den  Hellenen  ( Neue  Jahrb.  xxxiii.  pp.  3,  4).  Here  as  in 

other  things,  the  Ionians  carried  on  “  Minoan  ”  traditions. 

Simplicius  quotes  Theophrastos  as  saying  that  Thales  had  manv 
predecessors  (Do,.  P.  475,  r ,).  This  need  not  trouble  us  fo  ^S 
on  Apol lomos  Rhodios  (ii.  x248)  tells  us  that  he  made  Prometheus  the 
Jf  St  Philosopher,  which  is  merely  an  application  of  Peripatetic  literalism 
R  a  phrase  of  Plato’s  (Phileb.  16  c  6).  Cf.  Note  on  Sources  §  2. 


THE  MILESIAN  SCHOOL 


4i 


of  the  Seven  Wise  Men  was  already  in  existence  when  he 
wrote.  He  says  that  Thales  was  of  Phoenician  descent, 
a  statement  which  other  writers  explained  by  saying  he 
belonged  to  a  noble  house  descended  from  Kadmos  and 
Agenor.1  Herodotos  probably  mentions  the  supposed 
descent  of  Thales  simply  because  he  was  believed  to  have 
introduced  certain  improvements  in  navigation  from 
Phoenicia.2  At  any  rate,  his  father’s  name,  Examyes,  lends 
no  support  to  the  view  that  he  was  a  Semite.  It  is  Karian, 
and  the  Karians  had  been  almost  completely  assimilated 
by  the  Ionians.  On  the  monuments  we  find  Greek 
and  Karian  names  alternating  in  the  same  families,  while 
the  name  Thales  is  otherwise  known  as  Cretan.  There 
is  therefore  no  reason  to  doubt  that  Thales  was  of  pure 
Milesian  descent,  though  he  probably  had  Karian  blood  in 
his  veins.3 

3.  The  most  remarkable  statement  Herodotos  makes 
about  Thales  is  that  he  foretold  the  eclipse  of  the  sun  which 
put  an  end  to  the  war  between  the  Lydians  and  the  Medes.4 
Now,  he  was  quite  ignorant  of  the  cause  of  eclipses.  Anaxi¬ 
mander  and  his  successors  certainly  were  so,5  and  it  is 
incredible  that  the  explanation  should  have  been  given 
and  forgotten  so  soon.  Even  supposing  Thales  had  known 
the  cause  of  eclipses,  such  scraps  of  elementary  geometry 

1  Herod,  i.  170  (R.  P.  9  d)  ;  Diog.  i.  22  (R.  P.  9).  This  is  no  doubt 
connected  with  the  fact  mentioned  by  Herodotos  (i.  146)  that  there  were 
Kadmeians  from  Boiotia  among  the  original  Ionian  colonists.  Cf.  also. 
Strabo,  xiv.  pp.  633,  636  ;  Pausan.  vii.  2,  7.  These,  however,  were  not 
Semites. 

2  Diog.  i.  23,  K a\M/j.axos  5’  airbr  older  eiiperrjv  rrjs  dpKrov  tt)s  piKpas  \tyiov  (v 
rois  ’IdpjSots  ovtqjs — 

iial  rrjs  ap.a^T]t  tXtyero  OTa.Sp.'poa.oOa.i 
Toils  aareploKOVS,  p  ir\tovcn  $otviKes. 

3  See  Diels,  “  Thales  ein  Semite  ?  ”  (Arch.  ii.  165  sqq.),  and  Immisch, 
"  Zu  Thales  Abkunft  "  (ib.  p.  5*5).  The  name  Examyes  occurs  also  in 
Kolophon  (Hermesianax,  Leontion,  fr.  2,  38  Bgk.),  and  may  be  compared 
with  other  Karian  names  such  as  Cheramyes  and  Panamyes. 

4  Herod,  i.  74. 

5  For  the  theories  held  by  Anaximander  and  Herakleitos,  see  infra, 
§§  19,  71- 


The 
eclipse 
foretold 
by  Thales. 


42 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


as  he  picked  up  in  Egypt  would  never  have  enabled  him  to 
calculate  one.  Yet  the  evidence  for  the  prediction  is  too 
strong  to  be  rejected  off-hand.  The  testimony  of  Herodotos 
is  said  to  have  been  confirmed  by  Xenophanes,1  and 
according  to  Theophrastos  Xenophanes  was  a  disciple  of 
Anaximander.  In  any  case,  he  must  have  known  scores 
of  people  who  were  able  to  remember  what  happened. 
The  prediction  of  the  eclipse  is  therefore  better  attested 
than  any  other  fact  about  Thales  whatsoever. 


Now  it  is  possible  to  predict  eclipses  of  the  moon 
approximately  without  knowing  their  true  cause,  and  there 
is  no  doubt  that  the  Babylonians  actually  did  so.  It  is 
generally  stated,  further,  that  they  had  made  out  a  cycle 
of  223  lunar  months,  within  which  eclipses  of  the  sun  and 
moon  recurred  at  equal  intervals  of  time.2  This,  however, 
would  not  have  enabled  them  to  predict  eclipses  of  the  sun 
for  a  given  spot  on  the  earth’s  surface  ;  for  these  pheno¬ 
mena  are  not  visible  at  all  places  where  the  sun  is  above  the 
horizon  at  the  time.  We  do  not  occupy  a  position  at  the 
centre  of  the  earth,  and  the  geocentric  parallax  has  to  be 
taken  into  account.  It  would  only,  therefore,  be  possible 
to  tell  by  means  of  the  cycle  that  an  eclipse  of  the  sun 
would  be  visible  somewhere,  and  that  it  might  be  worth 
while  to  look  out  for  it,  though  an  observer  at  a  given  place 


log.  1.  23,  SoKei  St  KO.T&  Tiva s  it/jcotos  darpo\oy9,aai  ko.1  ^Xta/c&s  tKXelpeis 
Ka  rporrds  xpoenretv,  Sis  <fn,<iLV  JHJ8r,p.os  tv  rrj  irepl  tCiv  darpdKoyoxjpAvwv  icroptq., 
?,  aUTbv  KzlSevocpdirijs  KO.1  'HpiSoros  dav/L idpei.  The  statement  that  Thales 
Pr“  solstices  as  well  as  eclipses  is  not  so  absurd  as  has  been 
thought.  Eudemos  may  very  well  have  meant  that  he  fixed  the  dates  of 
the  solstices  and  equinoxes  more  accurately  than  had  been  done  before, 
that  he  would  do  by  observing  the  length  of  the  shadow  cast  by  an 
upnght  (yvd)fj.wv),  and  we  shah  see  (p.  47)  that  popular  tradition  ascribed 
observations  of  the  kind  to  him.  This  interpretation  is  favoured  by 
another  remark  of  Eudemos,  preserved  by  Derkyllides  (ap.  Theon.  p.  198 
17  Hiller),  that  Thales  discovered  rV  Kara  rds  rpoxds  airov  (rov  r,Xfou)  xepLoSou, 
uu  OVK  tar,  ael  av^aheu  In  other  . words,  he  discovered  the  inequality  of  the 
four  seasons  which  is  due  to  the  solar  anomaly. 

It  is  wrong  to  call  this  the  Saros  with  Souidas  ;  for  sar  on  the 
monuments  always  means  6o2=36oo,  the  number  of  the  Great  Year. 

f  thPen°d  °f  223  lunations  is’  of  course>  that  of  the  retrograde  movement 


THE  MILESIAN  SCHOOL 


43 


might  be  disappointed  five  times  out  of  six.  Now,  if  we 
may  judge  from  reports  by  Chaldaean  astronomers  which 
have  been  preserved,  this  was  just  the  position  of  the 
Babylonians  in  the  eighth  century  b.c.  They  watched  for 
eclipses  at  the  proper  dates ;  and,  if  they  did  not  occur, 
they  announced  the  fact  as  a  good  omen.1  To  explain 
what  we  are  told  about  Thales  no  more  is  required.  He 
said  there  would  be  an  eclipse  by  a  certain  date  ;  and 
luckily  it  was  visible  in  Asia  Minor,  and  on  a  striking 
occasion.2 

4-  The  prediction  of  the  eclipse  does  not,  then,  throw  Date  of 
any  fight  on  the  scientific  attainments  of  Thales  ;  but,  if  Thales‘ 
we  can  fix  its  date,  it  will  give  us  an  indication  of  the  time 
at  which  he  lived.  Astronomers  have  calculated  that 
there  was  an  eclipse  of  the  sun,  probably  visible  in  Asia 
Minor,  on  May  28  (O.S.),  585  b.c.,  while  Pliny  gives  the  date 
of  the  eclipse  foretold  by  Thales  as  01.  XL VIII. 4  (585/4  b.c.).3 
This  does  not  exactly  tally  ;  for  May  585  belongs  to  the 
year  586/5  b.c.  It  is  near  enough,  however,  to  justify  us  in 

1  See  George  Smith,  Assyrian  Discoveries  (1875),  p.  409.  The  inscrip¬ 
tion  which  follows  was  found  at  Kouyunjik  : — 

“  To  the  king  my  lord,  thy  servant  Abil-Istar. 

“  Concerning  the  eclipse  of  the  moon  of  which  the  king  my  lord  sent 
to  me  ;  in  the  cities  of  Akkad,  Borsippa,  and  Nipur,  observations  they 
made,  and  then  in  the  city  of  Akkad,  we  saw  part.  .  .  .  The  observation 
was  made,  and  the  eclipse  took  place. 

“  And  when  for  the  eclipse  of  the  sun  we  made  an  observation,  the 
observation  was  made  and  it  did  not  take  place.  That  which  I  saw  with 
my  eyes  to  the  king  my  lord  I  send.”  See  further  R.  C.  Thomson,  Reports 
of  the  Magicians  and  Astrologers  of  Nineveh  and  Babylon  (1900). 

2  Cf.  Schiaparelli,  "  I  primordi  dell'  Astronomia  presso  i  Babilonesi  " 
(Scientia,  1908,  p.  247).  His  conclusion  is  that  “the  law  which  regulates 
the  circumstances  of  the  visibility  of  solar  eclipses  is  too  complex  to  be 
discovered  by  simple  observation,”  and  that  the  Babylonians  were  not 
in  a  position  to  formulate  it.  “  Such  a  triumph  was  reserved  to  the 
geometrical  genius  of  the  Greeks.” 

3  Pliny,  N.H.  ii.  53.  It  should  be  noted  that  this  date  is  inconsistent 
with  the  chronology  of  Herodotos,  but  that  is  vitiated  by  the  assumption 
that  the  fall  of  the  Median  kingdom  synchronised  with  the  accession  of 
Cyrus  to  the  throne  of  Persia.  If  we  make  the  necessary  correction, 

Cyaxares  was  still  reigning  in  585  b.c. 


44 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Thales  in 
Egypt. 


identifying  the  eclipse  as  that  of  Thales,1  and  this  is 
confirmed  by  Apollodoros,  who  fixed  his  floruit  in  the  same 
year.2  The  further  statement  in  Diogenes  that,  according 
to  Demetrios  Phalereus,  Thales  “  received  the  name  of 
wise  ”  in  the  archonship  of  Damasias  at  Athens,  really  refers 
to  the  Tale  of  the  Seven  Wise  Men,  as  is  shown  by  the  words 
which  follow,  and  is  doubtless  based  on  the  story  of  the 
Delphic  tripod  ;  for  the  archonship  of  Damasias  is  the  era 
of  the  restoration  of  the  Pythian  Games.3 

5-  The  introduction  of  Egyptian  geometry  into  Hellas 
is  ascribed  to  Thales,4  and  it  is  probable  that  he  did  visit 
Egypt ;  for  he  had  a  theory  of  the  inundations  of  the  Nile. 
Herodotos  6  gives  three  explanations  of  the  fact  that  this 
alone  of  all  rivers  rises  in  summer  and  falls  in  winter  ;  but, 
as  his  custom  is,  he  does  not  name  their  authors.  The 
first,  however,  which  attributes  the  rise  of  the  Nile  to  the 
Etesian  winds,  is  ascribed  to  Thales  in  the  Placita,6  and  by 


The  words  of  Herodotos  (i.  74),  oSpoy  , rpoOi^os  hcavrby  tovtov  h  t<2 
SV  Kaljyh.ro,  mean  at  first  sight  that  he  only  said  the  eclipse  would 
occur  before  the  end  of  a  certain  year,  but  Diels  suggests  (Neue  Jahrb. 
xxxm.  p.  2)  that  hiavris  has  here  its  original  sense  of  summer  solstice  ” 
(cf  Brugmann,  Idg.  Forsch.  xv.  p.  87).  In  that  case  Thales  would  have 
xed  the  date  within  a  month.  He  may  have  observed  the  eclipse  of 
ay  1  ,  603  b.c.  in  Egypt,  and  predicted  another  in  eighteen  years  and 
some  days,  not  later  than  the  solstice. 

*  For  Apollodoros,  see  Note  on  Sources,  §  21.  The  dates  in  our  text 
of  Diogenes  (1.  37  ;  R.  p.  8)  cannot  be  reconciled  with  one  another.  That 

ifVc6  5e3th  °f  ThalCS  is  ProbabJy  rigbt ;  for  it  is  the  year  before 
t  e  fall  of  Sardeis  in  546/5  b.c.,  which  is  one  of  the  regular  eras  of  Apollo- 
doros.  It  no  doubt  seemed  natural  to  make  Thales  die  the  year  before 

brLsTtn  ,  7  ”  "  ^  Se-nty-eight  years  before  this 

rings  us  to  624/3  b.c.  for  the  birth  of  Thales,  and  this  gives  us  585/4 
b.c.  for  his  fortieth  year.  That  is  Pliny's  date  for  the  eclipse,  and  Phny’s 
dates  come  from  Apollodoros  through  Nepos. 

,  7Dl°g‘  72  (f  P-  9J’  esPecially  the  words  Ka&’  S,  Kal  ol  iirrb  aocpol 
h\jeWay.  The  story  of  the  tnpod  was  told  in  many  versions  (cf.  Diog, 

of  tv 7  c  V°rS\xr  P'  ™  26  Sqq,)'  It  clearly  belongs  to  the  Delphian  Tale 
of  the  Seven  Wise  Men,  which  is  already  alluded  to  by  Plato  (Prot 

343  a,  b).  Now  Demetnos  of  Phaleron  dated  this  in  the  archonship  of 
Damasias  at  Athens  (582/1  b.c.),  and  the  Marmor  Parium  dates  the 
restoration  of  the  dyCjp  ar^avlrr,*  at  Delphoi  in  the  same  year,  and  also 
identifies  it  with  that  of  Damasias  (cf.  Jacoby,  p.  170,  n.  12). 

4  Proclus,  in  Eucl.  I.  p.  65,  Friedlein  (from  Eudemos) 

6  Her0d' 2°-  •  Aet.iv.i.  1  (Dor.  p.  384). 


THE  MILESIAN  SCHOOL 


45 


many  later  writers.  Now,  this  comes  from  a  treatise  on 
the  Rise  of  the  Nile  attributed  to  Aristotle  and  known  to 
the  Greek  commentators,  but  extant  only  in  a  Latin  epitome 
of  the  thirteenth  century.1  In  this  the  first  of  the  theories 
mentioned  by  Herodotos  is  ascribed  to  Thales,  the  second 
to  Euthymenes  of  Massalia,  and  the  third  to  Anaxagoras. 

Where  did  Aristotle,  or  whoever  wrote  the  book,  get  these 
names  ?  We  think  naturally  of  Hekataios ;  and  this 
conjecture  is  strengthened  when  we  find  that  Hekataios 
mentioned  Euthymenes.2  We  may  conclude  that  Thales 
really  was  in  Egypt ;  and,  perhaps,  that  Hekataios,  in 
describing  the  Nile,  took  account,  as  was  natural,  of  his 
fellow-citizen’s  views. 

6.  As  to  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  mathematical  Thales 
knowledge  brought  back  by  Thales  from  Egypt,  it  must  be  “ometry. 
pointed  out  that  most  writers  have  seriously  misunderstood 
the  character  of  the  tradition.3  In  his  commentary  on  the 
First  Book  of  Euclid,  Proclus  enumerates,  on  the  authority 
of  Eudemos,  certain  propositions  which  he  says  were  known 
to  Thales,4  one  of  which  is  that  two  triangles  are  equal 
when  they  have  one  side  and  the  two  adjacent  angles  equal. 

This  he  must  have  known,  as  otherwise  he  could  not  have 
measured  the  distances  of  ships  at  sea  in  the  way  he  was 
said  to  have  done.5 6  Here  we  see  how  all  these  statements 
arose.  Certain  feats  in  the  way  of  measurement  were 
traditionally  ascribed  to  Thales,  and  Eudemos  assumed 
that  he  must  have  known  all  the  propositions  these  imply. 

1  Dox.  pp.  226-229.  The  Latin  epitome  will  be  found  in  Rose's  edition 
of  the  Aristotelian  fragments. 

2  Hekataios,  fr.  278  ( F.H.G .  i.  p.  19). 

s  See  Cantor,  Vorlesungen  ilber  Geschichte  der  Mathematik,  vol.  i.  pp. 

12  sqq. ;  Allman,  “  Greek  Geometry  from  Thales  to  Euclid  "  ( Hermathena 
iii.  pp.  164-174). 

4  Proclus,  in  Eucl.  pp.  65,  7  ;  157,  10  ;  250,  20  ;  299,  1  ;  352,  I4 

(Friedlein).  Eudemos  wrote  the  first  histories  of  astronomy  and  mathe¬ 
matics,  just  as  Theophrastos  wrote  the  first  history  of  philosophy. 

6  Proclus,  p.  352,  14,  E05t7,uos  be  tv  rats  yewperpiKats  Urropiais  els  OaXsjv  tovto 
dvdyei  rb  dedipppa  (Eucl.  i.  26)-  rr}v  yap  tCjv  tv  6a\dTTV  trXoluv  dirbaracnv  5l’  ov 
rpowov  (paaiv  avrbv  Seucvtivcu  Totrrtp  wpocrxpV<r6al  cprjaiv  dvaynalov. 


46 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


But  this  is  quite  illusory.  Both  the  measurement  of  the 
distance  of  ships  at  sea,  and  that  of  the  height  of  the  pyra¬ 
mids,  which  is  also  ascribed  to  him,1  are  easy  applications 
of  the  rule  given  by  Aahmes  for  finding  the  seqt.2  What 
the  tradition  really  points  to  is  that  Thales  applied  this 
empirical  rule  to  practical  problems  which  the  Egyptians 
had  never  faced,  and  that  he  was  thus  the  originator  of 
general  methods.  That  is  a  sufficient  title  to  fame. 

Thales  7.  Thales  appears  once  more  in  Herodotos  some  time 

politician,  before  the  fall  of  the  Lydian  monarchy.  He  is  said  to  have 
urged  the  Ionian  Greeks  to  unite  in  a  federal  state  with  its 
capital  at  Teos.3  We  shall  have  occasion  to  notice  more 
than  once  that  the  early  schools  of  philosophy  by  no  means 
held  aloof  from  politics  ;  and  there  are  many  things,  for 
instance  the  part  played  by  Hekataios  in  the  Ionian  revolt, 
which  suggest  that  the  scientific  men  of  Miletos  took  up  a 
very  decided  position  in  the  stirring  times  that  followed  the 
death  of  Thales.  It  is  this  political  action  which  has  gained 
the  founder  of  the  Milesian  school  his  undisputed  place 
among  the  Seven  Wise  Men  ,  and  it  is  owing  to  his  inclusion 
among  those  worthies  that  the  numerous  anecdotes  told 
of  him  in  later  days  attached  themselves  to  his  name.4 

8-  So  far  as  we  know’  Thales  ™te  nothing,  and  no 
of  the  writer  earlier  than  Aristotle  knows  anything  of  him  as  a 
ra  ition.  scientific  man  and  a  phiiOSOpher  ;  in  the  older  tradition  he 

1  The  oldest  version  of  this  story  is  given  in  Diog.  i.  27,  6  8i  'lepihwpLos 

ko.1  (K/ieTfrqffal  avrbv  rds  it vpaplSas,  (k  rij s  tr/aas  naparrip^aavTa  Sre  r)fuv 

Laop-eyMps  iariv.  Cf.  Pliny,  H.  Nat.  xxxvi.  82,  mensuram  altitudinis  earum 
deprehendere  invenit  Thales  Milesius  umbram  metiendo  qua  hora  par  esse 
corpori  solet.  (Hieronymos  of  Rhodes  was  contemporary  with  Eudemos  ) 
This  need  imply  no  more  than  the  reflexion  that  the  shadows  of  all  objects 
will  be  equal  to  the  objects  at  the  same  hour.  Plutarch  (Conv  sept  sap 
147  a)  gives  a  more  elaborate  method,  fSaKTVPlav  arpaas  M  Ty  Wpcm  rijl 
(TKias  f/v  p  irupaph  itrolei,  yevop-huv  rrj  ^a<pfj  ttjs  d/cr^os  8voh>  r piy&vuv,  6v 

i/  <TKia  TTpbs  TT)V  Uyov  elXe,  tV  TrvpaplSa  irpbs  ryv  /3aKTVpla v  tXov<rav. 

2  See  Gow,  Short  History  of  Greek  Mathematics,  §  84. 

3  Herod,  i.  170  (R.  P.  9  d). 

4  The  st0IT  of  Thales  filing  into  a  well  (Plato,  Theaet.  174  a)  is  nothing 
but  a  fable  teaching  the  uselessness  of  cropLa  ;  the  anecdote  about  the 

“  corner  ”  in  oil  (Ar.  Pol.  A,  11.  1259  a  6)  is  intended  to  inculcate  the 
opposite  lesson. 


THE  MILESIAN  SCHOOL  47 

is  simply  an  engineer  and  an  inventor.1  It  is  obvious, 
however,  that  the  requirements  of  Milesian  enterprise  and 
commerce  would  necessarily  turn  his  attention  to  problems 
which  we  should  call  astronomical.  He  was  said,  we  saw, 
to  have  introduced  the  practice  of  steering  a  ship’s  course 
by  Ursa-  minor  ; 2  and  there  is  a  remarkable  persistence  in 
the  tradition  that  he  tried  to  do  something  for  the  calendar, 
though  the  details  are  not  sufficiently  well  attested  to  find 
a  place  here.3  No  doubt  he  constructed  a  7 rapawriy/ia  like 
those  of  much  later  date  which  have  been  discovered  at 
Miletos.4  The  irapdirpy^a  was  the  oldest  form  of  almanac, 
and  gave,  for  a  series  of  years,  the  equinoxes  and  solstices, 
the  phases  of  the  moon,  the  heliacal  risings  and  settings  of 
certain  stars,  and  also  weather  predictions.  Even  Aristotle 
does  not  pretend  to  know  how  Thales  arrived  at  the  views  he 
ascribes  to  him  or  by  what  arguments  they  were  supported. 

This  very  reserve,  however,  makes  it  hard  to  doubt  that 
he  was  correctly  informed  with  regard  to  the  few  points 
about  them  he  mentions,  so  we  may  venture  on  a  conjec¬ 
tural  restoration  of  his  cosmology.  This,  of  course,  must 
be  taken  for  just  what  it  is  worth. 

9.  The  statements  of  Aristotle  may  be  reduced  to  three  :  The  cos- 

(1)  The  earth  floats  on  the  water.5  mology  of 

*  |  |-| 

(2)  Water  is  the  material  cause  6  of  all  things. 

Cf.  Aristophanes,  Clouds  180  (after  a  burlesque  description  of  how 
Sokrates  provided  himself  with  a  cloak)  tI  8rjr  hceTvov  t6 v  0 a\rjv  dav/xd^o/xev  ■ 

Birds  1009  (of  Meton’s  town-planning,  dvdpamos  Qa\r,s).  Plato’s  way  of 
speaking  is  remarkable.  Cf.  Rep.  600  a  d\X’  da  Sr,  els  rd  Spy  a  ao<p0v  drSpos 
rroXKal  fTTtWat  Kai  evg.-f,Xavm  els  rtXvas  i)  rims  dXXas  irpdfas  Xtyovra t,  CSarrep  at 
Ba\eu  re  irdpi  roO  MiXycrlov  Kal  ’ A.vaXdpcnos  toO  2,ku6ov. 

2  See  p.  41,  n.  2. 

3  If  he  tried  to  introduce  the  year  of  360  days  and  the  month  of 
30  days,  he  may  have  learnt  that  in  Egypt. 

4  For  the  Milesian  rraparrrryp.aTa  see  Rehm,  Berl.  Sitzungsber.,  1893, 
p.  101  sqq.,  752  sqq. 

3  Ar.  Met.  A,  3.  983  b  21  (R.  P.  10)  ;  De  caelo,  B,  13.  294  a  28 
(R.  P.  11). 

6  Met.  A,  3.  983  b  21  (R.  P.  10).  We  must  translate  dpXi,  here  by 
“  material  cause,”  for  rqs  roiadrys  dpXrjs  (b  19)  means  rrjs  tv  i)\Vs  e(8ei  dpXrjs 
(b  7).  The  word,  then,  is  used  here  in  a  strictly  Aristotelian  sense.  Cf. 

Introd.  p.  11,  n.  3. 


48 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Water. 


(3)  All  things  are  full  of  gods.  The  magnet  is  alive  ; 
for  it  has  the  power  of  moving  iron.1 

The  first  of  these  statements  must  be  understood  in 
the  light  of  the  second,  which  is  expressed  in  Aristotelian 
terminology,  but  would  undoubtedly  mean  that  Thales 
had  said  water  was  the  stuff  of  which  all  other  things  were 
transient  forms.  We  have  seen  that  this  was  the  great 
question  of  the  day. 

10.  Aristotle  and  Theophrastos,  followed  by  Simplicius 
and  the  doxographers,  suggest  several  explanations  of  this 
doctrine.  Aristotle  gives  them  as  conjectures  ;  it  is  only 
later  writers  that  repeat  them  as  if  they  were  quite  certain.2 
The  most  probable  view  seems  to  be  that  Aristotle  ascribed 
to  Thales  the  arguments  used  at  a  later  date  by  Hippon  of 
Samos  in  support  of  a  similar  thesis.3  That  would  account 
for  their  physiological  character.  The  rise  of  scientific 
medicine  had  made  biological  arguments  popular  in  the 
fifth  century ;  but,  in  the  days  of  Thales,  the  prevailing 
interest  was  not  physiological,  but  meteorological,  and  it  is 
from  this  point  of  view  we  must  try  to  understand  the 
theory. 

Now  it  is  not  hard  to  see  how  meteorological  considera- 


1  Arist.  De  an.  A.  5.  411  a  7  (R.  P.  13)  ;  ib.  2.  4o5  a  lg  (R  p  » 
Diog.  i.  24  (R.  P.  ib.)  adds  amber. 

2  Met.  A,  3.  983  b  22  ;  Aet.  i.  3,  1  ;  Simpl.  Phys.  p.  36,  10  (R.  P.  io, 
12,  12  a).  The  last  of  Aristotle’s  explanations,  that  Thales  was  influenced 
by  cosmogonical  theories  about  Okeanos  and  Tethys,  has  strangely  been 
supposed  to  be  more  historical  than  the  rest,  whereas  it  is  merely  a  fancv 
of  Plato's  taken  literally.  Plato  says  (Theaet.  180  d  2  ;  Crat  402  b  I) 
that  Herakleitos  and  his  predecessors  (ol  p<W«)  derived  their  philosophy 
from  Homer  (II.  xiv.  201),  and  even  earlier  sources  (Orph.  frag.  2  Diels 
Vors.  66  b  2).  In  quoting  this  suggestion,  Aristotle  refers  it  to  “  some  ” 
-a  word  which  often  means  Plato-and  he  calls  the  originators  of  the 
theory  jra/iTraXalous,  as  Plato  had  done  (Met.  A,  3.  083  b  28  ■  rf  Th 

181  b  3).  This  is  how  Aristotle  gets  history  out  of  Plato.  See  Note  on 
Sources,  §  2.  on 

2  Compare  Arist.  De  an.  A,  2.  405  b  2  (R.  P.  220)  with  the  passages 
referred  to  m  the  last  note.  We  now  know  that,  thongh  Aristotle  declines 
to  consider  Hippon  as  a  philosopher  (Met.  A,  3.  984  a  3  •  R  p  2TO 

/LSL  sT^Lj.  Peripatetic  of  medicin*  ^wn'asMenont 


THE  MILESIAN  SCHOOL 


49 


tions  may  have  led  Thales  to  adopt  the  view  he  did.  Of  all 
the  things  we  know,  water  seems  to  take  the  most  various 
shapes.  It  is  familiar  to  us  in  a  solid,  a  liquid,  and  a 
vaporous  form,  and  so  Thales  may  well  have  thought  he 
saw  the  world-process  from  water  and  back  to  water  again 
going  on  before  his  eyes.  The  phenomenon  of  evaporation 
naturally  suggests  that  the  fire  of  the  heavenly  bodies  is 
kept  up  by  the  moisture  they  draw  from  the  sea.  Even  at 
the  present  day  people  speak  of  “  the  sun  drawing  water.” 

Water  comes  down  again  in  rain ;  and  lastly,  so  the  early  • 
cosmologists  thought,  it  turns  to  earth.  This  may  have 
seemed  natural  enough  to  men  familiar  with  the  river  of 
Egypt  which  had  formed  the  Delta,  and  the  torrents  of 
Asia  Minor  which  bring  down  large  alluvial  deposits.  At 
the  present  day  the  Gulf  of  Latmos,  on  which  Miletos  used 
to  stand,  is  filled  up.  Lastly,  they  thought,  earth  turns 
once  more  to  water — an  idea  derived  from  the  observation 
of  dew,  night-mists,  and  subterranean  springs.  For  these 
last  were  mot  in  early  times  supposed  to  have  anything  to 
do  with  the  rain.  The  “  waters  under  the  earth  ”  were 
regarded  as  an  independent  source  of  moisture.1 

ii.  The  third  of  the  statements  mentioned  above  is  Theology, 
supposed  by  Aristotle  to  imply  that  Thales  believed  in  a 
“  soul  of  the  world,”  though  he  is  careful  to  mark  this  as 
no  more  than  an  inference.2  The  doctrine  of  the  world-soul 
is  then  attributed  quite  positively  to  Thales  by  Aetios,  who 
gives  it  in  the  Stoic  phraseology  which  he  found  in  his 
immediate  source,  and  identifies  the  world-intellect  with 
God.3  Cicero  found  a  similar  statement  in  the  Epicurean 
manual  which  he  followed,  but  he  goes  a  step  further. 
Eliminating  the  Stoic  pantheism,  he  turns  the  world- 
intellect  into  a  Platonic  demiourgos,  and  says  that  Thales 

1  The  view  here  taken  most  resembles  that  of  the  “  Homeric  allegorist  " 
Herakleitos  (R.  P.  12  a).  That,  however,  is  also  a  conjecture,  probably 
of  Stoic,  as  the  others  are  of  Peripatetic,  origin.  - 

2  Arist.  De  an.  A,  5.  411  a  7  (R.  P.  13). 

3  Aet.  i.  7,  n=Stob.  i.  56  (R.  P.  14).  On  the  sources  here  referred 
to,  see  Note  on  Sources,  §§  11,  12. 


4 


5o 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Life. 


held  there  was  a  divine  mind  which  formed  all  things  out 
of  water.1  All  this  is  derived  from  Aristotle’s  cautious  state¬ 
ment,  and  can  have  no  greater  authority  than  its  source. 
We  need  not  enter,  then,  on  the  old  controversy  whether 
Thales  was  an  atheist  or  not.  If  we  may  judge  from  his 
successors,  he  may  very  possibly  have  called  water  a  “  god  ”  ; 
but  that  would  not  imply  any  definite  religious  belief.2 

Nor  must  we  make  too  much  of  the  saying  that  “  all 
things  are  full  of  gods.  It  is  not  safe  to  regard  an  apo¬ 
phthegm  as  evidence,  and  the  chances  are  that  it  belongs  to 
Thales  as  one  of  the  Seven  Wise  Men,  rather  than  as  founder 
of  the  Milesian  school.  Further,  such  sayings  are,  as  a  rule, 
anonymous  to  begin  with,  and  are  attributed  now  to  one 
sage  and  now  to  another.3  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  probable 
that  Thales  did  say  the  magnet  and  amber  had  souls.  That 
is  no  apophthegm,  but  more  on  the  level  of  the  statement 
that  the  earth  floats  on  the  water.  It  is  just  the  sort  of 
thing  we  should  expect  Hekataios  to  record  about  Thales. 
It  would  be  wrong,  however,  to  draw  any  inference  from  it 
as  to  his  view  of  the  world  ;  for  to  say  the  magnet  and  amber 
are  alive  is  to  imply,  if  anything,  that  other  things  are  not. 


II.  Anaximander 

12.  Anaximander,  son  of  Praxiades,  was  also  a  citizen 
of  Miletos,  and  Theophrastos  described  him  as  an  "  asso¬ 
ciate  ”  of  Thales.4  We  have  seen  how  that  expression  is  to 
be  understood  (§  XIV.). 

1  Cicero,  De  nat.  d.  i.  25  (R.  P.  13  b).  On  Cicero's  source,  see  Dox 
pp.  125,  128.  The  Herculanean  papyrus  of  Philodemos  is  defective  at 
this  point,  but  it  is  not  likely  that  he  anticipated  Cicero’s  mistake. 

2  See  Introd.  §  IX. 

Plato  refers  to  the  saying  irAvra  ir \rjptj  deCiv  in  Laws,  899  b  9  (R  P 
14  b),  without  mentioning  Thales.  That  ascribed  to  Herakleitos  in  the 
De  part.  an.  A,  5.  645  a  7  seems  to  be  a  mere  variation  on  it.  In  any 
case  it  means  only  that  nothing  is  more  divine  than  anything  else. 

4  R-  P-  15  d.  That  the  words  ttoMttjs  xal  e racpo s,  given  by  Simplicius 
De  cad°,  p.  615,  13,  are  from  Theophrastos  is  shown  by  the  agreement 
of  Cic.  Acad.  11.  1 1 8,  popularis  et  sodalis.  The  two  passages  represent 
independent  branches  of  the  tradition.  See  Note  on  Sources  §§  7  12 


THE  MILESIAN  SCHOOL 


5i 


According  to  Apollodoros,  Anaximander  was  sixty-four 
years  old  in  01.  LVIII.  2  (547/6  b.c.)  ;  and  this  is  confirmed 
by  Hippolytos,  who  says  he  was  born  in  01.  XLII.  3  (610/9 
b.c.),  and  by  Pliny,  who  assigns  his  great  discovery  of  the 
obliquity  of  the  zodiac  to  01.  LVIII.1  We  seem  to  have 
something  more  here  than  a  combination  of  the  ordinary 
type  ;  for,  according  to  all  the  rules,  Anaximander  should 
have  “  flourished  ”  in  565  b.c.,  half-way  between  Thales 
and  Anaximenes,  and  this  would  make  him  sixty,  not  sixty- 
four,  in  546.  Now  Apollodoros  appears  to  have  said  that 
he  had  met  with  the  work  of  Anaximander  ;  and  the  only 
reason  he  can  have  had  for  mentioning  this  must  be  that 
he  found  in  it  some  indication  which  enabled  him  to  fix 
its  date.  Now  547/6  is  just  the  year  before  the  fall  of 
Sardeis,  and  we  may  perhaps  conjecture  that  Anaximander 
mentioned  what  his  age  had  been  at  the  time  of  that 
event.  We  know  from  Xenophanes  that  the  question, 

“  How  old  were  you  when  the  Mede  appeared  ?  ”  was  con¬ 
sidered  an  interesting  one  in  those  days.2  At  all  events, 
Anaximander  was  apparently  a  generation  younger  than 
Thales.3 

Like  his  predecessor,  he  distinguished  himself  by  certain 
practical  inventions.  Some  writers  credited  him  with  that  of 
the  gnomon ;  but  that  can  hardly  be  correct.  Herodotos  tells 
us  this  instrument  came  from  Babylon,  and  Thales  must 
have  used  it  to  determine  the  solstices  and  equinoxes.4 
Anaximander  was  also  the  first  to  construct  a  map,  and 
Eratosthenes  said  this  was  the  map  elaborated  by  Hekataios. 
No  doubt  it  was  intended  to  be  of  service  to  Milesian  enter¬ 
prise  in  the  Black  Sea.  Anaximander  himself  conducted 

1  Diog.  ii.  2  (R.  P.  15) ;  Hipp.  Ref.  i.  6  (Box.  p.  560);  Plin.  N.H.  ii.  31. 

*  Xenophanes,  fr.  22  (=  fr.  17  Karsten;  R.  P.  95  a). 

*  The  statement  that  he  “  died  soon  after  ”  (Diog.  ii.  2  ;  R.  P.  15) 
seems  to  mean  that  Apollodoros  made  him  die  in  the  year  of  Sardeis 
(546/5),  one  of  his  regular  epochs. 

4  For  the  gnomon,  see  Introd.  p.  26,  n.  1  ;  and  cf.  Diog.  ii.  1  (R  P.  # 
15)  ;  Herod,  ii.  109  (R.  P.  15  a).  Pliny,  on  the  other  hand,  ascribes  the 
invention  of  the  gnomon  to  Anaximenes  (N.H.  ii.  187). 


52 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


a  colony  to  Apollonia,1  and  his  fellow-citizens  erected  a 
statue  to  him.2 


Theo- 
phrastos 
on  Anaxi¬ 
mander’s 
theory  of 
the 

primary 

substance. 


13.  Nearly  all  we  know  of  Anaximander’s  system  is 
derived  in  the  last  resort  from  Theophrastos,  who  certainly 
knew  his  book.3  He  seems  once  at  least  to  have  quoted 
Anaximander  s  own  words,  and  he  criticised  his  style. 

Here  are  the  remains  of  what  he  said  of  him  in  the  First 
Book  : 


Anaximander  of  Miletos,  son  of  Praxiades,  a  fellow-citizen 
and  associate  of  Thales,4  said  that  the  material  cause  and  first 
element  of  things  was  the  Infinite,  he  being  the  first  to  introduce 
this  name  of  the  material  cause.  He  says  it  is  neither  water  nor 
any  other  of  the  so-called  5  elements,  but  a  substance  different 
from  them  which  is  infinite,  from  which  arise  all  the  heavens  and 
the  worlds  within  them. — Phys.  Op.  fr.  2  ( Dox .  p.  476  ;  R.  P.  16). 

He  says  that  this  is  “  eternal  and  ageless,”  and  that  it  "  en¬ 
compasses  all  the  worlds.”— Hipp.  Ref.  i.  6  (R.  P.  17  a). 

And  into  that  from  which  things  take  their  rise  they  pass 
away  once  more,  "  as  is  meet ;  for  they  make  reparation  and 
satisfaction  to  one  another  for  their  injustice  according  to  the 
ordenng  of  time,”  as  he  says  6  in  these  somewhat  poetical  terms 
—Phys.  Op.  fr.  2  (R.  P.  16). 

And  besides  this,  there  was  an  eternal  motion,  in  which 
was  brought  about  the  origin  of  the  worlds.— Hipp.  Ref.  i  6 
(R.  P.  17  a). 


\  TheTowe^^'  T  Presumably  Apollonia  on  the  Pontos  is  meant. 
Miletos  (wSTaLf  dis“''“'d  at 

sss honour  ^ h' ras  a — “■>  - 

_  *  In  lhKS  acnd  °ther  cases’  where  the  words  of  the  original  have  been 

?uoM.1eSSC”o^  f  ~  ‘hem  ^  »»  «**« 

co  ^ fa  hu 

P-  25F;r4the  eXpreSS1°n  rA  vToixtla,  see  Diels,  Elementum, 

v  yl™?5  (F°The2’r)  bv§mS  aCtUal  qU°tation  with  the  words  #  ffi,  5£ 

■  ;Jhe  <fre£*  Practlce  of  blending  quotations  with  the  text 
tells  against  this.  Further,  it  is  safer  not  to  ascribe  the  terms  i  a 

**  “  technical  Platonic  sense  to  Anax^ande,  "V  Tot 
hkely  that  Anaximander  said  anything  about  rd  Sura. 


THE  MILESIAN  SCHOOL 


53 

He  did  not  ascribe  the  origin  of  things  to  any  alteration  in 
matter,  but  said  that  the  oppositions  in  the  substratum,  which 
was  a  boundless  body,  were  separated  out. — Simpl.  Phys. 
p.  150,  20  (R.  P.  18). 

14.  Anaximander  taught,  then,  that  there  was  an  eternal, 
indestructible  something  out  of  which  everything  arises, 
and  into  which  everything  returns  ;  a  boundless  stock  from 
which  the  waste  of  existence  is  continually  made  good. 
That  is  only  the  natural  development  of  the  thought  we 
have  ascribed  to  Thales,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
Anaximander  at  least  formulated  it  distinctly.  Indeed,  we 
can  still  follow  to  some  extent  the  reasoning  which  led  him 
to  do  so.  Thales  had  regarded  water  as  the  most  likely 
thing  to  be  that  of  which  all  others  are  forms  ;  Anaximander 
appears  to  have  asked  how  the  primary  substance  could  be 
one  of  these  particular  things.  His  argument  seems  to  be 
preserved  by  Aristotle,  who  has  the  following  passage  in  his 
discussion  of  the  Infinite  : 

Further,  there  cannot  be  a  single,  simple  body  which  is 
infinite,  either,  as  some  hold,  one  distinct  from  the  elements, 
which  they  then  derive  from  it,  or  without  this  qualification.  For 
there  are  some  who  make  this  (i.e.  a  body  distinct  from  the 
elements)  the  infinite,  and  not  air  or  water,-  in  order  that  the 
other  things  may  not  be  destroyed  by  their  infinity.  They  are 
in  opposition  one  to  another — air  is  cold,  water  moist,  and  fire 
hot — and  therefore,  if  any  one  of  them  were  infinite,  the  rest  would 
have  ceased  to  be  by  this  time.  Accordingly  they  say  that  what  is 
infinite  is  something  other  than  the  elements,  and  from  it  the 
elements  arise. — Arist.  Phys.  T,  5.  204  b  22  (R.  P.  16  b). 

It  is  clear  that  Anaximander  is  here  contrasted  with 
Thales  and  with  Anaximenes.  Nor  is  there  any  reason  to 
doubt  that  the  account  given  of  his  reasoning  is  substantially 
correct,  though  the  form  is  Aristotle’s  own,  and  in  particular 
the  “elements”  are  an  anachronism.1  Anaximander  started, 
it  would  seem,  from  the  strife  between  the  opposites  which 


The 

primary 
substance 
is  not  one 
of  the 

“elements.” 


1  See  p.  12,  n.  2. 


54 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


go  to  make  up  the  world  ;  the  warm  was  opposed  to  the 
cold,  the  dry  to  the  wet.  These  were  at  war,  and  any 
predominance  of  one  over  the  other  was  an  "  injustice  ” 
for  which  they  must  make  reparation  to  one  another  at  the 
appointed  time.1  If  Thales  had  been  right  in  saying  that 
water  was  the  fundamental  reality,  it  would  not  be  easy  to 
see  how  anything  else  could  ever  have  existed.  One  side  of 
the  opposition,  the  cold  and  moist,  would  have  had  its  way 
unchecked,  and  the  warm  and  dry  would  have  been  driven 
from  the  field  long  ago.  We  must,  then,  have  something 
not  itself  one  of  the  warring  opposites,  something  more 
primitive,  out  of  which  they  arise,  and  into  which  they  once 
more  pass  away.  That  Anaximander  called  this  something 
by  the  name  of  c/nW?  is  the  natural  interpretation  of  what 
Theophrastos  says  ;  the  current  statement  that  the  term 
aPXV  was  introduced  by  him  appears  to  be  due  to  a  mis¬ 
understanding.2  We  have  seen  that,  when  Aristotle  used 


1  The  important  word  dXX^ots  is  in  all  the  MSS.  of  Simplicius,  though 
omitted  in  the  Aldine.  This  omission  made  the  sentence  appear  to  mean 
that  the  existence  of  individual  things  (6vra)  was  somehow  a  wrong 
(dScKla)  for  which  they  must  be  punished.  With  d\\sj\ «,  restored,  this 
anciful  interpretation  disappears.  It  is  to  one  another  that  whatever  the 
subject  of  the  verb  may  be  make  reparation  and  give  satisfaction  and 
therefore  the  injustice  must  be  a  wrong  which  they  commit  against  one 
another.  Now,  as  SUr,  is  regularly  used  of  the  observance  of  an  equal 
balance  between  the  opposites  hot  and  cold,  dry  and  wet,  the  dSirta  here 
referred  to  must  be  the  undue  encroachment  of  one  opposite  on  another 
such  as  we  see,  for  example,  in  the  alternation  of  day  and  night,  winter 
and  summer,  which  have  to  be  made  good  by  an  equal  encroachment  of 
the  other.  I  stated  this  view  in  my  first  edition  (1892),  pp.  60-62  and 
am  glad  to  find  it  confirmed  by  Professor  Heidel  (Class.  Phil,  vii  1012 
P-  233  sq.).  "  y  ’ 

*  The  words  °f  Theophrastos,  as  given  by  Simplicius  (. Phys .  p.  24,  15  : 
R  P.  16),  are  dpXM  re  nal  orTocX(wi>  dpr]Ke  tuv  6vtwv  rb  Zireipov,  -rrpwTos  toOto 
Tovvopa  Kop.lv as  rrjs  dpXf,  the  natural  meaning  of  which  is  "he  being  the 
rst  to  introduce  this  name  (rb  direipor)  of  the  material  cause.”  Hippo¬ 
lytos,  however,  says  (Ref.  i.  6,  2)  rodvopa  Mas  rijs  dPXijs,  and  this 

has  Rd  most  writers  to  take  the  words  in  the  sense  that  Anaximander  intro- 
duced  the  term  dPxf  Hippolytos,  however,  is  not  an  independent  authority 
(see  Note  on  Sources,  §  13),  and  the  only  question  is  what  Theophrastos 
wrote.  Now  Simphcius  quotes  Theophrastos  from  Alexander,  who  used 
e  original,  while  Hippolytos  represents  a  much  more  indirect  tradition 
Obviously,  Mas  is  a  corruption  of  the  characteristically  Peripatetic 
Kopiaas,  and  the  omission  of  toOtg  is  much  more  likely  than  its  inter- 


THE  MILESIAN  SCHOOL 


55 

the  term  in  discussing  Thales,  he  meant  what  is  called  the 
material  cause, *  1  and  it  is  hard  to  believe  that  it  means 
anything  else  here. 

I5-  It  was  natural  for  Aristotle  to  regard  this  theory  Aristotle's 
as  an  anticipation  or  presentiment  of  his  own  doctrine  of  of  the1* 
indeterminate  matter,”  2  and  that  he  should  sometimes  theory- 
express  the  views  of  Anaximander  in  terms  of  the  later 
theory  of  elements.”  He  knew  that  the  Boundless  was 
a  body,3  though  in  his  own  system  there  was  no  room  for 
anything  corporeal  prior  to  the  elements  ;  so  he  had  to 
speak  of  it  as  a  boundless  body  “  alongside  of  ”  or  “  distinct 
from  the  elements  ( irapa  ra  aroi^ela).  So  far  as  I  know 
no  one  has  doubted  that,  when  he  uses  this  phrase,  he  is 
referring  to  Anaximander. 

In  a  number  of  other  places  Aristotle  speaks  of  some  one 
who  held  the  primary  substance  to  be  something  “  inter¬ 
mediate  between  ”  the  elements  or  between  two  of  them.4 


polation  by  Alexander  or  Simplicius.  But,  if  tovto  is  genuine,  the  6vo/j,a 
referred  to  must  be  rb  Airapov,  and  this  interpretation  is  confirmed  by 
Simpl.  De  caelo  615,  15,  tLxeipov  8b  trpCiTos  inr bdero.  In  another  place  (p.  150, 
23)  Simplicius  says  irpwTos  abrbs  a-pxhv  ovopuiaas  rb  viroKelp-evov,  which  must 
mean,  as  the  context  shows,  “  being  the  first  to  name  the  substratum 
of  the  opposites  as  the  material  cause,”  which  is  another  point  altogether. 
Tbeophrastos  is  always  interested  in  noting  who  it  was  that  "  first  ” 
introduced  a  concept,  and  both  dirtipov  and  inroKeip.evoi'  were  important 
enough  to  be  noted.  Of  course  he  does  not  mean  that  Anaximander  used 
the  word  viroKelp.evov.  He  only  infers  that  he  had  the  idea  from  the  doctrine 
that  the  opposites  which  are  “  in  "  the  tL-reipov  are  "  separated  out.” 
Lastly,  the  whole  book  from  which  these  extracts  were  taken  was  Tlepl  twv 
apx&v,  and  the  thing  to  note  was  who  first  applied  various  predicates  to 
the  dpxv  or  dpxat- 

1  See  p.  47  n.  6  and  Introd.  p.  11  u.  3. 

2  Arist.  Met.  A,  2.  1069  b  18  (R.  P.  16  c). 

3  This  is  taken  for  granted  in  Phys.  F,  4.  203  a  16;  204  b  22  (R.  P. 
16  b),  and  stated  in  r,  8.  208  a  8  (R.  P.  16  a).  Cf.  Simpl.  Phys.  p.  150, 
20  (R.  P.  18). 

4  Aristotle  speaks  four  times  of  something  intermediate  between  Fire 
and  Air  {Gen.  Corr.  B,  1.  328  b  35  ;  ib.  5.  332  a  21  ;  Phys.  A,  4.  187  a  14  ; 
Met.  A,  7.  988  a  30).  In  five  places  we  have  something  intermediate 
between  Water  and  Air  {Met.  A,  7.  988  a  13  ;  Gen.  Corr.  B,  5.  332  a  21  ; 
Phys.  T,  4.  203  a  18  ;  ib.  5.  205  a  27  ;  De  caelo,  F,  5.  303  b  12).  Once 
{Phys.  A,  6.  189  b  1)  we  hear  of  something  between  Water  and  Fire.  This 
variation  shows  at  once  that  he  is  not  speaking  historically.  If  any  one 


56 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Nearly  all  the  Greek  commentators  referred  this  to  Anaxi¬ 
mander  also,  but  most  modern  writers  refuse  to  follow  them. 
It  is,  no  doubt,  easy  to  show  that  Anaximander  himself 
cannot  have  said  anything  of  the  sort,  but  that  is  no  real 
objection.  Aristotle  puts  things  in  his  own  way  regardless 
of  historical  considerations,  and  it  is  difficult  to  see  that  it  is 
more  of  an  anachronism  to  call  the  Boundless  “  intermediate 
between  the  elements  ”  than  to  say  that  it  is  “  distinct 
from  the  elements.”  Indeed,  if  once  we  introduce  the 
elements  at  all,  the  former  description  is  the  more  adequate 
of  the  two.  At  any  rate,  if  we  refuse  to  understand  these 
passages  as  referring  to  Anaximander,  we  shall  have  to  say 
that  Aristotle  paid  a  great  deal  of  attention  to  some  one 
whose  very  name  has  been  lost,  and  who  not  only  agreed 
with  some  of  Anaximander’s  views,  but  also  used  some  of 
his  most  characteristic  expressions.* 1  We  may  add  that  in 
one  or  two  places  Aristotle  certainly  seems  to  identify  the 
intermediate  with  the  sometliing  “  distinct  from  ”  the 
elements.2 

There  is  even  one  passage  in  which  he  speaks  of  Anaxi¬ 
mander  s  Boundless  as  a  ‘  mixture,”  though  his  words  may 
perhaps  admit  of  another  interpretation.3  But  this  is  of 
no  consequence  for  our  interpretation  of  Anaximander. 
It  is  certain  that  he  cannot  have  said  anything  about 
elements,  which  no  one  thought  of  before  Empedokles, 


ever  held  the  doctrine  of  rd  pera^u,  he  must  have  known  which  "  ele¬ 
ments  ”  he  meant. 

1  Anst.  De  caelo,  T,  5.  303  b  12,  vSaros  ph  \exrbrrepov,  dtpos  St  xvKvbrepov 
o  TT€pUxet’v  <pacrl  TravTas  toi)$  ovpapotis  direipov  6v. 

2  Cf.  Phys.  r,  5.  204  b  22  (R.  P.  16  b),  where  Zeller  rightly  refers  to 
napa  rd  aroiXe?a  to  Anaximander.  Now,  at  the  end  (205  a  25)  the  whole 
passage  is  summarised  thus  :  Kai  Sid  tovt’  obdtU  rb  tv  Kai  dxecpov  xGp  txolvaev 
oiSt  yrjv  twv  <pwlo\byuv,  dXX’  7)  i)8up  i)  it  pa  f,  t8  ptaov  avrQv.  In  Gen.  Corr. 

.B’  1-  B  35  We  have  first  TI  tovtuv  au/xd  re  dv  Kai  x^P^rbv,  and  a 

little  further  on  (329  a  9)  piav  ii\Vv  xapi  rd  eippptva.  In  B,  5.  332  a  20  we 

have  ov  p.T)V  ouS’  <UXo  H  ye  wapa  ravra,  olov  ptaov  ti  atpos  Kai  GSaros  i)  itpos  Kai 
7TP/50S. 

3  MeL  A’  2-„1069  b  18  (R-  P-  16  ZeUer  (p.  205,  1)  assumes  an 


THE  MILESIAN  SCHOOL 


57 


and  no  one  could  think  of  before  Parmenides.  The  question 
has  only  been  mentioned  because  it  has  given  rise  to  a  lengthy 
controversy,  and  because  it  throws  light  on  the  historical 
value  of  Aristotle's  statements.  From  the  point  of  view 
of  his  own  system,  these  may  be  justified  ;  but  we  shall 
have  to  remember  in  other  cases  that,  when  he  seems  to 
attribute  an  idea  to  some  earlier  thinker,  we  are  not  bound 
to  take  what  he  says  in  an  historical  sense.1 

16.  Anaximander’s  reason  for  conceiving  the  primary 
substance  as  boundless  was,  no  doubt,  as  indicated  by 
Aristotle,  “  that  becoming  might  not  fail.”  2  It  is  not  clear, 
however,  that  these  words  are  his  own,  though  the  doxo- 
graphers  speak  as  if  they  were.  It  is  enough  for  us  that 
Theophrastos,  who  had  seen  his  book,  attributed  the  thought 
to  him.  And  certainly  his  view  of  the  world  would  bring 
home  to  him  the  need  of  a  boundless  stock  of  matter.  The 
“  opposites  ”  are,  we  have  seen,  at  war  with  one  another, 
and  their  strife  is  marked  by  “  unjust  ”  encroachments  on 
either  side.  The  warm  commits  "  injustice  ”  in  summer, 

1  For  the  literature  of  this  controversy,  see  R.  P.  15.  Professor 
Heidel  has  shown  in  his  “  Qualitative  Change  in  Pre-Socratic  Philosophy  " 
{Arch.  xix.  p.  333)  that  Aristotle  misunderstood  the  Milesians  because  he 
could  only  think  of  their  doctrine  in  terms  of  his  own  theory  of  dAAoWis. 
That  is  quite  true,  but  it  is  equally  true  that  they  had  no  definite  theory 
of  their  own  with  regard  to  the  transformations  of  substance.  The 
theory  of  an  original  “  mixture  ”  is  quite  as  unhistorical  as  that  of  dXXo(co<m. 
Qualities  were  not  yet  distinguished  from  “things,”  and  Thales  doubtless 
said  that  water  turned  into  vapour  or  ice  without  dreaming  of  any 
further  questions.  They  all  believed  that  in  the  long  run  there  was  only 
one  "  thing,”  and  at  last  they  came  to  the  conclusion  that  all  apparent 
differences  were  due  to  rarefaction  and  condensation.  Theophrastos 
(&p.  Simpl.  Phys.  150,  22)  says  evovtras  yap  Tas  iyayTiirriTas  ev  rip  lmoKeip.ev<p 
.  .  .  iKKpLvf.aOai.  I  do  not  believe  these  words  are  even  a  paraphrase  of 
anything  Anaximander  said.  They  are  merely  an  attempt  to  “  accommo¬ 
date  ”  his  views  to  Peripatetic  ideas,  and  tvouaas  is  as  unhistorical  as 
the  uiroKelfievov. 

2  Phys.  T,  8.  208  a  8  (R.  P.  16  a).  Cf.  Aet.  i.  3,  3  (R.  P.  16  a).  The 
same  argument  is  given  in  Phys.  T,  4.  203  b  18,  a  passage  where  Anaxi¬ 
mander  has  just  been  named,  r<p  out<*js  hv  p.bvov  p.q  uiroXelireLy  y£ve<jiv  ral 
cpdop&v,  el  direipov  etq  66 ev  arpaipelrai  rb  yiyyb/ieyoy.  I  cannot,  however, 
believe  that  the  arguments  at  the  beginning  of  this  chapter  (203  b  7  ; 
R.  P.  17)  are  Anaximander’s.  They  bear  the  stamp  of  the  Eleatic  dialectic, 
and  are,  in  fact,  those  of  Melissos. 


The 

primary 
substance 
is  infinite. 


58 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


The  in¬ 
numerable 
worlds. 


the  cold  in  winter,  and  this  would  lead  in  the  long  run  to 
the  destruction  of  everything  but  the  Boundless  itself,  if 
there  were  not  an  inexhaustible  supply  of  it  from  which 
opposites  might  continually  be  separated  out  afresh.  We 
must  picture,  then,  an  endless  mass,  which  is  not  any  one  of 
the  opposites  we  know,  stretching  out  without  limit  on  every 
side  of  the  world  we  live  in.1  This  mass  is  a  body,  out  of 
which  our  world  once  emerged,  and  into  which  it  will  one 
day  be  absorbed  again. 

17.  We  are  told  that  Anaximander  believed  there  were 
innumerable  worlds  in  the  Boundless/’  2  and  we  have  to 
decide  between  the  interpretation  that,  though  all  the 
worlds  are  perishable,  there  are  an  unlimited  number  of 
them  in  existence  at  the  same  time,  and  Zeller’s  view  that 
a  new  world  never  comes  into  existence  till  the  old 
one  has  passed  away,  so  that  there  is  never  more  than 
one  world  at  a  time.  As  this  point  is  of  fundamental 
importance,  it  will  be  necessary  to  examine  the  evidence 
carefully. 

In  the  first  place,  the  doxographical  tradition  proves 
that  Theophrastos  discussed  the  views  of  all  the  early 
philosophers  as  to  whether  there  was  one  world  or  an 
infinite  number,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that,  when  he 
ascribed  “  innumerable  worlds  ”  to  the  Atomists,  he  meant 
coexistent  and  not  successive  worlds.  Now,  if  he  had 
classed  two  such  different  views  under  one  head,  he  would 

*  I  haye  assumed  that  the  word  faeipov  means  spatially  infinite,  not 
qualitatively  indeterminate,  as  maintained  by  Teichmiiller  and  Tannery 
The  decisive  reasons  for  holding  that  the  sense  of  the  word  is  '  boundless 
in  extent  are  as  follows  :  (r)  Theophrastos  said  the  primary  substance 
of  Anaximander  was  bwcipor  and  contained  all  the  worlds,  and  the  word 

ZT*XelV  fV6ryWhere  means  “  t0  encompass,"  not,  as  has  been  suggested 
to  contain  potentially.”  (2)  Aristotle  says  (. Phys .  r,  4.  203  b  «)  SiL 

yap  rb  iv  rV  ro*r«  M  viroMireir  Kal  6  apidpbs  Soku  direipoi  drat  Kal  ra  ^pariKd 
VeyMr,  Kal  rato,  rev  ovpavoO  •  airdpov  S’  Srros  to 0  $w>  Kal  au,pa  airupor  drat  Sosd 
ko.l  Kbap.pi.  The  mention  of  aupa  shows  that  this  does  not  refer  to  the 
Atomists.  (3)  Anaximander’s  theory  of  the  A^tpor  was  adopted  by 

£S££Ke  *  ^  ^  WhlCh  13  *0t  ^ative^ 

a  Cf.  [Plut.]  Strom,  fr.  2  (R.  P.  2I  b). 


THE  MILESIAN  SCHOOL 


59 

have  been  careful  to  point  out  in  what  respect  they  differed, 
and  there  is  no  trace  of  any  such  distinction.  On  the 
contrary,  Anaximander,  Anaximenes,  Archelaos,  Xeno¬ 
phanes,  Diogenes,  Leukippos,  Demokritos,  and  Epicurus  are 
all  mentioned  together  as  holding  the  doctrine  of  “  in¬ 
numerable  worlds  ”  on  every  side  of  this  one,1  and  the  only 
distinction  is  that,  while  Epicurus  made  the  distances 
between  these  worlds  unequal,  Anaximander  said  all  the 
worlds  were  equidistant.2  Zeller  rejected  this  evidence 3 
on  the  ground  that  we  can  have  no  confidence  in  a  writer 
who  attributes  “  innumerable  worlds  ”  to  Anaximenes, 
Archelaos,  and  Xenophanes.  With  regard  to  the  first  two, 
I  hope  to  show  that  the  statement  is  correct,  and  that  it  is 
at  least  intelligible  in  the  case  of  the  last.4  In  any  case,  the 
passage  comes  from  Aetios,5  and  there  is  no  reason  for 
doubting  that  it  is  derived  from  Theophrastos,  though  the 
name  of  Epicurus  has  been  added  later.  This  is  confirmed 
by  what  Simplicius  says  : 

Those  who  assumed  innumerable  worlds,  e.g.  Anaximander, 
Leukippos,  Demokritos,  and,  at  a  later  date,  Epicurus,  held  that 
they  came  into  being  and  passed  away  ad  infinitum,  some  always 
coming  into  being  and  others  passing  away.6 

It  is  practically  certain  that  this  too  comes  from  Theo¬ 
phrastos  through  Alexander. 

1  Aet.  ii.  i,  3  ( Dox .  p.  327).  Zeller  seems  to  be  wrong  in  understanding 
Kara  Traaav  ntpiaywy-qv  here  of  revolution.  It  must  mean  “  in  every 
direction  we  turn,”  as  is  shown  by  the  alternative  phrase  kclt A  Traaav 
v epLaramv.  The  six  Trepiardafis  are  xpoaui,  dwi<ru>,  dvo),  kcltio,  5e£id,  apiurepd 
(Nicom.  Introd.  p.  85,  11,  Hoche). 

*  Aet.  ii.  I,  8  (Dox.  p.  329),  tu>v  airelpovs  dwoip-pyaptvojv  roils  Kdirpovs 
’  kva^ip-avopos  TO  taov  avrodt  air^xeu'  aWif)\uiv,  'Eirinoupos  dviuou  eivai  t6  piracy 
tuiv  Kdapcov  8i6.aT-qpa. 

3  He  supposed  it  to  be  only  that  of  Stobaios.  The  filiation  of  the 
sources  had  not  been  traced  when  he  wrote. 

4  For  Anaximenes  see  §  30  ;  Xenophanes,  §  59  ;  Archelaos,  §  192. 

6  This  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  the  hst  of  names  is  given  also  by 
Theodoret.  See  Note  on  Sources,  §  10. 

6  Simpl.  Phys.  p.  1121,  5  (R.  P.  21  b).  Cf.  Simpl.  De  caelo,  p.  202,  14, 
oi  8i  Kai  Tty  TrXrjdei  &Trelpous  Kocrpovs,  iis  ’ kfa^pavSpos  .  .  .  diretpoy  Tip  peytOei  Tpv 
dpXVv  Otpxuoi  airdpovs  aiiTov  rip ^wX-r/dei ydcrpovs _ttoiuv  Sonet 


6o 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


We  come  next  to  a  very  important  statement  which 
Cicero  has  copied  from  Philodemos,  the  author  of  the 
Epicurean  treatise  on  Religion  found  at  Herculaneum,  or 
perhaps  from  the  immediate  source  of  that  work.  “  Anaxi¬ 
mander’s  opinion  was,”  he  makes  Velleius  say,  “  that  there 
were  gods  who  came  into  being,  rising  and  passing  away 
at  long  intervals,  and  that  these  were  the  innumerable 
worlds  ”  ;  1  and  this  must  clearly  be  taken  along  with  the 
statement  of  Aetios  that,  according  to  Anaximander,  the 
“  innumerable  heavens  ”  were  gods.2  Now  it  is  much 
more  natural  to  understand  the  “  long  intervals  ”  as 
intervals  of  space  than  as  intervals  of  time  ; 3  and,  if 
that  is  right,  we  have  a  perfect  agreement  among  our 
authorities. 

It  may  be  added  that  it  is  very  unnatural  to  understand 
the  statement  that  the  Boundless  “  encompasses  all  the 
worlds  ”  of  worlds  succeeding  one  another  in  time  ;  for  on 
this  view  there  is  at  a  given  time  only  one  world  to  “  en¬ 
compass.”  Moreover,  the  argument  mentioned  by  Aristotle 
that,  if  what  is  outside  the  heavens  is  infinite,  body  must 
be  infinite,  and  there  must  be  innumerable  worlds,  can  only 
be  understood  in  one  sense,  and  is  certainly  intended  to 
represent  the  reasoning  of  the  Milesians  ;  for  they  were 
the  only  cosmologists  who  held  there  was  a  boundless 
body  outside  the  heavens.4  Lastly,  we  happen  to  know 
that  Petron,  one  of  the  earliest  Pythagoreans,  held 
there  were  just  one  hundred  and  eighty -three  worlds 

1  Cicero,  De  nat.  d.  i.  25  (R.  P.  21). 

Aet.  i.  7,  12  (R.  P.  21  a).  The  reading  of  Stob.,  airelpovs  ovpavods, 
is  guaranteed  by  the  dwelpovs  k6< rpovt  of  Cyril,  and  the  dnelpov s  vovs 
(i.e.  owovs)  of  the  pseudo-Galen.  See  Dox.  p.  n. 

It  is  natural  to  suppose  that  Cicero  found  SiaaT-ppacnv  in  his  Epicurean 
source,  and  that  is  a  technical  term  for  the  intermyndia. 

4  Phys.  T.  4.  203  b  25,  airdpov  S'  Svros  too  (sc.  rov  ovpavov), 

Kal  auifia  Aireipov  chat  SoKei  Kai  *607*01  (SC.  dweipot).  The  next  words— rt  yd p 
fiaWov  rov  KcroS  ivraida  1)  dvravda  ; — show  that  this  refers  to  the  Atomists 
as  well ;  but  the  dweipov  <r<^*a  will  not  apply  to  them.  The  meaning  is 
that  both  those  who  made  the  Boundless  a  body  and  those  who  made 
it  a  Kevjy  held  the  doctrine  of  dirtipoi  *607*01  in  the  same  sense. 


THE  MILESIAN  SCHOOL  61 

arranged  in  a  triangle,1 *  which  shows  at  least  that  the 
doctrine  of  a  plurality  of  worlds  was  much  older  than  the 
Atomists. 

18-  The  doxographers  say  it  was  the  “  eternal  motion  ” 
that  brought  into  being  “  all  the  heavens  and  all  the  worlds 
within  them.”  We  have  seen  (§  VIII.)  that  this  is  probably 
only  the  Aristotelian  way  of  putting  the  thing,  and  that  we 
must  not  identify  the  primordial  motion  of  the  Boundless 
with  any  purely  mundane  movement  such  as  the  diurnal 
revolution.  That  would  be  quite  inconsistent,  moreover, 
with  the  doctrine  of  innumerable  worlds,  each  of  which  has, 
presumably,  its  own  centre  and  its  own  diurnal  revolution! 
As  to  the  true  nature  of  this  motion,  we  have  no  definite 
statement,  but  the  term  separating  off  ”  ( airoKpiai ?)  rather 
suggests  some  process  of  shaking  and  sifting  as  in  a  riddle 
or  sieve.  That  is  given  in  Plato’s  Timaeus  as  the  Pytha¬ 
gorean  doctrine, *  and  the  Pythagoreans  followed  Anaxi¬ 
mander  pretty  closely  in  their  cosmology  (§  54).  The 
school  of  Abdera,  as  will  be  shown  (§  179),  attributed  a 
motion  of  the  same  kind  to  their  atoms,  and  they  too  were 
mainly  dependent  on  the  Milesians  for  the  details  of  their 
system.  This,  however,  must  remain  a  conjecture  in  the 
absence  of  express  testimony. 

When,  however,  we  come  to  the  motion  of  the  world 
once  it  has  been  “  separated  off,”  we  are  on  safer  ground. 
It  is  certain  that  one  of  the  chief  features  of  early  cosmology 
is  the  part  played  in  it  by  the  analogy  of  an  eddy  in  water 
or  in  wind,  a  8lvr/  (or  Blvo<;),3  and  there  seems  to  be  little 

1  See  below,  §  53.  Cf.  Diels,  Elementum,  pp.  63  sqq. 

!  Plato,  Tim.  52  e.  There  the  elemental  figures  (which  have  taken 
the  place  of  the  “  opposites  ")  "  being  thus  stirred  (by  the  irregular 
motion  of  the  Tid-qvri),  are  carried  in  different  directions  and  separated, 
just  as  by  sieves  and  instruments  for  winnowing  corn  the  grain  is  shaken 
and  sifted  ;  and  the  dense  and  heavy  parts  go  one  way,  while  the  rare 
and  light  are  carried  to  a  different  place  and  settle  there." 

3  Aristophanes,  referring  to  the  Ionian  cosmology,  says  (Clouds,  828) 
Aivos  Pa<n\e6ei  rbv  At’  eteX^XaKiis,  which  is  nearer  the  truth  than  the 
modem  theory  of  its  religious  origin. 


“  Eternal 
motion  ” 
and  the 
5Lvi). 


62 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Origin 
of  the 
heavenly 
bodies. 


doubt  that  we  are  entitled  to  regard  this  as  the  doctrine 
of  Anaximander  and  Anaximenes.1  It  would  arise  very 
naturally  in  the  minds  of  thinkers  who  started  with  water 
as  the  primary  substance  and  ended  with  “  air,”  and  it 
would  account  admirably  for  the  position  of  earth  and  water 
in  the  centre  and  fire  at  the  circumference,  with  “  air  ” 
between  them.  Heavy  things  tend  to  the  centre  of  a  vortex 
and  light  things  are  forced  out  to  the  periphery.  It  is  to  be 
observed  that  there  is  no  question  of  a  sphere  in  revolution 
at  this  date  ;  what  we  have  to  picture  is  rotary  motion  in  a 
plane  or  planes  more  or  less  inclined  to  the  earth’s  surface.2 
It  is  in  favour  of  the  conjecture  given  above  as  to  the  nature 
of  the  primordial  motion  that  it  provides  a  satisfactory 
dynamical  explanation  of  the  formation  of  the  Sivy,  and 
we  shall  find  once  more  (§  180)  that  the  Atomists  held 
precisely  this  view  of  its  origin. 

19.  The  doxographers  also  give  us  some  indications 
of  the  process  by  which  the  different  parts  of  the  world 
arose  from  the  Boundless.  The  following  statement  comes 
ultimately  from  Theophrastos  : 

He  says  that  something  capable  of  begetting  hot  and  cold 
out  of  the  eternal  was  separated  off  at  the  origin  of  this  world. 
From  this  arose  a  sphere  of  flame  which  fitted  close  round  the 
air  surrounding  the  earth  as  the  bark  round  a  tree.  When  this 
had  been  torn  off  and  shut  up  in  certain  rings,  the  sun, 


1  I  gratefully  accept  the  view  propounded  by  Prof.  W.  A.  Heidel 
("  The  Sivy  in  Anaximenes  and  Anaximander,”  Class.  Phil.  i.  279),  so 
far  as  the  cosmical  motion  goes,  though  I  cannot  identify  that  with  the 

eternal  motion.  I  had  already  done  what  I  could  to  show  that  the 
“  spheres  ”  of  Eudoxos  and  Aristotle  must  not  be  imported  into  Pytha- 
goreanism,  and  it  strengthens  the  position  considerably  if  we  ascribe  a 
rotary  motion  in  a  plane  to  Anaximander’s  world. 

2  This  is  the  plain  meaning  of  Aet.  ii.  2,  4,  0l  SI  rPoXou  SUyv 

Siveiadcu  Tbv  ko<jPov,  which  is  referred  to  Anaximander  by  Diels  {Pox. 
p.  46).  Zeller’s  objections  to  the  ascription  of  the  Sivy  to  Anaximander 
are  mainly  based  on  an  inadmissible  rendering  of  the  word  rpoiral 
(p.  63  n.  2).  Of  course,  the  rotations  are  not  all  in  the  same  plane; 
the  ecliptic,  for  instance,  is  inclined  to  the  equator,  and  the  Milky  Wav 
to  both.  J  J 


THE  MILESIAN  SCHOOL  63 

moon  and  stars  came  into  existence.— Ps.-Plut.  Strom  fr  2 
(R.  P.  19).! 

We  see  from  this  that,  when  a  portion  of  the  Boundless 
was  separated  off  from  the  rest  to  form  a  world,  it  first 
differentiated  itself  into  the  two  opposites,  hot  and  cold. 
The  hot  appears  as  flame  surrounding  the  cold  ;  the  cold,  as 
earth  with  air  surrounding  it.  We  are  not  told  here  how  the 
cold  was  differentiated  into  earth,  water  and  air,  but  there 
is  a  passage  in  Aristotle’s  Meteorology  which  throws  some 
light  on  the  question.  After  discussing  the  views  of  the 
“  theologians  ”  regarding  the  sea,  he  says  : 

But  those  who  are  wiser  in  the  wisdom  of  men  give  an  origin 
for  the  sea.  At  first,  they  say,  all  the  terrestrial  region  was 
moist ,  and,  as  it  was  dried  up  by  the  sun,  the  portion  of  it  that 
evaporated  produced  the  winds  and  the  turnings  back  of  the 
sun  and  moon,1 2  while  the  portion  left  behind  was  the  sea.  So 


1  This  passage  has  been  discussed  by  Heidel  ( Proceedings  of  the  A  merican 
Academy,  xlviii.  686).  I  agree  that  d™  rod  iwdpov  must  be  supplied  with 
aTroKpidrjvai,  and  I  formerly  thought  that  4k  toO  atSiov  might  be  equivalent 
to  that,  and  might  have  been  displaced  if  the  order  of  words  was 
too  harsh.  I  cannot  believe  that  it  means  “  from  eternity,”  as  Heidel 
thinks.  On  the  other  hand,  he  is  clearly  right  in  his  interpretation  of 
irtpt<pvTji>aL  and  Airoppaydo-ris.  He  also  points  out  correctly  that  “  the 
sphere  of  flame  ”  is  an  inaccuracy.  The  comparison  to  the  bark  of  a  tree 
distinctly  suggests  something  annular. 

2  Zeller  (p.  223,  n.  5)  asks  what  can  be  meant  by  rpowal  r <re\^Vs, 
but  his  difficulty  is  an  imaginary  one.  The  moon  has  certainly  a  move- 
ment  in  declination  and  therefore  rpoirai.  In  other  words,  the  moon  does 
not  always  rise  at  the  same  point  of  the  horizon  any  more  than  the  sun. 
This  is  admitted  by  Sir  T.  L.  Heath  (Aristarchus,  p.  33,  n,  3),  though  he 
has  unfortunately  followed  Zeller  in  supposing  that  rporrai  here  means 
‘  revolutions.”  This  seems  to  me  impossible  ;  for  r/,<W0(u  means  ”  to 

turn  back  ”  or  “to  turn  aside,”  never  " to  turn  round,”  which  is  arp^aOat. 
It  is  conceivable,  indeed,  that  rpoirai  y/eXioio  in  Od.  xv.  404  means  the  place 
where  the  sun  sets  and  turns  back  from  west  to  east,  though  it  is  not 
very  likely,  as  Hesiod  already  uses  rpo-rrai  ^eMoio  of  the  winter  and  summer 
solstices  ( O.D .  479,  564,  663).  Zeller’s  statement  (repeated  by  Heath) 
that  Aristotle  speaks  of  rpoiraL  of  the  fixed  stars  in  De  caelo,  B,  14.  296  b  4 
is  erroneous.  What  Aristotle  does  say  is  that,  if  the  earth  is  in  motion’ 
there  ought  to  be  1 rdpoSoi  (movements  in  latitude)  and  rpo-rrai  of  the  fixed 
stars,  which  there  are  not*.  The  passage  is  correctly  rendered  by  Sir  T.  L. 
Heath  himself  in  a  subsequent  chapter  (p.  241).  For  the  other  passages 
referred  to,  see  p.  64,  n.  1,  and  p.  76,  n.  3. 


Earth 
and  sea. 


64  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 

they  think  the  sea  is  becoming  smaller  by  being  dried  up,  and 
that  at  last  it  will  all  be  dry. — Meteor,  B,  1.  353  b  5. 

And  the  same  absurdity  arises  for  those  who  say  the  earth 
too  was  at  first  moist,  and  that,  when  the  region  of  the  world 
about  the  earth  was  heated  by  the  sun,  air  was  produced  and  the 
whole  heavens  were  increased,  and  that  it  (the  air)  produced 
winds  and  caused  its  (the  sun’s)  turnings  back.1 — lb.  2.  355  a  21 
(R.  P.  20  a). 

In  his  commentary  on  the  passage,  Alexander  says 
this  was  the  view  of  Anaximander  and  Diogenes,  and  cites 
Theophrastos  as  his  authority  for  the  statement.  This  is 
confirmed  by  Anaximander’s  theory  of  the  sea  as  given  by 
the  doxographers  (§  20).  We  conclude,  then,  that  after  the 
first  separation  of  the  hot  and  the  cold  by  the  Sovr),  the  heat 
of  the  flame  turned  part  of  the  moist,  cold  interior  of  the 
world  into  air  or  vapour — it  is  all  one  at  this  date — and  that 
the  expansion  of  this  mist  broke  up  the  flame  itself  into 
rings.  We  shall  come  back  to  these  rings  presently,  but  we 
must  look  first  at  what  we  are  told  of  the  earth. 

20.  The  origin  of  earth  and  sea  from  the  moist,  cold 
matter  which  was  “  separated  off  ”  in  the  beginning  is  thus 
described  : 

The  sea  is  what  is  left  of  the  original  moisture.  The  fire  has 
dried  up  most  of  it  and  turned  the  rest  salt  by  scorching  it. — 
Aet.  iii.  16,  1  (R.  P.  20  a). 

He  says  that  the  earth  is  cylindrical  in  form,  and  that  its  depth 
is  as  a  third  part  of  its  breadth. — Ps.-Plut.  Strom,  fr.  2  (R.  P.  ib.). 

The  earth  swings  free,  held  in  its  place  by  nothing.  It  stays 
where  it  is  because  of  its  equal  distance  from  everything.  Its 


1  From  the  whole  context  it  is  plain  that  ras  rpoiras  avrov  means 
r&s  toD  tjXlov  rpoirds,  and  not  ras  rov  oupavov,  as  Zeller  and  Heath  say. 
The  “  air  ”  in  this  passage  answers  to  “  the  portion  that  evaporated  " 
(t6  oiarpLaap)  in  that  previously  quoted,  and  tout  op  must  therefore  refer 
to  it.  Cf.  the  paraphrase  of  Alexander  (p.  67,  3  from  Theophrastos, 
Dox.  p.  494),  Td  piv  ti  tt) s  vypoTi)TOS  VTTO  tov  pXLov  ^arplfeadai  Kai  ylretrOai 
irpevpaTo.  re  4%  auTOU  Kai  rpoiras  i]\lov  re  Kai  tTtX-qvip;  (see  last  note).  In  this 
chapter  of  the  Meteorology,  Aristctle  is  discussing  the  doctrine  that  the 
sun  is  “  fed  ”  by  moisture  and  the  relation  of  that  doctrine  to  its 
rpoiral  at  the  solstices,  and  we  must  interpret  accordingly. 


65 


THE  MILESIAN  SCHOOL 

shape  is  hollow  and  round,  and  like  a  stone  pillar.  We  are  on 
one  of  the  surfaces,  and  the  other  is  on  the  opposite  side.1— Hipp 
Ref.  i.  6  (R.  P.  20). 

Adopting  for  a  moment  the  popular  theory  of  “elements,” 
we  see  that  Anaximander  put  fire  on  one  side  as  the  hot  and 
dry,  and  a 11  the  rest  on  the  other  as  the  cold,  which  is  also 
moist.  This  may  explain  how  Aristotle  came  to  speak  of 
the  Boundless  as  intermediate  between  fire  and  water.  And 
we  have  seen  also  that  the  moist  element  was  partly  turned 
into  air  or  vapour  by  the  fire,  which  explains  how 
Aristotle  could  say  the  Boundless  was  something  between 
fire  and  air,  or  between  air  and  water.2 

The  moist,  cold  interior  of  the  world  is  not,  in  fact, 
water.  It  is  always  called  “  the  moist  ”  or  "  the  moist 
state.  That  is  because  it  has  to  be  still  further  differ¬ 
entiated  under  the  influence  of  heat  into  earth,  water,  and 
vapour.  The  gradual  drying  up  of  the  water  by  the  fire  is  a 
good  example  of  what  Anaximander  meant  by  “  injustice.” 

Thales  had  said  that  the  earth  floated  on  the  water, 
but  Anaximander  realised  that  it  was  freely  suspended  in 
space  (/ xerecopo? )  and  did  not  require  any  support.  Aristotle 
has  preserved  the  argument  he  used.  The  earth  is  equally 
distant  from  the  circumference  of  the  vortex  in  every 
direction,  and  there  is  no  reason  for  it  to  move  up  or  down 

1  The  MSS.  of  Hippolytos  have  vypov  (rrpoyyvXov,  and  so  has  Cedrenus, 
a  writer  of  the  eleventh  century  who  made  extracts  from  him.  Roeper 
read  yvpou  [crrpoyytjXov],  supposing  the  second  word  to  be  a  gloss  on  the 
first.  Diels  (Dox.  p.  218)  holds  that  the  first  applies  to  the  surface  of  the 
earth  ;  while  the  second  refers  to  its  circuit.  Professor  A.  E.  Taylor  has 
pointed  out  to  me,  however,  the  great  improbability  of  the  view  that 
yvpbv  means  convex.  The  Ionians  down  to  Archelaos  (§  192)  and  Demo- 
kritos  (Aet.  iii.  10,  5,  kolXtjv  rip  pJmp)  regularly  regarded  the  surface  of 
the  earth  as  concave,  and  yvp6 s  can  just  as  well  mean  that.  The  next 
words  are  also  of  doubtful  meaning.  The  MSS.  of  Hippolytos  have  x^ovl 
Xldip,  while  Aetios  (iii.  10,  2)  has  Xldip  k Lovi.  Diels  doubtfully  conjectures 
Xidip  tdovi,  which  he  suggests  might  represent  an  original  Xide-rj  kIovi 
(Dox.  p.  219).  In  any  case  the  pillar  seems  genuine,  and  the  general 
sense  is  guaranteed  by  the  Plutarchean  Stromateis  ( loc .  cit.),  virdpx'iv  .  . 

Tip  p.bv  <txpp-o.ti.  rrjv  yijv  KvXivSpoeibi). 

*  See  above,  p.  55,  n.  4. 


5 


66 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


The 

heavenly 

bodies. 


or  sideways.1  The  doctrine  of  innumerable  worlds  was 
inconsistent  with  the  existence  of  an  absolute  up  and  down 
in  the  universe,  so  the  argument  is  quite  sound.  The  central 
position  of  the  earth  is  due  to  the  hlvt] ;  for  the  greater 
masses  tend  to  the  centre  of  an  eddy.2  There  is  good 
evidence  that  Anaximander  made  the  earth  share  in  the 
rotary  movement.3  It  is  not,  however,  a  sphere,  so  we 
must  not  speak  of  an  axial  revolution.  The  shape  given 
to  the  earth  by  Anaximander  is  easily  explained  if  we 
adopt  the  view  that  the  world  is  a  system  of  rotating 
rings.  It  is  just  a  solid  ring  in  the  middle  of  the 
vortex. 

21.  We  have  seen  that  the  flame  which  had  been  forced 
to  the  circumference  of  the  vortex  was  broken  up  into  rings 
by  the  pressure  of  expanding  vapour  produced  by  its  own 
heat.  I  give  the  statements  of  Hippolytos  and  Aetios  as  to 
the  formation  of  the  heavenly  bodies  from  these  rings. 

The  heavenly  bodies  are  a  wheel  of  fire,  separated  off  from 
the  fire  of  the  world,  and  surrounded  by  air.  And  there  are 
breathing-holes,  certain  pipe-like  passages,  at  which  the  heavenly 
bodies  show  themselves.  That  is  why,  when  the  breathing-holes 
are  stopped,  eclipses  take  place.  And  the  moon  appears  now  to 
wax  and  now  to  wane  because  of  the  stopping  and  opening  of 


1  Arist.  De  cash,  B,  13.  295  b  10  elal  Si  rives  ol  Sid  7-771/  bp.oibrr\rd  ipacriv 
abrvv  (t>  yyv)  fUveiv,  ibairep  rQv  dpXaluv  ’Ava^avSpo s'  pdXXov  p,iv  ydp  ovdiv 
dvei  1)  Kd.ru  eis  rd  irXdyia  <piPea0ai  irpoapKeiv  rd  iirl  roD  pjaov  lSpvp.ivov  Kal  o/xolus 
irpbs  rd  e<TXara  HXov.  One  point  of  the  Sivr,  is  no  more  “  down "  than 
another.  Apparently,  the  Pythagoreans  adopted  this  reasoning-  for 
Plato  makes  Sokrates  in  the  Phaedo  say  (108  e)  hippo irov  yap  irpdypu'bpiolov 
nvds  ev  p.iaV  red  tv  ovy,  ?£«  p.aXXov  ovSi  Jjrrov  oiSapArre  KXi0ijvai.  From  this  it 
appears  that  op-oibr-ps  means  something  like  “  indifference."  There  is 
nothing  to  differentiate  one  radius  of  a  circle  from  another. 

2  Arlst-  De  caelo,  B,  13.  295  ag(jj  yyj)  (rwyjXdev  <hrl  rb  pdaov  <pepopdvV  Sid 
rVv  Slwaiv  ravrVv  ydp  rpv  alriav  srdv res  Xbyovmv  &  ruv  iv  roTs  bypdis  Kal  nepi 
rov  abpaav^aivbvruv  •  iv  rovrois  ydp  del  <piperai  rd  pidfr  Kal  rd  (iapSrepa  irpbs  rb 

fxeaov  rps  Sivr, s.  Sr,  Kal  rr,v  yijv  rrdvres  tiaoi  rbv  ovpavbv  yevvCoaiv  irrl  rb  ahov 

crvveXoeiv  cpaaiv. 

s  This  was  expressly  stated  by  Eudemos  \ap.  Theon.  Smyrn.  p.  198 

18),  A  vathavSpos  Si  Sri  iarlv  77  yij  stupas  Kal  Kiveirai  ire  pi  rb  p.i  a  ov. 
Anaxagoras  held  the  same  view  (§133). 


THE  MILESIAN  SCHOOL 


67 

the  passages.  The  wheel  of  the  sun  is  27  times  the  size  of 
(the  earth,  while  that  of)  the  moon  is  18  times  as  large.1  The 
sun  is  the  highest  of  all,  and  lowest  are  the  wheels  of  the  stars. 
— Hipp.  Ref.  i.  6  (R.  P.  20). 

The  heavenly  bodies  were  hoop-like  compressions  of  air,  full 
of  fire,  breathing  out  flames  at  a  certain  point  through  orifices. — 
Aet.  ii.  13,  7  (R.  P.  19  a). 

The  sun  was  a  wheel  28  times  the  size  of  the  earth,  like  a 
chariot  -  wheel  with  the  felloe  hollow,  full  of  fire,  showing 
the  fire  at  a  certain  point  through  an  orifice,  as  through  the  nozzle 
of  a  pair  of  bellows. — Aet.  ii.  20,  1  (R.  P.  19  a). 

The  sun  was  equal  to  the  earth,  but  the  wheel  from  which 
it  breathes  out  and  by  which  it  is  carried  round  was  27 
times  the  size  of  the  earth. — Aet.  ii.  21,  1. 

The  sun  was  eclipsed  when  the  orifice  of  the  fire’s  breathing- 
hole  was  stopped. — Aet.  ii.  24,  2. 

The  moon  was  a  wheel  19  times  the  size  of  the  earth, 
like  a  chariot-wheel  with  its  felloe  hollow  and  full  of  fire  like  that 
of  the  sun,  lying  oblique  also  like  it,  with  one  breathing-hole  like 
the  nozzle  of  a  pair  of  bellows.  [It  is  eclipsed  because  of  the 
turnings  of  the  wheel.]  2 — Aet.  ii.  25,  1. 

The  moon  was  eclipsed  when  the  orifice  of  the  wheel  was 
stopped. — Aet.  ii.  29,  1. 

(Thunder  and  lightning,  etc.)  were  all  caused  by  the  blast 
of  the  wind.  When  it  is  shut  up  in  a  thick  cloud  and  bursts 
forth  with  violence,  then  the  tearing  of  the  cloud  makes  the 
noise,  and  the  rift  gives  the  appearance  of  a  flash  in  contrast  with 
the  blackness  of  the  cloud. — Aet.  iii.  3,  1. 

Wind  was  a  current  of  air  (i.e.  vapour),  which  arose  when  its 
finest  and  moistest  particles  were  stirred  or  melted  by  the 
sun. — Aet.  iii.  7,  1. 


1  I  assume  with  Diels  (Dox.  p.  560)  that  something  has  fallen  out  of 
the  text,  but  I  have  made  the  moon’s  circle  18  and  not  19  times  as  large, 
as  agreeing  better  with  the  other  figure,  27.  See  p.  68,  n.  1. 

2  There  is  clearly  some  confusion  here,  as  Anaximander's  real  account 
of  lunar  eclipses  is  given  in  the  next  extract.  There  is  also  some  doubt 
about  the  reading.  Both  Plutarch  and  Eusebios  ( P.E .  xv.  26,  1)  have 
eTno-Tpo'pas,  so  the  rpoirds  of  Stob.  may  be  neglected,  especially  as  the 
codex  Sambuci  had  arpocp as.  It  looks  as  if  this  were  a  stray  reference  to 
the  theory  of  Herakleitos  that  eclipses  were  due  to  a  o-rpotp-r)  or  t maTpcxpri  of 
the  <TK&<pri  (§71).  In  any  case,  the  passage  cannot  be  relied  on  iq  sup¬ 
port  of  the  meaning  given  to  rpoirai  by  Zeller  and  Heath  (p.  63,  n.  2). 


68 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


There  is  a  curious  variation  in  the  figures  given  for  the 
size  of  the  wheels  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  and  it  seems  most 
likely  that  18  and  27  refer  to  their  inner,  while  19  and  28 
refer  to  their  outer  circumference.  We  may,  perhaps,  infer 
that  the  wheels  of  the  “  stars  ”  were  nine  times  the  size  of 
the  earth  ;  for  the  numbers  9,  18,  27  play  a  considerable 
part  in  primitive  cosmogonies.1  We  do  not  see  the  wheels 
of  fire  as  complete  circles  ;  for  the  vapour  or  mist  which 
formed  them  encloses  the  fire,  and  forms  an  outer  ring  except 
at  one  point  of  their  circumference,  through  which  the  fire 
escapes,  and  that  is  the  heavenly  body  we  actually  see.2 
It  is  possible  that  the  theory  .of  “  wheels  ”  was  suggested 
by  the  Milky  Way.  If  we  ask  how  it  is  that  the  wheels 


of  air  can  make  the  fire  invisible  to  us  without  becoming 
visible  themselves,  the  answer  is  that  such  is  the  property 
of  what  the  Greeks  at  this  date  called  "  air.”  For  instance, 
when  a  Homeric  hero  is  made  invisible  by  being  clothed  in 
“air,”  we  can  see  right  through  both  the  “  air  ”  and  the 
hero.3  It  should  be  added  that  lightning  is  explained  in 
much  the  same  way  as  the  heavenly  bodies.  It,  too,  was 
fire  breaking  through  condensed  air,  in  this  case  storm- 
clouds.  It  seems  probable  that  this  was  really  the  origin 
of  the  theory,  and  that  Anaximander  explained  the  heavenly 
bodies  on  the  analogy  of  lightning,  not  vice  versa.  It  must 
be  remembered  that  meteorology  and  astronomy  were 
still  undifferentiated,4  and  that  the  theory  of  “  wheels  ” 


91  ;  Diels,  “  Ueber  Anaximanders 


1  See  Tannery,  Science  helUne,  p. 

Kosmos  ”  (Arch.  x.  pp.  231  sqq.). 

2  The  true  meaning  of  this  doctrine  was  first  explained  by  Diels  ( Dox 
pp.  25  sqq  ).  The  flames  issue  per  magni  circum  spiracula  mundi,  as 

ucretius  has  it  (vi.  493).  The  irPr,ari)pos  at ’Ms,  to  which  these  are  com¬ 
pared,  is  simply  the  mouthpiece  of  the  smith’s  bellows,  a  sense  the  word 
irpvrT-hp  has  in  Apollonios  of  Rhodes  (iv.  776),  and  has  nothing  to  do  with 
the  meteorological  phenomenon  of  the  same  name  (see  Chap  III  s  71  i 

2*“  Gree+k  sailors  vei7  Uke]y  named  the  fiery  waterspout 
fter  the  familiar  instrument.  It  is  not  necessary  now  to  discuss  the 
earlier  interpretations  of  the  phrase. 

in  I  ThS  iS  ^  S°Strange  a  View  as  mi§ht  appear.  An  island  or  a  rock 
in  the  offing  may  disappear  completely  when  shrouded  in  mist  (d™)  and 
we  seem  to  *  the  sky  beyond  it.  4  See  above  p)’ 


THE  MILESIAN  SCHOOL 


69 

or  rings  is  a  natural  inference  from  the  idea  of  the 
vortex. 

So  far  we  seem  to  be  justified,  by  the  authority  of  Theo- 
phrastos,  in  going;  and,  if  that  is  so,  certain  further  inferences 
seem  to  be  inevitable.  In  the  first  place,  Anaximander 
had  shaken  himself  free  of  the  old  idea  that  the  heavens 
are  a  solid  vault.  There  is  nothing  to  prevent  us  from 
seeing  right  out  into  the  Boundless,  and  it  is  hard  to  think 
that  Anaximander  did  not  believe  he  did.  The  traditional 
cosmos  has  given  place  to  a  much  grander  scheme,  that  of 
innumerable  vortices  in  a  boundless  mass,  which  is  neither 
water  nor  air.  In  that  case,  it  is  difficult  to  resist  the  belief 
that  what  we  call  the  fixed  stars  were  identified  with  the 
“  innumerable  worlds  ”  which  were  also  “  gods.”  It  would 
follow  that  the  diurnal  revolution  is  only  apparent ;  for 
the  stars  are  at  unequal  distances  from  us,  and  can  have  no 
rotation  in  common.  It  must,  then,  be  due  to  the  rotation 
of  the  cylindrical  earth  in  twenty-four  hours.  We  have 
seen  that  the  earth  certainly  shared  in  the  rotation  of 
the  8/1/77.  That  gets  rid  of  one  difficulty,  the  wheel  of 
the  stars,  which  is  between  the  earth  and  the  moon  ; 
for  the  fixed  stars  could  not  be  explained  by  a  “  wheel  ”  at 
all ;  a  sphere  would  be  required.  What,  then,  are  the 
“  stars  ”  which  are  accounted  for  by  this  inner  wheel  ?  I 
venture  to  suggest  that  they  are  the  morning  and  the 
evening  stars,  which,  we  have  seen  (p.  23,  n.  1),  were 
not  recognised  yet  as  a  single  luminary.  In  other 
words,  I  believe  that  Anaximander  regarded  the  fixed 
stars  as  stationary,  each  rotating  in  its  own  vortex.  No 
doubt  this  involves  us  in  a  difficulty  regarding  the  rota¬ 
tion  of  the  sun  and  the  moon.  It  follows  from  the  nature 
of  the  vortex  that  they  must  rotate  in  the  same  direction 
as  the  earth,  and,  on  the  assumption  just  made,  that  must 
be  from  west  to  east,  and  it  must  be  a  slower  rotation 
than  that  of  the  earth,  which  is  inconsistent  with  the  fact 
that  the  circumference  of  a  vortex  rotates  more  rapidly 


70 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Animals. 


than  the  centre.  That,  however,  is  a  difficulty  which  all 
the  Ionian  cosmologists  down  to  Demokritos  had  to  face. 
Holding,  as  they  did,  that  the  whole  rotation  was  in  the 
same  direction,  they  had  to  say  that  what  we  call  the 
greatest  velocities  were  the  least.  The  moon,  for  instance, 
did  not  rotate  so  rapidly  as  the  sun,  since  the  sun  more  nearly 
keeps  up  with  the  fixed  stars.1  That  Anaximander  failed 
to  observe  this  difficulty  is  not  surprising,  if  we  remember 
that  he  was  the  first  to  attack  the  problem.  It  is  not 
immediately  obvious  that  the  centre  of  the  vortex  must 
have  a  slower  motion  than  the  circumference.  This  serves 
to  explain  the  origin  of  the  theory  that  the  heavenly  bodies 
have  a  rotation  of  their  own  in  the  opposite  direction  to 
the  diurnal  revolution  which  we  shall  see  reason  for 
attributing  to  Pythagoras  (§  54). 

22.  We  have,  in  any  case,  seen  enough  to  show  us  that 
the  speculations  of  Anaximander  about  the  world  were  of 
an  extremely  daring  character.  We  come  now  to  the 
crowning  audacity  of  all,  his  theory  of  the  origin  of  living 
creatures.  The  Theophrastean  account  of  this  has  been 
well  preserved  by  the  doxographers  : 

Living  creatures  arose  from  the  moist  element  as  it  was 
evaporated  by  the  sun.  Man  was  like  another  animal,  namely, 
a  fish,  in  the  beginning.— Hipp.  Ref.  i.  6  (R.  P.  22  a). 

The  first  animals  were  produced  in  the  moisture,  each 
enclosed  in  a  prickly  bark.  As  they  advanced  in  age,  they  came 
out  upon  the  drier  part.  When  the  bark  broke  oft,2  they  survived 
for  a  short  time.3— Aet.  v.  19,  4  (R.  P.  22). 

Further,  he  says  that  originally  man  was  born  from  animals 
of  another  species.  His  reason  is  that  while  other  animals 

1  Lucretius,  v.  619  sqq. 

2  This  is  to  be  understood  in  the  light  of  what  we  are  told  about  yaXeoi 
e  ow.  Cf.  Anst.  Hist.  An.  Z,  10.  565  a  25,  rots  pt,iv  ofo  ovciAfois,  06s  naXovtrL 

■nves  VfPpla j  yaXeots,  brav  vepippayjj  Kai  iniricr,  t'q  darpaKov,  ylvovrat  ol  vcottoL 

e  true  reading  is  iir’  oXLyov  xp&ov  pLera^Luvai,  the  omission  of 
Xpbvov  by  Diels  in  Vors.1  and  Vors.2  being  apparently'  a  slip.  In  the 
index  to  Do*.,  Dick  s.v.  pera^ovp  says  “  mutare  vitam  [cf.  ^eraSiairav], " 
and  I  fohowed  him  in  my  first  edition.  Heidel  well  compares  Archelaos, 
ap.  Hipp.  Ref.  i.  9 ,  5  (0f  the  first  animals)  pv  5e  oXiyoxpwict. 


THE  MILESIAN  SCHOOL 


7i 

quickly  find  food  by  themselves,  man  alone  requires  a  lengthy 
period  of  suckling.  Hence,  had  he  been  originally  as  he  is  now, 
he  would  never  have  survived.— Ps.-Plut.  Strom,  fr.  2  (R.  P.  ib.). 

He  declares  that  at  first  human  beings  arose  in  the  inside  of 
fishes,  and  after  having  been  reared  like  sharks,1  and  become 
capable  of  protecting  themselves,  they  were  finally  cast  ashore 
and  took  to  land.— Plut.  Symp.  Quaest.  730  f  (R.  P.  ib.). 

The  importance  of  these  statements  has  sometimes 
been  overrated  and  still  more  often  underestimated. 
Anaximander  has  been  called  a  precursor  of  Darwin  by 
some,  while  others  have  treated  the  whole  thing  as  a  mytho¬ 
logical  survival.  It  is  therefore  important  to  notice  that 
this  is  one  of  the  rare  cases  where  we  have  not  merely  a 
placitum,  but  an  indication  of  the  observations  on  which  it 
was  based.  It  is  clear  from  this  that  Anaximander  had  an 
idea  of  what  is  meant  by  adaptation  to  environment  and 
survival  of  the  fittest,  and  that  he  saw  the  higher  mammals 
could  not  represent  the  original  type  of  animal.  For  this 
he  looked  to  the  sea,  and  he  naturally  fixed  upon  those 
fishes  which  present  the  closest  analogy  to  the  mammalia. 
The  statements  of  Aristotle  about  the  galeus  levis  were 
shown  by  Johannes  Muller  to  be  more  accurate  than  those 
of  later  naturalists,  and  we  now  see  that  these  observations 
were  already  made  by  Anaximander.  The  way  in  which  the 
shark  nourishes  its  young  furnished  him  with  the  very  thing 
he  required  to  explain  the  survival  of  the  earliest  animals.2 

1  Reading  Cicnrep  ol  ya \eol  for  ibcnrep  ol  TraXatol  with  Doehner,  who 
compares  Plut.  De  soli.  anim.  982  a,  where  the  (piXiaropyov  of  the  shark  is 
described. 

2  On  Aristotle  and  the  galeus  levis,  see  Johannes  Muller,  “  Ueber  den 
glatten  Hai  des  Aristoteles  "  ( K .  Preuss.  Akad.,  1842),  to  which  my 
attention  was  directed  by  my  colleague,  Professor  D’Arcy  Thompson.  The 
precise  point  of  the  words  TpapSpevoi.  ibairep  ol  yaXeol  appears  from  Arist. 
Hist.  An.  Z,  IO.  565  b  I,  ol  St  KaXoSptvoL  Xeiot  toiv  ya\euv  ra  ptv  tpa  fo’xoucri 
pera^u  toiv  varepCov  opolws  rots  ckvXIois,  irepLcrdvra  St  raOra  (is  i Kartpav  ttjv  ScKpoav 
ri)S  vcrrtpas  Karafialt/a,  Kal  to.  tf<pa  ylverai  rbv  6p<pa\bv  txovra  irpds  rjj  vartpq.,  &<xt( 
SvaXiUKop-tiHjiv  twv  tpw v  dpLolivs  SoKeiv  ixfAV  T°  tp.fi pvou  rots  re Tpairooiv.  It  is  not 
necessary  to  suppose  that  Anaximander  referred  to  the  further  phenomenon 
described  by  Aristotle,  who  more  than  once  says  that  all  the  ya\(ol  except 
the  aKavdlas  “  send  out  their  young  and  take  them  back  again  ”  (tfacpLaoi 


72 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Life. 


His  book. 


III.  Anaximenes 


23.  Anaximenes  of  Miletos,  son  of  Eurystratos,  was, 
according  to  Theophrastos,  an  ”  associate  ”  of  Anaximander.* 1 
Apollodoros  said,  it  appears,  that  he  “  flourished  ”  about 
the  time  of  the  fall  of  Sardeis  (546/5  B.c.),  and  died  in 
01.  LXIII.  (528/525  b.c.).2  In  other  words,  he  was  born 
when  Thales  "flourished,”  and  "flourished”  when  Thales 
died,  and  this  means  that  Apollodoros  had  no  definite 
information  about  his  date.  He  perhaps  made  him  die  in 
the  sixty-third  Olympiad  because  that  gives  just  three 
generations  for  the  Milesian  school.3  We  cannot  therefore 
say  anything  positive  as  to  his  date,  except  that  he  must 
have  been  younger  than  Anaximander. 

24.  Anaximenes  wrote  a  book  which  survived  until  the 
age  of  literary  criticism  ;  for  we  are  told  that  he  used  a 
simple  and  unpretentious  Ionic,4  very  different,  we  may 
suppose,  from  the  poetical  prose  of  Anaximander.5  The 
speculations  of  Anaximander  were  distinguished  for  their 
hardihood  and  breadth  ;  those  of  Anaximenes  are  marked 
by  the  opposite  quality.  He  appears  to  have  thought 
out  his  system  carefully,  but  he  rejects  the  more  audacious 
theories  of  his  predecessor.  The  result  is  that,  while  his 
view  of  the  world  is  less  like  the  truth  than  Anaximander’s, 


T'e/TT  T0"  "0TT0"S’ ib- 565  b  23)1  for  whlch  comPare  aIs° 

,  \  7  amore  p rolis  494  c;  De  soil.  anim.  982  a  The 

as ttyrd  described  by  j°ha,mes  m“u“  ”u 

1  Theophr.  Phys.  Op.  fr.  2  (R.  P.  26). 

fR  fr°,m  3  C°mParis0D  of  Di°g-  3  with  Hipp.  Ref.  i.  7 

(R.  P.  23)  and  Souxdas  (5.,.).  In  Hippolytos  we  must,  however,  read 

mentionedThToi  ^  SUg8estion  in  R-  P-  23  e  that  Apollodoros 

mentioned  the  Olympiad  without  giving  the  number  of  the  year  is  in- 

archonas  ’  APoUodoros  did  not  reckon  by  Olympiads,  but  Athenian 

3  Jacoby  (p  i94)  brings  the  date  into  connexion  with  the  floruit  of 

Pythagoras,  which  seems  to  me  less  probable  P 

4  Diog.  ii.  3  (R.  p.  23). 

Cf.  the  statement  of  Theophrastos  above,  §  13. 


THE  MILESIAN  SCHOOL 


73 

it  is  perhaps  more  fruitful  in  ideas  that  were  destined  to 
hold  their  ground. 

25.  Anaximenes  is  one  of  the  philosophers  on  whom  Theory 
Theophrastos  wrote  a  special  monograph  ; 1  and  this  gives  p^ry 
us  an  additional  guarantee  for  the  trustworthiness  of  the  substance- 
tradition.  The  following  2  are  the  passages  which  contain 
the  fullest  account  of  the  central  feature  of  his  system  : 

Anaximenes  of  Miletos,  son  of  Eurystratos,  who  had  been  an 
associate  of  Anaximander,  said,  like  him,  that  the  underlying 
substance  was  one  and  infinite.  He  did  not,  however,  say  it 
was  indeterminate,  like  Anaximander,  but  determinate  ;  for  he 
said  it  was  Air .—Phys.  Op.  fr.  2  (R.  P.  26). 

From  it,  he  said,  the  things  that  are,  and  have  been,  and  shall 
be,  the  gods  and  things  divine,  took  their  rise,  while  other  things 
come  from  its  offspring.— Hipp.  Ref.  i.  7  (R.  P.  28). 

Just  as,  he  said,  “  our  soul,  being  air,  holds  us  together, 
so  do  breath  and  air  encompass  the  whole  world.” — Aet.  i.  3,  4 
(R.  P.  24). 

And  the  form  of  the  air  is  as  follows.  Where  it  is  most  even, 
it  is  invisible  to  our  sight ;  but  cold  and  heat,  moisture  and 
motion,  make  it  visible.  It  is  always  in  motion  ;  for,  if  it  were 
not,  it  would  not  change  so  much  as  it  does. — Hipp.  Ref.  i.  7 
(R.  P.  28). 

It  differs  in  different  substances  in  virtue  of  its  rarefaction 
and  condensation. — Phys.  Of.  fr.  2  (R.  P.  26). 

When  it  is  dilated  so  as  to  be  rarer,  it  becomes  fire ;  while 
winds,  on  the  other  hand,  are  condensed  Air.  Cloud  is  formed 
from  Air  by  felting  ;  3  and  this,  still  further  condensed,  becomes 
water.  Water,  condensed  still  more,  turns  to  earth  ;  and  when 
condensed  as  much  as  it  can  be,  to  stones. — Hipp.  Ref.  i.  7 
(R.  P.  28). 

26.  At  first,  this  looks  like  a  falling  off  from  the  more  Rarefac- 
refined  doctrine  of  Anaximander  to  a  cruder  view  ;  but  this  condenfa- 
is  not  really  the  case.  On  the  contrary,  the  introduction  of  tion- 
rarefaction  and  condensation  into  the  theory  is  a  notable 

1  On  these  monographs,  see  Dox.  p.  103. 

2  See  the  conspectus  of  extracts  from  Theophrastos  given  in  Dox.  p.  135. 

3  “  Felting  "  (ttiAtjo-is)  is  the  regular  term  for  this  process  with  all  the 
early  cosmologists,  from  whom  Plato  has  taken  it  {Tim.  58  b  4  ;  76  c  3). 


74  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 

advance.1  In  fact,  it  makes  the  Milesian  cosmology  con¬ 
sistent  for  the  first  time  ;  since  a  theory  which  explains 
everything  as  a  form  of  a  single  substance  is  clearly  bound 
to  regard  all  differences  as  quantitative.  The  only  way  to 
save  the  unity  of  the  primary  substance  is  to  say  that  all 
diversities  are  due  to  the  presence  of  more  or  less  of  it  in 
a  given  space.  And  when  once  this  step  has  been  taken, 
it  is  no  longer  necessary  to  make  the  primary  substance 
something  “  distinct  from  the  elements,”  to  use  Aristotle’s 
inaccurate  but  convenient  phrase  ;  it  may  just  as  well  be 
one  of  them. 

27.  The  air  Anaximenes  speaks  of  includes  a  good  deal 
that  we  should  not  call  by  the  name.  In  its  normal  con¬ 
dition,  when  most  evenly  distributed,  it  is  invisible,  and  it 
then  corresponds  to  our  “  air  ”  ;  it  is  the  breath  we  inhale 
and  the  wind  that  blows.  That  is  why  he  called  it  Trvevfia. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  old  idea  that  mist  or  vapour  is 
condensed  air,  is  still  accepted  without  question.  It  was 
Empedokles,  we  shall  see,  who  first  discovered  that  what 
we  call  air  was  a  distinct  corporeal  substance,  and  not 
identical  either  with  vapour  or  with  empty  space.  In  the 
earlier  cosmologists  “  air  ”  is  alwaj^s  a  form  of  vapour,  and 
even  darkness  is  a  form  of  “  air.”  It  was  Empedokles  who 

cleared  up  this  point  too  by  showing  that  darkness  is  a 
shadow.2 


!  Sl“plicif'  Phys-  P-  *49.  32  (R.  p.  26  b),  says  that  Theophrastos 

It  should  rbeenaCttlH°nhand  COndKnSatl°n  “  the  case  of  Ana*imenes  alone. 
imoWW  A  ’  TVer'  tMt  Anstotle'  Phys-  4-  187  a  12,  seems  to 
tion,  especianvaJrr  T° ^  Sp°ken,  °f  ^faction  and  condensa- 
him  On  tv.  f  v,Tt  7rvKv^TeP0V  Mpo*  Xe7r rtrrepov  is  referred  to 

him.  On  the  other  hand,  at  20,  oi  5’  &  roo  M,  froAra,  rAs 

Kpveadat,  wawep  A Pa^puvSp6i  <p v<n  seems  to  be  opposed  to  a  12  oi  kt\ 

md,cTd  ihddAy'  lt  looks  «  if  ™  were  dealing 
Aristotle  s  own  inferences  and  interpretations,  which  are  far  from  clear 
They  are  outweighed  by  the  definite  statement  quoted  by  Simplicius  from 
Theophras  os.  though  Simplicius  himself  adds^W  ToHxXo^ 

■Kfjm''6T7,Tl  iXpQvT°-  That'  h°wever,  is  only  his  own  inferenS 
from  Aristotle’s  somewhat  confused  statement.  6 

2  For  the  meaning  of  in  Homer,  cf.  e.g.  Od.  viii  1  mdi  Ka\ 

and  f°r  its  survival  in  Ionic  prose,  Hippokrates,  £pl 


THE  MILESIAN  SCHOOL 


75 

It  was  natural  for  Anaximenes  to  fix  upon  “  air  ”  as  the 
primary  substance  ;  for,  in  the  system  of  Anaximander,  it 
occupied  an  intermediate  place  between  the  two  funda¬ 
mental  opposites,  the  ring  of  flame  and  the  cold,  moist 
mass  within  it  (§  19).  We  know  from  Plutarch  that  he 
fancied  air  became  warmer  when  rarefied,  and  colder  when 
condensed.  Of  this  he  satisfied  himself  by  a  curious 
experimental  proof.  When  we  breathe  with  our  mouths 
open,  the  air  is  warm  ;  when  our  lips  are  closed,  it  is  cold.1 

28.  This  argument  brings  us  to  an  important  point  in  The  world 
the  theory,  which  is  attested  by  the  single  fragment  that  breathes- 
has  come  down  to  us.2  “  Just  as  our  soul,  being  air,  holds 

us  together,  so  do  breath  and  air  encompass  the  whole 
world.  The  primary  substance  bears  the  same  relation 
to  the  life  of  the  world  as  to  that  of  man.  Now  this  was  the 
Pythagorean  view  ;  3  and  it  is  also  an  early  instance  of 
the  argument  from  the  microcosm  to  the  macrocosm,  and 
so  marks  the  beginning  of  an  interest  in  physiological 
matters. 

29.  We  turn  now  to  the  doxographical  tradition  COn-  The  parts 

ceming  the  formation  of  the  world  and  its  parts  :  world. 

He  says  that,  as  the  air  was  felted,  the  earth  first  came  into 
being.  It  is  very  broad  and  is  accordingly  supported  by  the 
air- — Ps.-Plut.  Strom,  fr.  3  (R.  P.  25). 

In  the  same  way  the  sun  and  the  moon  and  the  other  heavenly 
bodies,  which  are  of  a  fiery  nature,  are  supported  by  the  air 


dtpuv,  vddrojv,  rbirwv,  15,  dpp  re  7ro\i)s  Karbx€L  tt)v  x^PVv  dn'd  rihr  vSaTwv. 

Plato  is  still  conscious  of  the  old  meaning  ;  for  he  makes  Timaios  say 
dtpos  (7 bv-q)  t6  p.bv  evaytaraTov  bvlKXqv  aldqp  KaXovpLevos,  6  5b  0oXepd)TaTos 
dfilxXy  Kal  <jk5to$  {Tim.  58  d).  For  the  identification  of  app  with  darkness, 
cf.  Plut.  De  prim.  frig.  94^  e,  Bti  5’  app  to  Trpdmus  cKOTeirbr  icrnv  ovSb 
rods  Troipras  XbXqOev  •  ibpa  yap  rd  c tk6tos  KaXoutnv.  My  view  has  been 
criticised  by  Tannery,  "  Une  nouvelle  hypothese  sur  Anaximandre  " 
{Arch.  viii.  pp.  443  sqq.),  and  I  have  slightly  altered  my  expression  of  it 
to  meet  these  criticisms.  The  point  is  of  fundamental  importance  for 
the  interpretation  of  Pythagoreanism. 

1  Plut.  De  prim.  frig.  947  f  (R.  P.  27),  where  we  are  told  that  he  used 
the  term  rb  xo. \apbv  for  the  rarefied  air. 

2  Aet.  i.  3,  4  (R.  P.  24). 


3  See  Chap.  II.  §  53. 


76 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


because  of  their  breadth.  The  heavenly  bodies  were  produced 
from  the  earth  by  moisture  rising  from  it.  When  this  is  rarefied, 
fire  comes  into  being,  and  the  stars  are  composed  of  the  fire  thus 
raised  aloft.  There  were  also  bodies  of  earthy  substance  in  the 
region  of  the  stars,  revolving  along  with  them.  And  he  says 
that  the  heavenly  bodies  do  not  move  under  the  earth,  as  others 
suppose,  but  round  it,  as  a  cap  turns  round  our  head.  The  sun 
is  hidden  from  sight,  not  because  it  goes  under  the  earth,  but 
because  it  is  concealed  by  the  higher  parts  of  the  earth,  and 
because  its  distance  from  us  becomes  greater.  The  stars  give 
no  heat  because  of  the  greatness  of  their  distance. — Hipp  Ref  i 
7,  4-6  (R.  P.  28). 

Winds  are  produced  when  air  is  condensed  and  rushes  along 
under  propulsion  ;  but  when  it  is  concentrated  and  thickened 
still  more,  clouds  are  generated  ;  and,  lastly,  it  turns  to  water  1 
— Hipp.  Ref.  i.  7,  7  (Dox.  p.  561). 

The  stars  [are  fixed  like  nails  in  the  crystalline  vault  of  the 
heavens,  but  some  say  they]  are  fiery  leaves,  like  paintings.2 — 
Aet.  ii.  14,  3  (Dox.  p.  344). 

They  do  not  go  under  the  earth,  but  turn  round  it.— Ib  16  6 
(Dox.  p.  348). 

The  sun  is  fiery. — Ib.  20,  2  (Dox.  p.  348). 

It  is  broad  like  a  leaf.— Ib.  22,  1  (Dox.  p.  352). 

The  heavenly  bodies  turn  back  in  their  courses  3  owing  to  the 
resistance  of  compressed  air.— Ib.  23,  1  (Dox.  p.  352). 

The  moon  is  of  fire.— Ib.  25,  2  (Dox.  p.  356). 

Anaximenes  .explained  lightning  like  Anaximander,  adding 
as  an  illustration  what  happens  in  the  case  of  the  sea,  which 
flashes  when  divided  by  the  oars.— Ib.  iii.  3,  2  (Dox.  p.  368). 

Hail  is  produced  when  water  freezes  in  falling ;  snow,  when 
there  is  some  air  imprisoned  in  the  water. — Aet.  iii  4  r  (Dox 
P-  370).  v  ' 


e  rainbow  is  produced  when  the  beams  of  the  sun  fall  on 
thick  condensed  air.  Hence  the  anterior  part  of  it  seems  red 
being  burnt  by  the  sun’s  rays,  while  the  other  part  is  dark’ 


are  told  above  C,01TUpt  he^e'  1  retain  iKireirvKPw/Uvos,  because  we 

are  told  above  that  winds  are  condensed  air. 

2  See  below,  p.  77,  «.  4. 

3  can  only  refer  to  the  rpowal  of  the  sun,  though  it  is  loosely 

stated  of  Ta  dvr  pa  generally.  It  occurs  in  the  chapter  TT™)  -  ,,,  y 

and  we  cannot  interpret  it  as  if  it  were  a  detached  statement.  ’ 


THE  MILESIAN  SCHOOL 


owing  to  the  predominance  of  moisture.  And  he  says  that  a 
rainbow  is  produced  at  night  by  the  moon,  but  not  often,  because 
there  is  not  constantly  a  full  moon,  and  because  the  moon’s  light 
is  weaker  than  that  of  the  sun .—Schol.  Arat.1  (. Dox .  p.  231). 

The  earth  was  like  a  table  in  shape. — Aet.  iii.  10  3  (Dox 
P-  377)- 


The  cause  of  earthquakes  was  the  dryness  and  moisture  of 
the  earth,  occasioned  by  droughts  and  heavy  rains  respectively. 
— ■ Ib-  *5,  3  (Dox.  p.  379). 


We  have  seen  that  Anaximenes  was  justified  in  going 
back  to  Thales  in  regard  to  the  nature  of  primary  substance ; 
but  the  effect  upon  the  details  of  his  cosmology  was  unfor¬ 
tunate.  The  earth  is  once  more  imagined  as  a  table-like 
disc  floating  .on  the  air.  The  sun,  moon,  and  stars  are  also 
fiery  discs  which  float  on  the  air  “  like  leaves  ”  ;  an  idea 
naturally  suggested  by  the  “  eddy  ”  ( Uw, ).  It  follows  that 
the  heavenly  bodies  cannot  go  under  the  earth  at  night,  as 
Anaximander  must  have  held,  but  only  round  it  laterally 
like  a  cap  or  a  millstone.2  This  view  is  also  mentioned  in 
Aristotle’s  Meteorology,3  where  the  elevation  of  the  northern 
parts  of  the  earth,  which  makes  it  possible  for  the  heavenly 
bodies  to  be  hidden  from  sight,  is  referred  to.  This  is  only 
meant  to  explain  why  the  stars  outside  the  Arctic  circle 
appear  to  rise  and  set,  and  the  explanation  is  fairly  adequate 
if  we  remember  that  the  world  is  regarded  as  rotating  in  a 
plane.  It  is  quite  inconsistent  with  the  theory  of  a  celestial 
sphere.4 


1  The  source  of  this  is  Poseidonios,  who  used  Theophrastos.  Dox. 
p.  231. 

2  Theodoret  (iv.  16)  speaks  of  those  who  believe  in  a  revolution  like  that 
of  a  millstone,  as  contrasted  with  one  like  that  of  a  wheel.  Diels  (Dox. 
p.  46)  refers  these  similes  to  Anaximenes  and  Anaximander  respectively. 
They  come,  of  course,  from  Aetios  (Note  on  Sources,  §  10),  though  they 
are  given  neither  by  Stobaios  nor  in  the  Placita. 

3  B,  1.  354  a  28  (R.  P.  28  c). 

4  For  this  reason,  I  now  reject  the  statement  of  Aetios,  ii.  14,  3  (p.  76), 
’ Avat;ifJ.tvr]S  ijA oiv  Shcqv  Ka.To.veTrrfytvo.L  rip  KpucrTaWcxiSei.  That  there  is  some 
confusion  of  names  here  is  strongly  suggested  by  the  words  which 
immediately  follow,  tvLOi  5£  irtraXa  elvai  irupLi>a  ioirnep  ret  (’ojyparp-fipaTa, 
which  is  surely  the  genuine  doctrine  of  Anaximenes.  I  understand 


78 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Innumer¬ 

able 

worlds. 


Influence 
of  Anaxi¬ 
menes. 


The  earthy  bodies,  which  circulate  among  the  planets, 
are  doubtless  intended  to  account  for  eclipses  and  the  phases 
of  the  moon.* 1 

30.  As  might  be  expected,  there  is  much  the  same 
difficulty  about  the  “  innumerable  worlds  ”  ascribed  to 
Anaximenes  as  there  is  about  those  of  Anaximander.  The 
evidence,  however,  is  far  less  satisfactory.  Cicero  says 
that  Anaximenes  regarded  air  as  a  god,  and  adds  that 
it  came  into  being.2  That  cannot  be  right.  Air,  as  the 
primary  substance,  is  certainly  eternal,  and  it  is  quite  likely 
that  Anaximenes  called  it  “  divine,”  as  Anaximander  did 
the  Boundless  ;  but  it  is  certain  that  he  also  spoke  of  gods 
who  came  into  being  and  passed  away.  These  arose,  he 
said,  from  the  air.  This  is  expressly  stated  by  Hippotytos,3 
and  also  by  St.  Augustine.4  These  gods  are  probably  to 
be  explained  like  Anaximander’s.  Simplicius,  indeed,  takes 
another  view ;  but  he  may  have  been  misled  by  a  Stoic 
authority.5 

31.  It  is  not  easy  for  us  to  realise  that,  in  the  eyes  of  his 
contemporaries,  and  for  long  after,  Anaximenes  was  a  much 
more  important  figure  than  Anaximander.  And  yet  the 
fact  is  certain.  We  shall  see  that  Pythagoras,  though  he 
followed  Anaximander  in  his  account  of  the  heavenly  bodies, 


faypatp-ti/Mara  of  the  constellations  (cf.  Plato,  Tim.  55  c).  To  regard  the  stars 
as  fixed  to  a  crystalline  sphere  is  quite  inconsistent  with  the  far  better 
attested  doctrine  that  they  do  not  go  under  the  earth. 

1  See  Tannery,  Science  helline,  p.  153.  For  the  precisely  similar  bodies 
assumed  by  Anaxagoras,  see  below,  Chap.  VI.  §  135.  See  further  Chap 
VII.  §  151. 

2  Cic.  De  nat.  d.  i.  26  (R.  P.  28  b). 

3  Hipp.  Ref.  i.  7,  1  (R.  P.  28). 

4  Aug.  De  civ.  D.  viii.  2  :  “  Anaximenes  omnes  rerum  causas  infinito 
aeri  dedit :  nec  deos  negavit  aut  tacuit ;  non  tamen  ab  ipsis  aerem  factum, 
sed  ipsos  ex  aere  ortos  credidit  ”  (R.  P.  28  b). 

3  Simpl.  Phys.  p.  1121,  12  (R.  P.  28  a).  The  passage  from  the  Placita 
is  of  higher  authority  than  this  from  Simplicius.  It  is  only  to  Anaximenes, 
Herakleitos,  and  Diogenes  that  successive  worlds  are  ascribed  even  here 
For  the  Stoic  view  of  Herakleitos,  see  Chap.  III.  §  78  ;  and  for  Diogenes, 
Chap.  X.  §  188.  That  Simplicius  is  following  a  Stoic  authority  is  suggested 
by  the  words  teal  vcrrepov  oi  aird  rijs  2roas. 


THE  MILESIAN  SCHOOL  79 

was  far  more  indebted  to  Anaximenes  for  his  general  theory 
of  the  world  (§  53).  We  shall  see  further  that  when,  at  a 
later  date,  science  revived  once  more  in  Ionia,  it  was  “  the 
philosophy  of  Anaximenes”  to  which  it  attached  itself 
(§  122).  Anaxagoras  adopted  many  of  his  most  character¬ 
istic  views  (§  135),  and  so  did  the  Atomists.1  Diogenes  of 
Apollonia  went  back  to  the  central  doctrine  of  Anaximenes, 
and  made  Air  the  primary  substance,  though  he  also  tried 
to  combine  it  with  the  theories  of  Anaxagoras  (§  188).  We 
shall  come  to  all  this  later  ;  but  it  seemed  desirable  to  point 
out  at  once  that  Anaximenes  marks  the  culminating  point 
of  the  line  of  thought  which  started  with  Thales,  and  to 
show  how  the  “  philosophy  of  Anaximenes  ”  came  to  mean 
tne  Milesian  doctrine  as  a  whole.  This  it  can  only  have 
done  because  it  was  really  the  work  of  a  school,  of  which 
Anaximenes  was  the  last  distinguished  representative,  and 
because  his  contribution  to  it  was  one  that  completed  the 
system  he  had  inherited  from  his  predecessors.  That  the 
theory  of  rarefaction  and  condensation  was  really  such  a 
completion  of  the  Milesian  system,  we  have  seen  (§  26),  and 
it  need  only  be  added  that  a  clear  realisation  of  this  fact  will 
be  the  best  clue  at  once  to  the  understanding  of  the  Milesian 
cosmology  itself  and  to  that  of  the  systems  which  followed 
it.  In  the  main,  it  is  from  Anaximenes  they  all  start. 

1  In  particular,  both  Leukippos  and  Demokritos  adhered  to  his  theory 
of  a  flat  earth.  Cf.  Aet.  iii.  io,  3-5  (Uepl  axvp-aTO  1  yijs),  ’Ava^ipLivijs  rpaxe- 

i’oeiSTj  (tV  ypv).  AeiJKixxoi  TvpixavoeLSfj.  AppiKpiTos  diaKoeiSr)  p'tv  Tip  xXdrei, 

KolXpv  Si  rip  pi  trip.  And  yet  the  spherical  form  of  the  earth  was  already  a 
commonplace  in  circles  affected  by  Pythagoreanism. 


Ionia  and 
the  West. 


CHAPTER  II 

SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION 

32.  The  spirit  of  the  Ionians  in  Asia  was,  as  we  have 
seen,  thoroughly  secular ;  and,  so  far  as  we  can  judge,  the 
Milesians  wholly  ignored  traditional  beliefs.  Their  use  of 
the  term  “  god  ”  for  the  primary  substance  and  the  innumer¬ 
able  worlds  had  no  religious  significance.1  It  was  different 
in  the  Aegean  islands,  which  had  been  the  home  of  the 
Ionians  long  before  the  Anatolian  coasts  were  open  to 
colonisation,  and  where  there  were  many  memories  of  a 
remote  past.  These  seem  to  have  centred  round  the 
sanctuary  of  Delos,  and  the  fragments  of  Pherekydes,  who 
belonged  to  the  neighbouring  island  of  Syros,  read  like 
belated  utterances  of  an  earlier  age.2  No  doubt  it  was  also 
different  in  the  Challddian  and  Ionian  colonies  of  the  West, 
which  were  founded  at  a  time  when  Hesiod  and  his  followers 
still  held  unchallenged  authority. 

Now  Pythagoras  and  Xenophanes,  the  most  striking 
figures  of  the  generation  that  saw  the  Greek  cities  in  Asia 
become  subject  to  Persia,  were  both  Ionians,  but  both  spent 
the  greater  part  of  their  lives  in  the  West.  There  it  was  no 
longer  possible  to  ignore  religion,  especially  when  reinforced 
by  the  revival  that  now  swept  over  the  Greek  world. 
Henceforth  the  leaders  of  enlightenment  must  either  seek 
to  reform  and  deepen  traditional  religion,  like  Pythagoras, 
or  oppose  it  openly,  like  Xenophanes. 

1  See  p.  14. 


80 


2  See  p.  3. 


SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION 


81 


33  The  revival  was  not,  however,  a  mere  recrudescence  The 
of  the  old  Aegean  religion,  but  was  profoundly  influenced  ^Ugion. 
by  the  diffusion  of  certain  ideas  originating  in  what  was  then 
the  far  North.  The  temple  legend  of  Delos  is  certainly 
ancient,  and  it  connects  the  worship  of  Apollo  with  the 
Hyperboreans,  who  were  thought  of  as  living  on  the  banks 
of  the  Danube.1  The  “  holy  things  wrapped  in  straw,” 
which  were  passed  on  trom  people  to  people  till  they  reached 
Delos  by  way  of  the  head  of  the  Adriatic,  Dodona,  and  the 
Malian  Gulf,2  bear  witness  to  a  real  connexion  between  the 
Danubian  and  Aegean  civilisations  at  an  early  date,  and  it 
is  natural  to  associate  this  with  the  coming  of  the  Achaians. 

The  stories  of  Abaris  the  Hyperborean  3  and  Aristeas  of 
Prokonnesos  4  belong  to  the  same  religious  movement  and 
prove  that  it  was  based  on  a  view  of  the  soul  which  was 
new,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  in  the  Aegean.  Now  the  connexion 
of  Pythagoras  with  Delos  is  well  attested,  and  it  is  certain 
that  he  founded  his  society  in  cities  which  gloried  in  the 
Achaian  name.  If  the  Delian  religion  was  really  Achaian, 
we  have  a  clue  to  certain  things  in  the  life  of  Pythagoras 
which  are  otherwise  puzzling.  We  shall  come  back  to  these 
later.5 

34.  It  was  not,  however,  in  its  Delian  form  that  the  orphicism. 
northern  religion  had  most  influence.  In  Thrace  it  had 
attached  itself  to  the  wild  worship  of  Dionysos,  and  was 
associated  with  the  name  of  Orpheus.  In  this  religion  the 
new  beliefs  were  mainly  based  on  the  phenomenon  of 
“  ecstasy  ”  (eWrao-t?,  “  stepping  out  ”).  It  was  supposed 
that  it  was  only  when  “  out  of  the  body  ”  that  the  soul 
revealed  its  true  nature.  It  was  not  merely  a  feeble  double 
of  the  self,  as  in  Homer,  but  a  fallen  god,  which  might  be 

1  Pindar,  01.  iii.  14-16. 

2  Herod,  iv.  33.  Cf.  Farnell,  Cults  of  the  Greek  States,  iv.  pp.  99  sqq. 

3  Herod,  iv.  36. 

1  Ibid.  iv.  13-15. 

6  I  have  discussed  the  origin  of  the  Pythagorist  religion  in  the  Ency¬ 
clopaedia  of  Religion  and  Ethics  ( s.v .  Pythagoras)  rather  more  fully  than 
would  be  appropriate  here. 


6 


82 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Philo¬ 
sophy  as 
a  way  of 
life. 


restored  to  its  high  estate  by  a  system  of  “  purifications  ” 
{fcadapfioL)  and  sacraments  ( opyia ).  In  this  form,  the  new 
religion  made  an  immediate  appeal  to  all  sorts  and  condi¬ 
tions  of  men  who  could  not  find  satisfaction  in  the  worship 
of  the  secularised  anthropomorphic  gods  of  the  poets  and 
the  state  religions. 

The  Orphic  religion  had  two  features  which  were  new 
in  Greece.  It  looked  to  a  written  revelation  as  the  source 
of  religious  authority,  and  its  adherents  were  organised  in 
communities,  based,  not  on  any  real  or  supposed  tie  of 
blood,  but  on  voluntary  adhesion  and  initiation.  Most  of 
the  Orphic  literature  that  has  come  down  to  us  is  of  late 
date  and  uncertain  origin,  but  the  thin  gold  plates,  with 
Orphic  verses  inscribed  on  them,  discovered  at  Thourioi 
and  Petelia  take  us  back  to  a  time  when  Orphicism  was  still 
a  living  creed.1  From  them  we  learn  that  it  had  some 
striking  resemblances  to  the  beliefs  prevalent  in  India 
about  the  same  time,  though  it  is  really  impossible  to 
assume  any  Indian  influence  in  Greece  at  this  date.2  In 
any  case,  the  main  purpose  of  the  Orphic  observances  and 
rites  was  to  release  the  soul  from  the  “  wheel  of  birth,”  that 
is,  from  reincarnation  in  animal  or  vegetable  forms!  The 
soul  so  released  became  once  more  a  god  and  enjoyed 
everlasting  bliss. 

35.  The  chief  reason  for  taking  account  of  the  Orphic 
communities  here  is  that  their  organisation  seems  to  have 


1  F,OI.lheS^  ®0ld  rplates'  see  the  Appendix  to  Miss  Harrison’s  Prolego¬ 
mena  to  the  Study  of  Greek  Religion,  where  the  texts  are  discussed  and 
translated  by  Professor  Gilbert  Murray 

1S  °f  "  GreCk  C°ming  Under  Indian  influence 

s  that  of  Pyrrho  of  Elis  (see  my  article  "Sceptics”  in  the  Ency- 

clopaeduz  of  Religion  and  Ethics).  1  venture  to  suggest  that  the  religious 

ideas  referred  to  may  have  reached  India  from  the  same  northern  source 

as  they  reached  Greece,  a  source  which  we  may  vaguely  call  "  Scvthian  ” 
If,  as  Caesar  tells  us  (B  G  vi  ia  fhp  n  -i  ,  ythian. 

of  transmigration  '  ‘  *-4’  •  “  Galllc  Drmds  taught  the  doctrine 

of  transmigration,  this  suggestion  is  strongly  confirmed.  The  theories  of 

L.  von  Schroeder  ( Pythagoras  und  die  Inder,  1884)  are  based  on  a  mis 
taken  view  of  Pythagoreanism,  and  appear  also  to  involve  chronological 

oT Transmigration “Pythagoras  and  the  Doctrine 
Of  Transmigration  (Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1909,  pp.  569  sqq  ) 


SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION 


83 


suggested  the  idea  that  philosophy  is  above  all  a  “  way  of 
life.”  In  Ionia,  as  we  have  seen,  (pi\oo-o<pLa  meant  some¬ 
thing  like  “  curiosity,”  and  from  that  use  of  it  the  common 
Athenian  sense  of  “  culture,”  as  we  find  it  in  Isokrates, 
seems  to  have  been  derived.  On  the  other  hand,  wherever 
we  can  trace  the  influence  of  Pythagoras,  the  word  has  a 
far  deeper  meaning.  Philosophy  is  itself  a  “  purification  ” 
and  a  way  of  escape  from  the  “  wheel.”  That  is  the  idea 
so  nobly  expressed  in  the  Phaedo,  which  is  manifestly 
inspired  by  Pythagorean  doctrine.1  This  way  of  regarding 
philosophy  is  henceforth  characteristic  of  the  best  Greek 
thought.  Aristotle  is  as  much  influenced  by  it  as  any  one, 
as  we  may  see  from  the  Tenth  Book  of  the  Ethics,  and  as  we 
should  see  still  more  clearly  if  we  possessed  his  UpoTpeTm/co? 
in  its  entirety.2  There  was  a  danger  that  this  attitude 
should  degenerate  into  mere  quietism  and  “  otherworldli¬ 
ness,”  a  danger  Plato  saw  and  sought  to  avert.  It  was  he 
that  insisted  on  philosophers  taking  their  turn  to  descend 
once  more  into  the  Cave  to  help  their  former  fellow- 
prisoners.3  If  the  other  view  ultimately  prevailed,  that 
was  hardly  the  fault  of  the  philosophers. 

36.  Science,  then,  became  a  religion,  and  to  that  extent 
it  is  true  that  philosophy  was  influenced  by  religion.  It 
would  be  wrong,  however,  to  suppose  that  even  now  philo¬ 
sophy  took  over  any  particular  doctrines  from  religion. 
The  religious  revival  implied,  we  have  seen,  a  new  view 
of  the  soul,  and  we  might  expect  to  find  that  it  profoundly 
influenced  the  teaching  of  philosophers  on  that  subject. 
The  remarkable  thing  is  that  this  did  not  happen.  Even 
the  Pythagoreans  and  Empedokles,  who  took  part  in  the 

1  The  Phaedo  is  dedicated,  as  it  were,  to  the  Pythagorean  community 
at  Phleious.  Plato  speaks  in  Rep.  x.  600  b  of  Pythagoras  as  the  originator 
of  a  private  656s  rts  fiiov.  Cf.  the  Arpairos  of  Phaed.  66  b. 

2  For  the  UporpeirTiKbs,  see  Bywater  in  /.  Phil.  ii.  p.  35.  It  was  the 
original  of  Cicero’s  Hortensius,  which  had  such  an  effect  on  Augustine. 

3  Plato,  Rep.  520  c  1,  Ka.To.fio.Tlov  ovv  tv  /jJpei.  The  Allegory  of  the 
Cave  seems  clearly  to  be  of  Orphic  origin  (Stewart,  Myths  of  Plato,  p.  252, 
n.  2). 


ik 

Relation 
of  religion 
and  philo¬ 
sophy. 


Character 
of  the 
tradition. 


84  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 

religious  movement  themselves,  held  views  about  the  soul 
which  flatly  contradicted  the  beliefs  implied  in  their  religious 
practices.1  There  is  no  room  for  an  immortal  soul  in  any 
philosophy  of  this  period,  as  we  shall  see.  Sokrates  was  the 
first  philosopher  to  assert  the  doctrine  on  rational  grounds,2 
and  it  is  significant  that  Plato  represents  him  as  only  half 
serious  in  appealing  to  the  Orphics  for  confirmation  of  his 
own  teaching.3 

The  reason  is  that  ancient  religion  was  not  a  body  of 
doctrine.  Nothing  was  required  but  that  the  ritual  should 
be  performed  correctly  and  in  a  proper  frame  of  mind  ;  the 
worshipper  was  free  to  give  any  explanation  of  it  he  pleased. 
It  might  be  as  exalted  as  that  of  Pindar  and  Sophokles  or 
as  debased  as  that  of  the  itinerant  mystery-mongers  described 
m  Piato’s  Republic.  "  The  initiated,”  said  Aristotle,  “  are 
not  supposed  to  learn  anything,  but  to  be  affected  in  a  certain 
way  and  put  into  a  certain  frame  of  mind.”  4  That  is  why 
the  religious  revival  could  inspire  philosophy  with  a  new 
spirit,  but  could  not  at  first  graft  new  doctrines  on  it. 


I.  Pythagoras  of  Samos 

37-  It  is  not  easy  to  give  any  account  of  Pythagoras 
that  can  claim  to  be  regarded  as  historical.  The  earliest 
reference  to  him,  indeed,  is  practically  a  contemporary  one. 
Some  verses  are  quoted  from  Xenophanes,  in  which  we  are 
told  that  Pythagoras  once  heard  a  dog  howling  and  appealed 
to  its  master  not  to  beat  it,  as  he  recognised  the  voice  of  a 
departed  friend.5  From  this  we  know  that  he  taught  the 

*  f°hraEm?ed0ldeS:  S?e  §  ”7  '•  for  Pythagoreans,  see  §  i49. 

- .  },  *lave  ^ssed  this  point  fully  in  "The  Socratic  Doctrine  of  the 
Soul  (Proceedings  of  the  British  Academy,  1915-16  p. 

3  Plato,  Phaed.  69  c  3,  Kal  KivdvveOovm  Kal  ol  ’  rds  reXeras  ^  o5r0l 
Karaarujaavres  06  faSKol  rives  etvai,  dXXd  T$  ^Xcu  alvtrreaOai  Jx  The 
irony  of  this  and  similar  passages  should  be  unmistakable. 

Kal  Siaredijvai'.'  ^  ^  ^  ***  "  deiv,  dXXd 

6  Xenophanes,  fr.  7. 


SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION 


85 

doctrine  of  transmigration.  Herakleitos,  in  the  next 
generation,  speaks  of  his  having  carried  scientific  investi¬ 
gation  [ia-Topir,)  further  than  any  one,  though  he  made  use 
of  it  for  purposes  of  imposture.1  Later,  though  still  within 
the  century,  Herodotos  2  speaks  of  him  as  "  not  the  weakest 
scientific  man  among  the  Hellenes,”  and  he  says 

he  had  been  told  by  the  Greeks  of  the  Hellespont  that  the 
legendary  Scythian  Salmoxis  had  been  a  slave  of  Pythagoras 
at  Samos.  He  does  not  believe  that ;  for  he  knew  Salmoxis 
lived  many  years  before  Pythagoras.  The  story,  however, 
is  evidence  that  Pythagoras  was  well  known  in  the  fifth 
century,  both  as  a  scientific  man  and  as  a  preacher  of 
immortality.  That  takes  us  some  way. 

Plato  was  deeply  interested  in  Pythagoreanism,  but  he 
is  curiously  reserved  about  Pythagoras.  He  only  mentions 
him  once  by  name  in  all  his  writings,  and  all  we  are  told  then 
is  that  he  won  the  affections  of  his  followers  in  an  unusual 
degree  (Soa<pep6vTm  p^arrpQi])  by  teaching  them  a  “  way 
of  fife,”  which  was  still  called  Pythagorean.3  Even  the 
Pythagoreans  are  only  once  mentioned  by  name,  in  the 
passage  where  Sokrates  is  made  to  say  that  they  regard 
music  and  astronomy  as  sister  sciences.4  On  the  other 
hand,  Plato  tells  us  a  good  deal  about  men  whom  we  know 
from  other  sources  to  have  been  Pythagoreans,  but  he 
avoids  the  name.  For  all  he  says,  we  should  only  have  been 
able  to  guess  that  Echekrates  and  Philolaos  belonged  to 
the  school.  Usually  Pythagorean  views  are  given  anony¬ 
mously,  as  those  of  “  ingenious  persons  ”  (ko^ol  rive ?)  or 
the  like,  and  we  are  not  even  told  expressly  that  Timaios  the 
Lokrian,  into  whose  mouth  Plato  has  placed  an  unmistak¬ 
ably  Pythagorean  cosmology,  belonged  to  the  society.  We 
are  left  to  infer  it  from  the  fact  that  he  comes  from  Italy. 
Aristotle  imitates  his  master’s  reserve  in  this  matter.  The 

1  Herakleitos,  fr.  17.  For  the  meaning  given  to  /caxorex''^.  see  note 
in  loc. 

2  Herod,  iv.  95. 

3  Plato,  Rep.  x.  600  b. 


4  Ibid.  vii.  530  d. 


86 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


name  of  Pythagoras  occurs  only  twice  in  the  genuine  works 
that  have  come  down  to  us.  In  one  place  we  are  told 
that  Alkmaion  was  a  young  man  in  the  old  age  of  Pytha¬ 
goras,1  and  the  other  is  a  quotation  from  Alkidamas  to  the 
effect  that  “  the  men  of  Italy  honoured  Pythagoras.”  2 
Aristotle  is  not  so  shy  of  the  word  “  Pythagorean  ”  as 
Plato,  but  he  uses  it  in  a  curious  way.  He  says  such  things 
as  “  the  men  of  Italy  who  are  called  Pythagoreans,”  3  and 
he  usually  refers  to  particular  doctrines  as  those  of  “  some 
of  the  Pythagoreans.”  It  looks  as  if  there  was  some  doubt 
in  the  fourth  century  as  to  who  the  genuine  Pythagoreans 
were.  We  shall  see  why  as  we  go  on. 

Aristotle  also  wrote  a  special  treatise  on  the  Pythagoreans 
which  has  not  come  down  to  us,  but  from  which  quotations 
are  found  in  later  writers.  These  are  of  great  value,  as 
they  have  to  do  with  the  religious  side  of  Pythagoreanism. 

The  only  other  ancient  authorities  on  Pythagoras  were 
Aristoxenos  of  Taras,  Dikaiarchos  of  Messene,  and  Timaios 
of  Tauromenion,  who  all  had  special  opportunities  of 
knowing  something  about  him.  The  account  of  the  Pytha¬ 
gorean  Order  in  the  Life  of  Pythagoras  by  Iamblichos  is 
based  mainly  on  Timaios,4  who  was  no  doubt  an  uncritical 
historian,  but  who  had  access  to  information  about  Italy 
and  Sicily  which  makes  his  testimony  very  valuable  when 
it  can  be  recovered.  Aristoxenos  had  been  personally 
acquainted  with  the  last  generation  of  the  Pythagorean 
society  at  Phleious.  It  is  evident,  however,  that  he  wished 
to  represent  Pythagoras  simply  as  a  man  of  science,  and 
was  anxious  to  refute  the  idea  that  he  was  a  religious  teacher. 
In  the  same  way,  Dikaiarchos  tried  to  make  out  that 
Pythagoras  was  simply  a  statesman  and  reformer.5 


1  Arist.  Met.  A,  5.  986  a  29.  2  Arist.  Rhet.  B,  23.  1398  b  14 

Cf.  e.g.  Met.  A,  5.  985  b  23  ;  De  caelo,  B,  13.  293  a  20. 

4  See  Rostagm,  “  Pitagora  e  i  Pitagorici  in  Timeo  "  (Atti  della 
Accademia  delle  Scienze  di  Torino,  vol.  49  (1913-14),  pp  373 

\See,iE'v°lde’S  Pa?.erS'  “  Die  QueUen  des  lambUchos  in  seiner  Bio 
graphie  des  Pythagoras,  in  Rh.  Mus.  xxvi.  and  xxvii. 


R. 


I 


SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION  87 

When  we  come  to  the  Lives  of  Pythagoras,  by  Porphyry, 
Iamblichos,  and  Diogenes  Laertios,1  we  find  ourselves  once 
more  in  the  region  of  the  miraculous.  They  are  based  on 
authorities  of  a  very  suspicious  character,2  and  the  result 
is  a  mass  of  incredible  fiction.  It  would  be  quite  wrong, 
however,  to  ignore  the  miraculous  elements  in  the  legend  of 
Pythagoras  ;  for  some  of  the  most  striking  miracles  are 
quoted  from  Aristotle’s  work  on  the  Pythagoreans  3  and 
from  the  Tripod  of  Andron  of  Ephesos,4  both  of  which 
belong  to  the  fourth  century  b.c.,  and  cannot  have  been 
influenced  by  Neopythagorean  fancies.  The  fact  is  that 
the  oldest  and  the  latest  accounts  agree  in  representing 
Pythagoras  as  a  wonder-worker  ;  but,  for  some  reason,  an 
attempt  was  made  in  the  fourth  century  to  save  his  memory 
from  that  imputation.  This  helps  to  account  for  the 
cautious  references  of  Plato  and  Aristotle,  but  its  full 
significance  will  only  appear  later. 

38.  We  may  be  said  to  know  for  certain  that  Pythagoras 
passed  his  early  manhood  at  Samos,  and  was  the  son  of 
Mnesarchos  ; 5  and  he  “  flourished,”  we  are  told,  in  the  reign 

1  Porphyry’s  Life  of  Pythagoras  is  the  only  considerable  extract  from 
his  History  of  Philosophy  that  has  survived.  The  Life  by  Iamblichos  has 
been  edited  by  Nauck  (1884). 

2  Iamblichos  made  a  compilation  from  the  arithmetician  Nikomachos 
of  Gerasa  and  the  romance  of  Apollonios  of  Tyana.  Porphyry  used 
Nikomachos  and  Antonius  Diogenes,  who  wrote  a  work  called  Marvels 
from  beyond  Thule,  which  is  parodied  in  Lucian’s  Vera  Historia. 

3  It  is  Aristotle  who  told  how  Pythagoras  killed  a  deadly  snake  by 
biting  it,  how  he  was  seen  at  Kroton  and  Metapontion  at  the  same  time, 
how  he  exhibited  his  golden  thigh  at  Olympia,  and  how  he  was  addressed 
by  a  voice  from  heaven  when  crossing  the  river  Kasas.  It  was  also 
Aristotle  who  preserved  the  valuable  piece  of  information  that  the  Kro- 
toniates  identified  Pythagoras  with  Apollo  Hyperboreios,  and  that  the 
Pythagoreans  had  a  division  of  the  \oyudiv  ffov  into  t8  fib  .  .  .  Beds,  t6  81 
Ardpuiros,  to  88  olov  Ilvffayipas.  For  these  and  other  statements  of  the 
same  kind,  see  Diels,  Vors.  4,  7.  It  looks  as  if  Aristotle  took  special 
pains  to  emphasise  this  aspect  of  Pythagoras -out  of  opposition  to  the 
later  Pythagoreans  who  tried  to  ignore  it. 

4  Andron  wrote  a  work  on  the  Seven  Wise  Men,  and  the  title  refers 
to  the  well-known  story  (p.  44,  n.  3). 

B  Cf.  Herod,  iv.  95,  and  Herakleitos,  fr.  17  (R.  P.  31  a).  Timaios, 
however,  gave  his  father’s  name  as  Demaratos.  Herodotos  represents 
him  as  living  at  Samos.  Aristoxenos  said  his  family  came  from  one  of 


Life  of 
Pytha¬ 
goras. 


88 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


of  Polykrates  (532  b.c.).1  This  date  cannot  be  far  wrong ; 
for  Herakleitos  already  speaks  of  him  in  the  past  tense.2 

The  extensive  travels  attributed  to  Pythagoras  by  late 
writers  are,  of  course,  apocryphal.  Even  the  statement 
that  he  visited  Egypt,  though  far  from  improbable  if  we 
consider  the  close  relations  between  Polykrates  of  Samos 
and  Amasis,  rests  on  no  sufficient  authority.3  Herodotos, 
it  is  true,  observes  that  the  Egyptians  agreed  in  certain 
practices  with  the  rules  called  Orphic  and  Bacchic,  which 
are  really  Egyptian,  and  with  the  Pythagoreans  ;  4  but  this 
does  not  imply  that  the  Pythagoreans  derived  these  directly 
from  Egypt.  He  says  also  that  the  belief  in  transmigration 
came  from  Egypt,  though  certain  Greeks,  both  at  an  earlier 
and  a  later  date,  had  passed  it  off  as  their  own.  He  refuses, 
however,  to  give  their  names,  so  he  can  hardly  be  referring 
to  Pythagoras.5  Nor  does  it  matter;  for  the  Egyptians 


"i*!  Asians ;  occupied  after  expelling  the  Tyrrhenians 
(m°g.  mi.  This  suggests  Lemnos  or  Imbros,  from  which  the  Tvr 
rheruan  "  Wasgians  »  were  expelled  by  Miltiades  Herod.  vi  i4o)  Th£ 
explains  the  story  that  he  was  an  Etrurian  or  a  Tyrian.  Other  accounts 
bring  him  into  connexion  with  Phleious,  but  that  may  be  a  pious  in 

fVoeurthnc  1  S°CietJ  WhiGh  fl°Unshed  there  ^  the  beginning  of  the 
tha?H  tUry  fuC'  Pausamas  (A  r3>  I)  gives  it  as  a  Phleiasian  tradition 
Phlei“sTsL„se  of  Pythagoras,  had  emigrated  from 

of  01Exlvm°';MS?ely  “■  Pytha8OTas  ”«■  ‘he  Olympic  victor 
Ot  Ol.  XL VIII  I  (588/7  B.C.),  but  Apollodoros  gave  his  floruit  as 

the  era  of  Polykrates.  He  doubtless  based  this  o„  thVSteLut <f< 
Anstoxenos  quoted  by  Porphyry  (V  Pvth  o)  thaf  l  r  nt  of 

from  dislike  the  tyLm?of  My^ta  a?' P 5,  Samos 

2  Herakl.  fr.  i6,  i7  (R.  P.  3I>  3I  a).  1  ’  53  &)' 

3  It  occurs  first  in  the  Bousiris  of  Isokrates,  §  28  (R  P 

Herodotos  behev^d^at  tK  ctlt  b^7  light' 

(“:  49)>  and  he  means  that  the  Orphics  got  these  practices  fromth™*50118 

Ship^^  S 

do  not  write  "  cannot  refer  to  Lhatrl  f  Z  ,names  1  kn™,  but 
Herodotos  speaks  in  this  way  (cf  i  51  iv  1S°n  y,of  contemPoraries 
he  meant  Empedokles  seems  convincing.  Her Lt^must* ^ 
at  Thourioi.  If  Herodotos  had  ever  heard  of  Pvtha  1  h  met  hlm 
he  would  surely  have  said  so  in  one  or  other  of  thS^aZSS? 
was  -  occasion  for  reserve,  as  Pythagoras  must  have  died  before"  HerodoS 


SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION 


89 


did  not  believe  in  transmigration  at  all,  and  Herodotos  was 
deceived  by  the  priests  or  the  symbolism  of  the  monuments. 

Aristoxenos  said  that  Pythagoras  left  Samos  in  order  to 
escape  from  the  tyranny  of  Polykrates.1  It  was  at  Kroton, 
a  city  which  had  long  been  in  friendly  relations  with  Samos 
and  was  famed  for  its  athletes  and  its  doctors,2  that  he 
founded  his  society.  Timaios  appears  to  have  said  that  he 
came  to  Italy  in  529  b.c.  and  remained  at  Kroton  for  twenty 
years.  He  died  at  Metapontion,  whither  he  had  retired  when 
the  Krotoniates  rose  in  revolt  against  his  authority.3 

39-  The  Pythagorean  Order  was  simply,  in  its  origin,  The  Order, 
a  religious  fraternity,  and  not,  as  has  been  maintained,  a 
political  league.4  Nor  had  it  anything  whatever  to  do 
with  the  Dorian  aristocratic  ideal.”  Pythagoras  was  an 
Ionian,  and  the  Order  was  originally  confined  to  Achaian 
states.5  Moreover  the  “  Dorian  aristocratic  ideal  ”  is  a 

1  Porph.  V.  Pyth.  9  (R.  P.  53  a). 

From  what  Herodotos  tells  us  of  Demokedes  (iii.  13 1)  we  may  infer 
that  the  medical  school  of  Kroton  was  founded  before  the  time  of 
Pythagoras.  The  series  of  Olympian  victories  won  by  Krotoniates  in  the 
sixth  century  b.c.  is  remarkable. 

For  a  full  discussion  of  the  chronological  problem,  see  Rostagni, 
op.  cit.  pp.  376  sqq.  It  seems  clear  that  Timaios  made  the  rising  of 
Kylon  take  place  just  after  the  destruction  of  Sybaris  (510  b.c.),  with 
which  he  connected  it.  The  statement  that  Pythagoras  then  retired  to 
Metapontion  is  confirmed  by  Cicero,  who  speaks  (De  fin.  v.  4)  of  the 
honours  still  paid  to  his  memory  in  that  city  (R.  P.  57  c).  Aristoxenos 
{ap.  Iambi.  V.  Pyth.  249)  referred  to  the  same  thing  (R.  P.  57  c).  Cf. 
also  Andron,  fr.  6  ( F.H.G .  ii.  347). 

4  Plato,  Rep.  x.  600  a  9,  clearly  implies  that  Pythagoras  held  no  public 
office.  The  view  that  the  Pythagorean  sect  was  a  political  league,  main¬ 
tained  in  modem  times  by  Krische  ( De  societatis  a  Pythagora  conditae  scopo 
politico,  1830),  goes  back,  as  Rohde  has  shown  ( loc .  cit.),  to  Dikaiarchos, 
the  champion  of  the  “  Practical  Life,"  j  1st  as  the  view  that  it  was 
primarily  a  scientific  society  goes  back  to  the  mathematician  and  musician 
Aristoxenos. 

6  The  idea  that  the  Pythagoreans  represented  the  “  Dorian  ideal  ”  dies 
very  hard.  In  his  Kulturhistorische  Beitrage  (Heft  i.  p.  59),  Max  C.  P. 

Schmidt  imagines  that  later  writers  call  the  founder  of  the  sect  Pythagoras 
instead  of  Pythagores,  as  he  is  called  by  Herakleitos  and  Demokritos, 
because  he  had  become  "  a  Dorian  of  the  Dorians."  The  fact  is  simply 
that  llvdayopas  is  the  Attic  form  of  U.v6ay6pris,  and  is  no  more  "  Doric  " 
than  ’Apa^ayipas.  Even  in  the  reign  of  Trajan,  the  Samians  still  knew  that 
Iii idayopys  was  the  correct  spelling.  Cf.  the  title  vignette  in  Diels,  Vors. 


90 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Downfall 
of  the 
Order. 


fiction  based  on  the  Sokratic  idealisation  of  Sparta  and 
Crete.  Corinth,  Argos,  and  Syracuse  are  quite  forgotten. 
Nor  is  there  any  evidence  that  the  Pythagoreans  favoured 
the  aristocratic  party.1  The  main  purpose  of  the  Order  was 
the  cultivation  of  holiness.  In  this  respect  it  resembled 
an  Orphic  society,  though  Apollo,  and  not  Dionysos,  was 
the  chief  Pythagorean  god.  That  is  doubtless  due  to  the 
connexion  of  Pythagoras  with  Delos,  and  explains  why  the 
Krotoniates  identified  him  with  Apollo  Hyperboreios.2 

40.  For  a  time  the  new  Order  succeeded  in  securing 
supreme  power  in  the  Achaian  cities,  but  reaction  soon  came. 
Our  accounts  of  these  events  are  much  confused  by  failure 
to  distinguish  between  the  revolt  of  Kylon  in  the  lifetime 
of  Pythagoras  himself,  and  the  later  risings  which  led  to  the 
expulsion  of  the  Pythagoreans  from  Italy.  It  is  only  if  we 
keep  these  apart  that  we  begin  to  see  our  way.  Timaios 
appears  to  have  connected  the  rising  of  Kylon  closely  with 


1  The  only  statement  which  might  suggest  that  Pythagoras  took  the 

aristocratic  side  is  the  remark  in  Diogenes  (viii.  3)  Sio-re  trxeSbv  etvai 
apuTTOKpartav  rpv  tt0\i relay.  That  may  come  from  Timaios,  but  (as  the 
adverb  <rXe56x  shows)  it  is  not  to  be  taken  literally.  The  Pythagorean 
rule  was  no  doubt  an  apiaroKparla  in  the  sense  given  to  the  word  by 
Sokrates  in  Plato's  Republic,  but  it  was  not  based  either  on  birth  or  on 
wealth,  so  that  it  was  not  an  aristocracy  in  the  common  Greek  sense  of 
the  word,  and  still  less  an  oligarchy.  It  was  more  like  the  "  Rule  of  the 
Saints.”  Kylon,  the  chief  opponent  of  the  Pythagoreans,  is  described  by 
Anstoxenos  (Iambi.  V.  Pyth.  248)  as  K*X  86£v  Kai  rr\obrV  rr^re^y 

ruy  TroXiruiy.  Taras,  later  the  chief  seat  of  the  Pythagoreans,  was  a 
democracy.  (Cf.  Strabo,  vi.  p.  280,  t<rxv<rav  Si  7 rore  ol  Tapayrcvoi  ko.6'  inrep- 
PcX^y  TroXtrevbfieyoi  SripoKparucus  .  .  .  aweS^ayro  Si  Kal  rpv  Undaybpeioy 
PiXoaopiay  ktX.)  The  truth  is  that,  at  this  time,  the  new  religion 
appealed  to  the  people  rather  than  the  aristocracies,  which  were  apt  to 
be  free -thinking.”  Xenophanes,  not  Pythagoras,  is  their  man 

2  We  have  the  authority  of  Aristotle,  fr.  186.  1510  b  20,  for  this 
identification.  The  names  of  Abaris  and  Aristeas  stand  for  a  mystical 
movement  parallel  to  the  Orphic,  but  based  on  the  worship  of  Apollo. 
The  later  tradition  makes  them  predecessors  of  Pythagoras  ;  and  that 
this  has  some  historical  basis  appears  from  Herod,  iv.  13  sqq .'  and  above 
all  from  the  statement  that  Aristeas  had  a  statue  at  Metapontion,  where 
Pythagoras  died.  The  connexion  of  Pythagoras  with  Salmoxis  belongs 
to  the  same  order  of  ideas.  As  the  legend  of  the  Hyperboreans  is  Delian, 
we  see  that  the  religion  taught  by  Pythagoras  was  genuinely  Ionian  in 
its  origin,  and  had  nothing  to  do  with  Dionysos. 


SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION 


9i 


the  events  which  led  to  the  destruction  of  Sybaris  (510  B.C.). 
We  gather  that  in  some  way  Pythagoras  had  shown  sympathy 
with  the  Sybarites,  and  had  urged  the  people  of  Kroton 
to  receive  certain  refugees  who  had  been  expelled  by  the 
tyrant  Telys.  There  is  no  ground  for  the  assertion  that 
he  sympathised  with  these  refugees  because  they  were 
“  aristocrats  ”  ;  they  were  victims  of  a  tyrant  and  suppliants, 
and  it  is  not  hard  to  understand  that  the  Ionian  Pytha¬ 
goras  should  have  felt  a  certain  kindness  for  the  men  of  the 
great  but  unfortunate  Ionian  city.  Kylon,  who  is  expressly 
stated  by  Aristoxenos  to  have  been  one  of  the  first  men 
of  Kroton  in  wealth  and  birth,1  was  able  to  bring  about 
the  retirement  of  Pythagoras  to  Metapontion,  another 
Achaian  city,  and  it  was  there  that  he  passed  his  remaining 
years. 

Disturbances  still  went  on,  however,  at  Kroton  after  the 
departure  of  Pythagoras  for  Metapontion  and  after  his 
death.  At  last,  we  are  told,  the  Kyloneans  set  fire  to  the 
house  of  the  athlete  Milo,  where  the  Pythagoreans  were 
assembled.  Of  those  in  the  house  only  two,  who  were 
young  and  strong,  Archippos  and  Lysis,  escaped.  Archippos 
retired  to  Taras,  a  democratic  Dorian  state  ;  Lysis,  first 
to  Achaia  and  afterwards  to  Thebes,  where  he  was  later 
the  teacher  of  Epameinondas.2  It  is  impossible  to  date 
these  events  accurately,  but  the  mention  of  Lysis  proves 
that  they  were  spread  over  more  than  one  generation.  The 

r 

coup  d’Etat  of  Kroton  can  hardly  have  occurred  before 
450  b.c.,  if  the  teacher  of  Epameinondas  escaped  from  it, 
nor  can  it  have  been  much  later  or  we  should  have  heard 
of  it  in  connexion  with  the  foundation  of  Thourioi  in 
444  b.c.  In  a  valuable  passage,  doubtless  derived  from 
Timaios,  Polybios  tells  us  of  the  burning  of  the  Pythagorean 

1  See  p.  90,  n.  1.  I  do  not  know  why  modern  historians  call  him  a 
democratic  leader. 

2  Rohde,  Rhein.  Mus.  xxxvi.  p.  565,  n.  1.  The  later  accounts  telescope 
these  events  into  a  single  catastrophe.  Some  have  it  that  Pythagoras 
himself  was  burned  to  death  in  the  house  of  Milo. 


92 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Want  of 
evidence 
as  to  the 
teaching 
of  Pytha¬ 
goras. 


"  lodges  ”  ( crvveSpia )  in  all  the  Achaian  cities,  and  the  way  in 
which  he  speaks  suggests  that  this  went  on  for  a  consider¬ 
able  time,  till  at  last  peace  and  order  were  restored  by  the 
Achaians  of  Peloponnesos.1  We  shall  see  that  at  a  later 
date  some  of  the  Pythagoreans  were  able  to  return  to  Italy, 
and  once  more  acquired  great  influence  there. 

41-  Of  the  opinions  of  Pythagoras  we  know  even  less 
than  of  his  life.  Plato  and  Aristotle  clearly  knew  nothing 
for  certain  of  ethical  or  physical  doctrines  going  back  to 
the  founder  himself.2  Aristoxenos  gave  a  string  of  moral 
precepts.3  Dikaiarchos  said  hardly  anything  of  what 
Pythagoras  taught  his  disciples  was  known  except  the  doc¬ 
trine  of  transmigration,  the  periodic  cycle,  and  the  kinship 
of  all  living  creatures.4  Pythagoras  apparently  preferred 
oral  instruction  to  the  dissemination  of  his  opinions  by 
writing,  and  it  was  not  till  Alexandrian  times  that  any  one 
ventured  to  forge  books  in  his  name.  The  writings  ascribed 
to  the  first  Pythagoreans  were  also  forgeries  of  the  same 
period.5  The  early  history  of  Pythagoreanism  is,  therefore, 
wholly  conjectural ;  but  we  may  still  make  an  attempt  to 
understand,  in  a  very  general  way,  what  the  position  of 
Pythagoras  in  the  history  of  Greek  thought  must  have  been. 


,  ,/b;  “•  3,9'  Xa&  061  ykP  KalPo{*  iv  ^rd  ’I raXlay  rbirots  Kara 

ri)v  p.eydXriy  EXXdBa  rbre  ir pooayopevop.iyVy  (riirpr^y  rd  avybopca  rdy  HvOayopelair, 
Vera  ravra  ytyopdyov  Klaras  6\o<jXepovs  ire  pi  rds  Gretas  (Birep  eU6s,  ds  By 
T  n purvy  dySpwy  4$  Udarr, f  7r6Xea,s  oiirco  irapaUytos  Bia^Oapiyrcy)  <rvy4Bv 
raj  Kar  <W0„S  rods  riirovs  'E XXynnds  t6X6«  dyaTXyaOyycu  06 ,ov  Kal  ardaew 
iraj-ro  airps  rapaXij s.  iy  oh  Kaipoh,  dir 6  rCiv  irXeicrTwy  fiepwy  rijs  'EXXctSos 

lprpn6rr  iv\  t ^  **  *  ZZ 

irpds  ryv  rwv  irapbvruv  Kandy  4£aycoyi)v. 

to  *  th?e^SCUSSing  t.he  Pythag0rean  system-  Aristotle  always  refers  it 
1°  th.C  Pythagoreans,"  not  to  Pythagoras  himself.  He  is  qnite  clear 
t  what  he  knew  as  the  Pythagorean  system  belonged  in  the  main  to 
the  days  of  Empedokles,  Anaxagoras,  and  Leukippos  ;  for.  after  mention 
mg  these,  he  goes  on  to  describe  the  Pythagoreans  as  coSempor^ 

9tb“J  *h“  (*•  «  ^  r^:,  m71  5 

by  d£Z  trtT’  >he  °‘  Aristoxenos  are  given 

1  Porphyry,  V.  Pyth.  19  (R.  P.  55). 

(ArchZ  !6lS|  D0*’  P  *50’  and  ‘‘Ein  gefaischtes  Pythagorasbnch  " 

(Arch.  m.  pp.  45I  sqq.)  ■  Bernays,  Die  heraklitischen  Brief e,  n.  1. 


SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION 


93 

42.  In  the  first  place,  as  we  have  seen,1  he  taught  the 
doctrine  of  transmigration.2  Now  this  is  most  easily  to  be 
explained  as  a  development  of  the  primitive  belief  in  the 
kinship  of  men  and  beasts,  a  view  which  Dikaiarchos  said 
Pythagoras  held.  Further,  this  belief  is  commonly  associ¬ 
ated  with  a  system  of  taboos  on  certain  kinds  of  food,  and 
the  Pythagorean  rule  is  best  known  for  its  prescription  of 
similar  forms  of  abstinence.  It  seems  certain  that  Pytha¬ 
goras  brought  this  with  him  from  Ionia.  Timaios  told  how 
at  Delos  he  refused  to  sacrifice  on  any  but  the  oldest  altar, 
that  of  Apollo  the  Father,  where  only  bloodless  sacrifices 
were  allowed.3 

43*  has  indeed  been  doubted  whether  we  can  accept 
what  we  are  told  by  such  late  writers  as  Porphyry  on  the 
subject  of  Pythagorean  abstinence.  Aristoxenos  undoubt¬ 
edly  said  Pythagoras  did  not  abstain  from  animal  flesh  in 
general,  but  only  from  that  of  the  ploughing  ox  and  the 
ram.4  He  also  said  that  Pythagoras  preferred  beans  to 
every  other  vegetable,  as  being  the  most  laxative,  and 
that  he  was  partial  to  sucking-pigs  and  tender  kids.5  The 
palpable  exaggeration  of  these  statements  shows,  however, 
that  he  is  endeavouring  to  combat  a  belief  which  existed  in 

1  See  above,  p.  84. 

2  The  proper  Greek  for  this  is  Tra\iyycv«ria,  and  the  inaccurate  term 
ixerep.p&x w<ris  only  occurs  in  late  writers.  Some  of  the  Neoplatonists  and 
Christian  apologists  say  /xeTei'o-u/xdTojo-is,  which  is  accurate  but  cumbrous. 
Cf.  Olympiodoros  in  Phaed.  p.  54,  25  (Norvm),  ttjv  /xeTe/xpdxoitnv,  IjTot  tt]v 
txereixTwfxdTacnv,  Sibri  01}  TroXXai  pvxal  $v  <rw/xa  dooiroiovaiv,  bird  aiinj  /xere/x- 
ptxuais  fy,  £aX4  /ha  ipvxv  Sidpopa  odj/xara  ixera/xirlaxeTai.  See  Rohde, 
Psyche,  p.  428,  n.  2. 

3  See  Diog.  viii.  13. 

4  Aristoxenos  ap.  Diog.  viii.  20,  irdvra  /xkv  rd  dXXa  <rvyXupeTv  abrbv 
tadleiv  lfx\[/vx<x,  fxbvov  S’  a irixeadai  pods  dporrjpos  Kal  xpiov. 

6  Aristoxenos  ap.  Gell.  iv.  IX,  5,  Wvdaybpas  Sd  twv  ocwploiv  fxdXicrra  rhv 
<va/xof  tSotdfxaaev  ■  XeiavriKdv  re  yap  etvai  xal  diaxuprp-LKtxv  •  Sib  Kal 
fxd\i<TTa  Ktxpvrai  a  imp ;  ib.  6,  "  porculis  quoque  minusculis  et  haedis  tene- 
rioribus  victitasse,  idem  Aristoxenus  refert.”  It  is  just  possible  that 
Aristoxenos  may  be  right  about  the  taboo  on  beans.  We  know  that  it 
was  Orphic,  and  it  may  have  been  transferred  to  the  Pythagoreans  by 
mistake.  That,  however,  would  not  affect  the  general  conclusion  that  at 
least  some  Pythagoreans  practised  abstinence  from  various  kinds  of 
animal  food,  which  is  all  that  is  required. 


Trans¬ 

migration. 


Abstinence. 


94 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


his  own  day,  so  we  can  show,  out  of  his  own  mouth,  that 
the  tradition  which  made  the  Pythagoreans  abstain  from 
animal  flesh  and  beans  goes  back  to  a  time  long  before  the 
Neopythagoreans.  The  explanation  is  that  Aristoxenos 
had  been  the  friend  of  the  last  of  the  Pythagoreans  ;  and, 
in  their  time,  the  strict  observance  had  been  relaxed,  except 
by  some  zealots  whom  the  heads  of  the  Society  refused  to 
acknowledge.1  The  “  Pythagorists  ”  who  clung  to  the  old 
practices  were  now  regarded  as  heretics,  and  it  was  said 
that  the  Akousmatics,  as  they  were  called,  were  really 
followers  of  Hippasos,  who  had  been  excommunicated  for 
revealing  secret  doctrines.  The  genuine  followers  of 
Pythagoras  were  the  Mathematicians.2  The  satire  of  the 
poets  of  the  Middle  Comedy  proves,  however,  that,  even 
though  the  friends  of  Aristoxenos  did  not  practise  abstinence, 
there  were  plenty  of  people  in  the  fourth  century,  calling 
themselves  followers  of  Pythagoras,  who  did.3  We  know 
also  from  Isokrates  that  they  still  observed  the  rule  of 

1  Yet  even  Aristoxenos  recorded  that,  when  Pherekydes  died,  he  was 
buried  by  Pythagoras  at  Delos  (Diog.  i.  118).  It  was,  perhaps,  too 
notorious  to  be  denied. 

2  Hippasos  of  Kroton  or  Metapontion  (in  the  catalogue  of  Iamblichos 
he  is  a  Sybarite)  is,  we  shall  see,  the  regular  scapegoat  of  the  Pythagoreans. 
Iamblichos,  who  here  follows  Nikomachos,  says  ( V.  Pyth.  8i  ;  R.  P.  56) 
that  the  padppartKoi  were  admitted  to  be  Pythagoreans  by  the  aKovopa- 
tikoI,  but  did  not  recognise  them  in  return.  We  are  told  (Diog.  viii.  7) 
that  the  pvcttikSs  \6yos  ascribed  to  Pythagoras  was  really  by  Hippasos, 
who  wrote  it  i-n-l  StafioXy  Uvda ybpov,  i.e.  to  throw  discredit  on  him  by 
representing  him  as  a  purely  religious  teacher.  The  term  U-vdayoptarps 
seems  to  have  been  used  specially  of  the  Akousmatics,  while  the 
scientific  Pythagoreans  were  called  Hvdaybpetoi  in  the  same  way  as  the 
followers  of  other  schools  were  called  ’  AvafaySpeioi,  'H/xwcXelreioi,  and  the 
like. 

3  For  the  fragments,  see  Diels,  Vors.  45  e.  The  most  striking  are 
Antiphanes,  fr.  135*  Kock,  ibtnrep  UvQayoplfav  ecrdlet  |  tpipvxov  ovStv  \  Alexis, 
fr.  220,  oi  HudayoplfovTes  ydp,  <i>s  aKouopev,  |  oifr’  6\po v  ioOlovotv  0 Or’  S.W’  ovSt 
tv  I  tptpvxov;  fr.  196  (from  the  Ilvdayopl^ovaa),  ij  S’  eartaois  laxdSes  Kal 
(TTtpipvXa  |  Kal  rvpbs  torat  •  raura  yap  Oueiv  vipos  |  Tots  Ilv&ayopetots ;  Aristophon, 
fr.  9  (from  the  JlvdayoptaT-l)s),  irpbs  tGiv  6ewv  oiSpeda  toOs  irdXat  irort,  |  tovs 
llvdayoptards  yevoptvovs  Svtus  pv-rdv  \  tKOvras  t)  tpopelv  rptfiCovas  pdetot ;  Mnesi- 
machos,  fr.  I,  ws  Ylvdayoptorl  Ovopev  rip  Ao £lq.  \  ip^vyov  oiiSbv  itrdlo vres 
iravTeAm.  See  also  Theokritos  xiv.  5,  toiovtos  Kal  irpdv  rts  atpineTo  IluOayo- 
piKTas,  \  u>xpSs  KavuTroS-qris  *  'AOpvatos  S’  ttpar’  ppev. 


SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION 


95 

silence.1  History  has  not  been  kind  to  the  Akousmatics, 
but  they  never  wholly  died  out.  The  names  of  Diodoros 
of  Aspendos  and  Nigidius  Figulus  help  to  bridge  the  gulf 
between  them  and  Apollonios  of  Tyana. 

We  have  seen  that  Pythagoras  taught  the  kinship  of 
beasts  and  men,  and  we  infer  that  his  rule  of  abstinence 
from  flesh  was  based,  not  on  humanitarian  or  ascetic  grounds 
but  on  taboo.  This  is  strikingly  confirmed  by  a  statement 
in  Porphyry’s  Defence  of  Abstinence,  to  the  effect  that, 
though  the  Pythagoreans  did  as  a  rule  abstain  from  flesh, 
they  nevertheless  ate  it  when  they  sacrificed  to  the  gods.2 
Now,  among  primitive  peoples,  we  often  find  that  the  sacred 
animal  is  slain  and  eaten  on  certain  solemn  occasions, 
though  in  ordinary  circumstances  this  would  be  the  greatest 
of  all  impieties.  Here,  again,  we  have  a  primitive  belief  ; 
and  we  need  not  attach  any  weight  to  the  denials  of 
Aristoxenos.3 

44.  We  shall  now  know  what  to  think  of  the  Pythagorean  Akousmata. 
rules  and  precepts  that  have  come  down  to  us.  These  are 

1  Bousiris,  §  28,  In  yap  Kai  vuv  rods  Tpomroiov/atvovs  ixeivov  paO-pras 
elvai  paWov  aiyuivras  davp.6.$ovaiv  7)  rod s  M  rip  \<?yeiv  /xeylarVv  8o£av  eXovras 
The  Pythagorean  silence  was  called  iye/xvdla  or  4XepPWoriv v,  both 
of  which  seem  to  be  good  Ionic  words.  It  is  probable  that  the 
silence  was  disciplinary  rather  than  a  means  of  keeping  the  doctrine 
secret. 

See  Bernays,  Theophtcistos  Schvift  iibey  Fydm'ynigkeit.  Porphyry’s 
tract,  Ilepl  anoxn s  i^piXwv,  is  addressed  to  Castricius  Firmus,  who  had 
fallen  away  from  the  strict  vegetarianism  of  the  Pythagoreans.  The 
passage  referred  to  is  De  abst.  p.  58,  25  Nauck,  iaropouai  5e  rives  Kai 
auroiis  airreadaL  rCiv  ip.pvXwv  robs  Ylvdayopeiovs,  Sre  dCioiev  0eols.  This  does  not 
come,  like  most  of  Porphyry's  tract,  from  Theophrastos,  but  it  is  in  all 
probability  from  Herakleides  of  Pontos.  See  Bernays,  op.  cit.  p.  n. 

Cf.  also  Plutarch,  Q.  conv.  729  c  (oi  ilvdayopiKoi)  iyetiovro  tGjv  UpoSvrwv 
atrap^dpevoi  rots  deols, 

8  Porphyry  (7.  Pyth.  c  15)  has  preserved  a  tradition  to  the  effect  that 
Pythagoras  recommended  a  flesh  diet  for  athletes  (Milo  ?).  This  story 
must  have  originated  at  the  same  time  as  those  related  by  Aristoxenos, 
and  in  a  similar  way.  In  fact,  Bernays  has  shown  that  it  comes  from 
Herakleides  of  Pontos  ( Theophr .  Schr.  n.  8).  Iamblichos  (V.  Pyth.  5.  25) 
and  others  (Diog.  viii.  13,  47)  got  out  of  this  by  supposing  it  referred  to 
a  gymnast  of  the  same  name.  We  see  here  how  the  Neoplatonists  en¬ 
deavoured  to  go  back  to  the  original  form  of  the  Pythagorean  legend,  and 
to  explain  away  the  fourth-century  reconstruction. 


96 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


of  two  kinds,  and  have  different  sources.  Some  of  them, 
derived  from  Aristoxenos,  and  for  the  most  part  preserved 
by  Iamblichos,  are  mere  precepts  of  morality.  They  do 
not  pretend  to  go  back  to  Pythagoras  himself  ;  they  are 
only  the  sayings  which  the  last  generation  of  “  Mathe¬ 
maticians  ”  heard  from  their  predecessors.1  The  second 
class  is  of  a  different  nature,  and  consists  of  rules  called 
Akousmata ,2  which  points  to  their  being  the  property  of  the 
sect  which  had  faithfully  preserved  the  old  customs.  Later 
writers  interpret  them  as  “  symbols  ”  of  moral  truth ;  but  it 
does  not  require  a  practised  eye  to  see  that  they  are  genuine 
taboos.  I  give  a  few  examples  to  show  what  the  Pytha¬ 
gorean  rule  was  really  like. 

1.  To  abstain  from  beans. 

2.  Not  to  pick  up  what  has  fallen. 

3.  Not  to  touch  a  white  cock. 

4.  Not  to  break  bread. 

5.  Not  to  step  over  a  crossbar. 

6.  Not  to  stir  the  fire  with  iron. 

7.  Not  to  eat  from  a  whole  loaf. 

8.  Not  to  pluck  a  garland. 

9.  Not  to  sit  on  a  quart  measure. 

10.  Not  to  eat  the  heart. 

11.  Not  to  walk  on  highways. 

12.  Not  to  let  swallows  share  one’s  roof. 

13.  When  the  pot  is  taken  off  the  fire,  not  to  leave  the  mark 

of  it  in  the  ashes,  but  to  stir  them  together. 

14.  Do  not  look  in  a  mirror  beside  a  light. 

15.  When  you  rise  from  the  bedclothes,  roll  them  together 

and  smooth  out  the  impress  of  the  body. 

It  would  be  easy  to  multiply  proofs  of  the  close  con¬ 
nexion  between  Pythagoreanism  and  primitive  modes  of 
thought,  but  what  has  been  said  is  sufficient  for  our 
purpose. 

1  For  the  UudayopiKal  awotpaaeis  of  Aristoxenos,  see  Diels,  Vors.  45  d. 

2  There  is  a  collection  of  '  A  nova  par  a  no.  I  aufMjioAa  in  Diels,  Vors.  45  c. 


SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION 


97 


45.  Now,  were  this  all,  we  should  be  tempted  to  delete 
the  name  of  Pythagoras  from  the  history  of  philosophy, 
and  relegate  him  to  the  class  of  “  medicine-men  ”  (7077x6?) 
along  with  Epimenides  and  Onomakritos.  That,  however, 
would  be  quite  wrong.  The  Pythagorean  Society  became 
the  chief  scientific  school  of  Greece,  and  it  is  certain  that 
Pythagorean  science  goes  back  to  the  early  years  of  the 
fifth  century,  and  therefore  to  the  founder.  Herakleitos, 
who  is  not  partial  to  him,  says  that  Pythagoras  had 
pursued  scientific  investigation  further  than  other  men.1 
Herodotos  called  Pythagoras  “by  no  means  the  weakest 
sophist  of  the  Hellenes,”  a  title  which  at  this  date  does  not 
imply  the  slightest  disparagement,  but  does  imply  scientific 
studies.2  Aristotle  said  that  Pythagoras  at  first  busied 
himself  with  mathematics  and  numbers,  though  he  adds 
that  later  he  did  not  renounce  the  miracle-mongering  of 
Pherekydes.3  Can  we  trace  any  connexion  between  these 
two  sides  of  his  activity  ? 

We  have  seen  that  the  aim  of  the  Orphic  and  other 
Orgia  was  to  obtain  release  from  the  “  wheel  of  birth  ” 
by  means  of  “  purifications  ”  of  a  primitive  type.  The 
new  thing  in  the  society  founded  by  Pythagoras  seems 
to  have  been  that,  while  it  admitted  all  these  old  prac¬ 
tices,  it  at  the  same  time  suggested  a  deeper  idea  of  what 
"  purification  ”  really  is.  Aristoxenos  said  that  the  Pytha¬ 
goreans  employed  music  to  purge  the  soul  as  they 
used  medicine  to  purge  the  body.4  Such  methods  of 
purifying  the  soul  were  familiar  in  the  Orgia  of  the  Kory- 

1  Herakl.  fr.  17  (R.  P.  31  a).  The  word  laropl-p  is  in  itself  quite  general. 

What  it  chiefly  means  here  we  see  from  a  valuable  notice  preserved  by 
Iamblichos,  V.  Pyth.  89,  eVaXetro  88  7/  yeiop-erpla  rrpbs  Rvdayipov  laropla. 

3  Herod,  iv.  95. 

3  Arist.  Ilepl  tGjv  Hvdayopeluv,  fr.  186,  1510  a  39,  Ylvdaydpa s  UrpaApyov 
vlds  rd  p.ev  irpuiTov  SieiroveiTO  ire  pi  ra  /laOpp-ara  Kal  Tons  apcdp.ovs,  vcrrtpov  88 
wore  Kal  rfjs  ‘PepeKudov  reparoToilas  ovk  dWcrrij. 

1  See  Cramer,  An.  Par.  i.  172,  Sri  ol  JlvdayopiKol,  ojj  ihpp  ’ Apiardljevos, 
Kad&ptrei  iypwvTO  roD  plr  rruip-aros  Ota  iarpLKrjs,  ttjs  S(  '/'vX^r  TV* 

piovaiKTjs. 


Pytha¬ 
goras  as  a 
man  of 
science. 


7 


98 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


bantes,1  and  will  serve  to  explain  the  Pythagorean  interest 
in  Harmonics.  But  there  is  more  than  this.  If  we  can 
trust  Herakleides,  it  was  Pythagoras  who  first  distinguished 
the  three  fives,  the  Theoretic,  the  Practical,  and  the 
Apolaustic,  which  Aristotle  made  use  of  in  the  Ethics.  The 
doctrine  is  to  this  effect.  We  are  strangers  in  this  world, 
and  the  body  is  the  tomb  of  the  soul,  and  yet  we  must  not 
seek  to  escape  by  self-murder ;  for  we  are  the  chattels  of 
God  who  is  our  herdsman,  and  without  his  command  we 
have  no  right  to  make  our  escape.2  In  this  fife  there  are 
three  kinds  of  men,  just  as  there  are  three  sorts  of  people 
who  come  to  the  Olympic  Games.  The  lowest  class  is  made 
up  of  those  who  come  to  buy  and  sell,  and  next  above  them 
are  those  who  come  to  compete.  Best  of  all,  however,  are 
those  who  come  to  look  on  (detopelv).  The  greatest  purifica¬ 
tion  of  all  is,  therefore,  science,  and  it  is  the  man  who 
devotes  himself  to  that,  the  true  philosopher,  who  has  most 
effectually  released  himself  from  the  “  wheel  of  birth.”  .  It 
would  be  rash  to  say  that  Pythagoras  expressed  himself 
exactly  in  this  manner  ;  but  all  these  ideas  are  genuinely 
Pythagorean,  and  it  is  only  in  some  such  way  that  we  can 
bridge  the  gulf  which  separates  Pythagoras  the  man  of 
science  from  Pythagoras  the  religious  teacher.3  It  is  easy 
to  understand  that  most  of  his  followers  would  rest  content 
with  the  humbler  kinds  of  purification,  and  this  will  account 
for  the  sect  of  the  Akousmatics.  A  few  would  rise  to  the 
higher  doctrine,  and  we  have  now  to  ask  how  much  of  the 


to  -rce 

^  :  for  bJLS 

(qc  r„ys‘  vs ;  STrr pw  h  ihe, tyrant  °f  "■“>»» 

from  it  in  the  Phaedo  (see  my  note  on  68  c  2)  ®  Sokmtes  argUe 


SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION 


99 

later  Pythagorean  science  may  be  ascribed  to  Pythagoras 
himself. 

46.  In  his  treatise  on  Arithmetic,  Aristoxenos  said  that  Arithmetic. 
Pythagoras  was  the  first  to  carry  that  study  beyond  the 
needs  of  commerce,1  and  his  statement  is  confirmed  by 
everything  we  otherwise  know.  By  the  end  of  the  fifth 
century  b.c.  we  find  that  there  is  a  widespread  interest  in 
such  subjects  and  that  these  are  studied  for  their  own  sake. 

Now  this  new  interest  cannot  have  been  wholly  the  work 
of  a  school ;  it  must  have  originated  with  some  great  man, 
and  there  is  no  one  but  Pythagoras  to  whom  we  can  refer  it. 

As,  however,  he  wrote  nothing,  we  have  no  sure  means  of 
distinguishing  his  own  teaching  from  that  of  his  followers 
in  the  next  generation  or  two.  All  we  can  safely  say  is 
that,  the  more  primitive  any  Pythagorean  doctrine  appears, 
the  more  likely  it  is  to  be  that  of  Pythagoras  himself,  and 
all  the  more  so  if  it  can  be  shown  to  have  points  of  con¬ 
tact  with  views  which  we  know  to  have  been  held  in  his 
own  time  or  shortly  before  it.  In  particular,  when  we  find 
the  later  Pythagoreans  teaching  things  that  were  already 
something  of  an  anachronism  in  their  own  day,  we  may  be 
pretty  sure  we-  are  dealing  with  survivals  which  only  the 
authority  of  the  master’s  name  could  have  preserved. 

Some  of  these  must  be  mentioned  at  once,  though  the 
developed  system  belongs  to  a  later  part  of  our  story.  It 
is  only  by  separating  its  earliest  form  from  its  later  that 
the  place  of  Pythagoreanism  in  Greek  thought  can  be 
made  clear,  though  we  must  remember  that  no  one  can 
now  pretend  to  draw  the  line  between  its  successive  stages 
with  any  certainty. 

47.  One  of  the  most  remarkable  statements  we  have  The 
about  Pythagoreanism  is  what  we  are  told  of  Eurytos  on  fisuns‘ 
the  unimpeachable  authority  of  Archytas.  Eurytos  was 

1  Stob.  i.  p.  20,  I,  tV  rG>v  ’ kpuTToiivov  Tepl  apidp.t]TiKTjs,  T-'r/v  Sc  irepl  to is 
&pidp.ovs  irpayp-ardav  p.a\i arra  ttAvtwv  Tip/rjaai.  ooKei  llvdaydpas  ical  TTpoayaydv 
M  to  trpStrdev  dirayaywo  airS  tt}s  tuv  ipiripaiv  xpe<-<*s- 


100 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


the  disciple  of  Philolaos,  and  Aristoxenos  mentioned  him 
along  with  Philolaos  as  having  taught  the  last  of  the  Pytha¬ 
goreans,  the  men  with  whom  he  himself  was  acquainted. 
He  therefore  belongs  to  the  beginning  of  the  fourth  century 
b.c.,  by  which  time  the  Pythagorean  system  was  fully 
developed,  and  he  was  no  eccentric  enthusiast,  but  one  of 
the  foremost  men  in  the  school.1  We  are  told  of  him,  then, 
that  he  used  to  give  the  number  of  all  sorts  of  things,  such 
as  horses  and  men,  and  that  he  demonstrated  these  by 
arranging  pebbles  in  a  certain  way.  Moreover,  Aristotle 
compares  his  procedure  to  that  of  those  who  bring  numbers 
into  figures  (o-^ara)  like  the  triangle  and  the  square.2 

Now  these  statements,  and  especially  the  remark  of 
Aristotle  last  quoted,  seem  to  imply  the  existence  at  this 
date,  and  earlier,  of  a  numerical  symbolism  quite  distinct 
from  the  alphabetical  notation  on  the  one  hand  and  from 
the  Euclidean  representation  of  numbers  by  lines  on  the 
other.  The  former  was  inconvenient  for  arithmetical 
purposes,  because  the  zero  was  not  yet  invented.3  The 
representation  of  numbers  by  lines  was  adopted  to  avoid 


,  ,APart  from  the  st0IT  in  Iamblichos  (V.  Pyth  148)  that  Enrv+n* 
S  't  after  Z  ^ZUnyyTs 

r  r  “ him  “ ,h» 

the'A“,  Latere8  £  £*  *>'  “  ^ 

quite  clear  ly  Thee “  7*? 
^XPL  TOV  Trpoe\06vra  irafecOcu)  reXtov  teal  chn  ~  -  ,  °  ^ap  ^SC*  ^ 

™ *  EUpvrof  S,Mra «r-  «*, 
apiOfibs,  SSe  St  t„ov,  8Se  S'  AWov  Lts  rvyxdZ!  ^  ^  Mp<iwou  6 

ated  ^a  date^n/8^  “  arithmetlcaI  treatises  must  have  origin- 

(Saentia.  xxi.  pp.  273  stjy  )  that  this  id  .  Caraa  de  Va"x  has  shown 
in  the  tenth  Centur  a  l)  jfd‘ 7  7*  ,,'Vhlch  °"»'  appearance 

“  Indian,"  and  W„;,  "arithmetical'-  h”°  betw“"  *he  ««*. 

the  -  Arabic  ”  numerals  wefe  L^ted  byTeT  th' 
brought  by  the  Neoplatonists  to  Ppm'  Z  ^  NeoPythagoreans,  and 
and  later  the  Aral/ The zto  on wh,'/ 7“  *,h'y  reaCh'd  the  I”dla"S 
depends,  appears  be  Z  SdfttS’ t  ““  "**»» 


SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION 


ioi 


the  difficulties  raised  by  the  discovery  of  irrational  quantities, 
and  is  of  much  later  date.  It  seems  rather  that  numbers 
were  originally  represented  by  dots  arranged  in  symmetrical 
and  easily  recognised  patterns,  of  which  the  marking  of 
dice  or  dominoes  gives  us  the  best  idea.  And  these  marking^ 
are,  in  fact,  the  best  proof  that  this  is  a  genuinely  primitive 
method  of  indicating  numbers  ;  for  they  are  of  unknown 
antiquity,  and  go  back  to  the  time  when  men  could  only 
coimt  by  arranging  numbers  in  such  patterns,  each  of  which 
became,  as  it  were,  a  fresh  unit. 

It  is,  therefore,  significant  that  we  do  not  find  any  clue 
to  what  Aristotle  meant  by  “  those  who  bring  numbers  into 
figures  like  the  triangle  and  the  square  ”  till  we  come  to 
certain  late  writers  who  called  themselves  Pythagoreans, 
and  revived  the  study  of  arithmetic  as  a  science  independent 
of  geometry.  These  men  not  only  abandoned  the  linear 
symbolism  of  Euclid,  but  also  regarded  the  alphabetical 
notation,  which  they  did  use,  as  inadequate  to  represent 
the  true  nature  of  number.  Nikomachos  of  Gerasa  says 
expressly  that  the  letters  used  to  represent  numbers  are 
purely  conventional.1  The  natural  thing  would  be  to 
represent  linear  or  prime  numbers  by  a  row  of  units,  poly¬ 
gonal  numbers  by  units  arranged  so  as  to  mark  out  the 
various  plane  figures,  and  solid  numbers  by  units  disposed 
in  pyramids  and  so  forth.2  We  therefore  find  figures  like 
this  : 


a 


a 


a 

a 

a 

aa 

a 

a 

a  a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

aaa 

aaa 


a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

1  Nikomachos  of  Gerasa,  Introd.  Arithm.  p.  83,  12,  Hoche,  n pbrepov  Sk 
bmyvtotrrbov  8rt  8  Kaurov  ypdppa  $  uppao-uptba  apidpbv,  olov  to  1,  <p  rb  8k  ko.,  rb 
k,  ip  rb.  etKocrt,  rb  01,  <p  to.  bKraKbuia,  vbpcp  Kai  avvd'qpan  dvQpwirlvip,  a\\’  uu 
<pv<rei  aqpavTiKbv  iari  rov  dpidpov  kt\.  Cf.  also  Iambi,  in  Nicom.  p.  56,  27, 
Pistelli,  lariov  yap  u>s  rb  iraXaibv  ipvaiKcorepov  ol  tcpbadev  itrppiaivovTo  rds  rov 
ApidpLou  Toabrijrai,  d\\’  ovy  ioairep  ol  vuv  <rvppo\iKUi. 

2  For  the  prime  or  rectilinear  numbers,  cf.  Iambi,  in  Nicom.  p.  26,  25, 
Pistelli,  irpurros  pdv  oftv  Kai  dabvderos  dpidpbs  kffri  irepLUtjbs  8s  virb  pbwqs 
povaSo s  Tr\r)povvrwt  perpelra t,  ouKkn  5b  Kai  vir'  AXKov  nvbs  pdpovs,  Kai  kirl  plav 


102 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Now  it  ought  to  be  obvious  that  this  is  no  innovation.  Of 
course  the  employment  of  the  letter  alpha  to  represent  the 
units  is  derived  from  the  conventional  notation  ;  but  other¬ 
wise  we  are  clearly  in  presence  of  something  which  belongs 
to  the  very  earliest  stage  of  the  science.  We  also  gather 
that  the  dots  were  supposed  to  represent  pebbles  (yjnjpoi.) , 
and  this  throws  light  on  early  methods  of  what  we  still  call 
calculation. 

Triangular,  48.  That  Aristotle  refers  to  this  seems  clear,  and  is 

and  oblong  connrmed  by  the  tradition  that  the  great  revelation  made 
b}7  Pythagoras  to  mankind  was  precisely  a  figure  of  this 
kind,  the  tetraktys,  by  which  the  Pythagoreans  used  to 
swear,1  and  we  have  the  authority  of  Speusippos  for  holding 
that  the  whole  theory  was  Pythagorean.2  In  later  days 
there  were  many  kinds  of  tetraktys ,3  but  the  original  one, 
that  by  which  the  Pythagoreans  swore,  was  the  “  tetraktys 
of  the  dekad.”  It  was  a  figure  like  this  : 


•  • 

•  • 


and  represented  the  number  ten  as  the  triangle  of  four. 

Si  Sidaraatv  Trpoj3-r/<reraL  o  rotovros,  Std  roOro  «  aurbv  Kai  eMvpterptKbv  rives 

*“Wt’  evfaPlSa*  W  Kal  tMvypa.np.tKbv  dirXarfr  yhp  iv  rij  tK0i<rei  id,'  tv 
Hbvov  Suardpevos.  It  is  generally  recognised  now  that  Thymaridas  was 
an  early  Pythagorean  (Tannery,  Mem.  scient.  vol.  i.  ♦».  o  •  G  Loria 
Scienze  esatte,  p.  807);  and,  if  that  is  so,  we  have  a  complete  proof 
that  this  theory  goes  back  to  the  early  days  of  the  school.  For  the 
tnangular  oblong,  and  square  numbers,  etc.,  see  Theon  of  Smyrna,  pp 
27‘37-  Hiller,  and  Nicom.  loc.  cit  * 

htasSrL/mcis/S.  m.  phe4j T'  th”s  mald°8  sweat  by 

on  PhflSP°S  T°te  a  W°rk  °n  thC  ^^gorean  numbers,  based  chiefly 
TW  ’  a  ,  a  C°USiderable  fr^nient  of  it  is  preserved  in  the 

Theologumena  AnthmeHca.  It  will  be  found  in  Diels,  Vorsokratiker  32  A  13 
and  is  discussed  by  Tannery,  Science  helline,  pp.  374  Sqq  ’  3’ 

See  Theon,  Expositio.  pp.  93  sqq.,  Hiller.  The  rerpaKrbs  used  in  the 
Timaeus  is  the  second  described  by  Theon  {Exp.  p.  94,  xo  sqq  ) 


SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION  I03 

It  showed  at  a  glance  that  1+2+3+4=10.  Speusippos 
tells  us  of  several  properties  which  the  Pythagoreans  dis¬ 
covered  in  the  dekad.  It  is,  for  instance,  the  first  number 
ihat  has  in  it  an  equal  number  of  prime  and  composite 
numbers.  How  much  of  this  goes  back  to  Pythagoras 
himself,  we  cannot  tell ;  but  we  are  probably  justified  in 
referring  to  him  the  conclusion  that  it  is  “  according  to 
nature  that  all  Hellenes  and  barbarians  count  up  to  ten 
and  then  begin  over  again. 

It  is  obvious  that  the  tetraktys  may  be  indefinitely 
extended  so  as  to  exhibit  the  sums  of  the  series  of  successive 
integers  in  a  graphic  form,  and  these  sums  are  accordingly 
called  “  triangular  numbers.” 

For  similar  reasons,  the  sums  of  the  series  of  successive 
odd  numbers  are  called  “  square  numbers,”  and  those  of 
successive  even  numbers  “  oblong.”  If  odd  numbers  are 
added  in  the  form  of  gnomons,1  the  result  is  always  a  similar 
figure,  namely  a  square,  while,  if  even  numbers  are  added, 
we  get  a  series  of  rectangles,2  as  shown  by  the  figure  : 


Square  Numbers. 

Oblong  Numbers. 

•  • 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

•  • 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

•  :  • 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

1  In  accordance  with  analogy  (p.  21.  n.  1),  the  origihal  meaning  of 
the  word  yviliptav  must  have  been  that  of  the  carpenter’s  square.  From 
that  are  derived  its  use  (1)  for  the  instrument ;  (2)  for  the  figure  added 
to  a  square  or  rectangle  to  form  another  square  or  rectangle.  In  Euclid 
(ii.  def.  2)  this  is  extended  to  all  parallelograms,  and  finally  the  yvupwv  is 
defined  by  Heron  (ed.  Heiberg,  vol.  iv.  def.  58)  thus:  k<l06\ov  Sb  yvdipuv 
iorlv  irav,  5  irpoo\aj3ov  onouv,  dpidpos  f/  oxyp.0.,  iroiei  rb  8\ov  bpoiov  £  7 rpooel- 
\rj<pev.  These,  however,  are  later  developments  ;  for  the  use  of  yvupuv 
in  the  sense  of  “  perpendicular  ”  by  Oinopides  of  Chios  shows  that,  in 
the  fifth  century  b.c.,  it  only  applied  to  rectangular  figures. 

2  Cf.  Milhaud,  Philosophes  giomMres,  pp.  115  sqq.  Aristotle  puts  the 

matter  thus  ( Phys .  r,  4.  203  a  13)  :  irepLTLdepbvuv  yap  tCiv  yvov pbveov  irepl 
rb  iv  Kal  or£  pbv  6.W0  del  ylyveodai  rb  elSos,  orb  8b  iv.  This  is  more 

clearly  stated  by  Ps.-Plut.  (Stob.  i.  p.  22,  16),  m  5^  rj?  p ovd.81  tu>v  ipetfs 
irepicnrGiv  irepiTidepAvuv  6  yiv bpevoi  del  rerpdytijvbs  eon '  tQv  8b  aprlwv  bpoluis 


104 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


It  is  clear,  then,  that  we  are  entitled  to  refer  the  study  of 
sums  of  series  to  Pythagoras  himself  ;  but  whether  he  went 
beyond  the  oblong,  and  studied  pyramidal  or  cubic  numbers, 
we  cannot  say.1 

andmetry  49-  It 1S  easy  to  see  how  this  way  of  representing  numbers 

harmonics,  would  suggest  problems  of  a  geometrical  nature.  The  dots 
which  stand  for  the  pebbles  are  regularly  called  “  boundary- 
stones  ”  (opoi,  termini,  “  terms  ”),  and  the  area  they  mark 
out  is  the  “  field  ”  (%&>/>«). 2  This  is  evidently  an  early 
way  of  speaking,  and  may  be  referred  to  Pythagoras  himself. 
Now  it  must  have  struck  him  that  “  fields  ”  could  be  com¬ 
pared  as  well  as  numbers,3  and  it  is  likely  that  he  knew  the 
rough  methods  of  doing  this  traditional  in  Egypt,  though 
certainly  these  would  fail  to  satisfy  him.  Once  more  the 
tradition  is  helpful  in  suggesting  the  direction  his  thoughts 
must  have  taken.  He  knew,  of  course,  the  use  of  the 
triangle  3,  4,  5  in  constructing  right  angles.  We  have  seen 
(p.  20)  that  it  was  familiar  in  the  East  from  a  very  early 
date,  and  that  Thales  introduced  it  to  the  Hellenes,  if  they 
did  not  know  it  already.  In  later  writers  it  is  actually 
called  the  “  Pythagorean  triangle.”  Now  the  Pythagorean 
proposition  par  excellence  is  just  that,  in  a  right-angled 


It^wni  htTh  ^  ’rd"TeS  &*°P°-bov<riv,  W  Si  ladKl5  oiSds. 

It  will  be  observed  that  Aristotle  here  uses  dSos  in  the  sense  of  “figure  ** 

not  tom  1.""  EPParently  mean  W"  ™  W*.  <•«.  starting  from  2, 

1  SpeusipPos  (cf.  p.  102,  n.  2)  speaks  of  four  as  the  first  pyramidal 
toU  Pythagoras.  “  fr°m  Phil°laos'  80  we  cannot  safely  ascribe  it 

2  Proclus  in  End.  I.  p.  136,  8,  fori  Si  rS  6,o„a  (sc.  Spos)  oUdov  rfi  « 

amS  ¥  rk  x„pla  ifdrpovv  Kal  rots  tipovs  aJrw 

ZT°r07\  ?■  6  8p°l  °f  a  Series  (^«).  then  of  a  proportion 

and  m  later  times  of  a  syllogism.  The  signs  and  •  seem  to  be 

derived  tom  this.  The  term  x^pa  is  often  used  by  the  later  Pytha 
goreans,  though  Attic  usage  required  xupL0V  for  a  rectangle.  The  ^aces 

xSr611  the  and  the  chess-board  were  also  called 

3  In  his  commentary  on  Euclid  i.  44,  Proclus  tells  us  on  the  authoritv 

PythaV "a”  mven w'Tnk  “2d  “e" Ii°' 

terms  in  Conic  Sections,  see  Milhaud,  Pkilosophes  gtomitos ^pp.Ti  sqq.^ 


SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION  105 

triangle,  the  square  on  the  hypotenuse  is  equal  to  the 
squares  on  the  other  two  sides,  and  the  so-called  Pythagorean 
triangle  is  the  application  of  its  converse  to  a  particular 
case.  The  very  name  “  hypotenuse  ”  (v-rrordvovaa)  affords 
strong  confirmation  of  the  intimate  connexion  between  the 
two  things.  It  means  literally  “  the  cord  stretching  over 
against,  and  this  is  surely  just  the  rope  of  the  “  arpe- 
donapt.  It  is,  therefore,  quite  possible  that  this  proposi¬ 
tion  was  really  discovered  by  Pythagoras,  though  we  cannot 
be  sure  of  that,  and  though  the  demonstration  of  it  which 
Euclid  gives  is  certainly  not  his.1 

50.  One  great  disappointment,  however,  awaited  him. 
It  follows  at  once  from  the  Pythagorean  proposition  that 
the  square  on  the  diagonal  of  a  square  is  double  the  square 
on  its  side,  and  this  ought  surely  to  be  capable  of  arithmetical 
expression.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  however,  there  is  no  square 
number  which  can  be  divided  into  two  equal  square  numbers, 
and  so  the  problem  cannot  be  solved.  In  this  sense,  it  may 
be  true  that  Pythagoras  discovered  the  incommensurability 
of  the  diagonal  and  the  side  of  a  square,  and  the  proof 
mentioned  by  Aristotle,  namely,  that,  if  they  were  commen¬ 
surable,  we  should  have  to  say  that  an  even  number  was 
equal  to  an  odd  number,  is  distinctly  Pythagorean  in 
character.2  However  that  may  be,  it  is  certain  that  Pytha¬ 
goras  did  not  care  to  pursue  the  subject  any  further.  He 
may  have  stumbled  on  the  fact  that  the  square  root  of  two 
is  a  surd,  but  we  know  that  it  was  left  for  Plato’s  friends, 
Theodoros  of  Kyrene  and  Theaitetos,  to  give  a  complete 
theory  of  irrationals.3  For  the  present,  the  incommensura¬ 
bility  of  the  diagonal  and  the  square  remained,  as  has  been 
said,  a  “  scandalous  exception.”  Our  tradition  says  that 

1  See  Proclus's  commentary  on  Euclid  i.  47. 

2  Arist.  An.  Pr,  A,  23.  41  a  26,  dirt  Aav/Xfierpos  r)  did/xerpos  Sia  rd 

ylyveadai  ra  irepiTTct.  (era  rots  aprlois  uiippiTpov  Teddcrr)S.  The  proofs  given 
at  the  end  of  Euclid’s  Tenth  Book  (vol.  iii.  pp.  408  sqq.,  Heiberg)  turn 
on  this  very  point.  They  are  not  Euclidean,  and  may  be  substantially 
Pythagorean.  Cf.  Milhaud,  Philosophes  geomitres,  p.  94. 

3  Plato,  Theaet.  147  d  3  sqq. 


Incom¬ 

mensur¬ 

ability. 


io6 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Hippasos  of  Metapontion  was  drowned  at  sea  for  revealing 
this  skeleton  in  the  cupboard.1 

Proporti°n  51.  These  last  considerations  show  that,  while  it  is 

harmony,  quite  safe  to  attribute  the  substance  of  the  early  books 
of  Euclid  to  the  early  Pythagoreans,  his  arithmetical 
method  is  certainly  not  theirs.  It  operates  with  lines 
instead  of  with  units,  and  it  can  therefore  be  applied 
to  relations  which  are  not  capable  of  being  expressed  as 
equations  between  rational  numbers.  That  is  doubtless 
why  arithmetic  is  not  treated  in  Euclid  till  after  plane 
geometry,  a  complete  inversion  of  the  original  order. 
For  the  same  reason,  the  doctrine  of  proportion  which  we 
find  in  Euclid  cannot  be  Pythagorean,  and  is  indeed 
the  work  of  Eudoxos.  Yet  it  is  clear  that  the  early 
Pythagoreans,  and  probably  Pythagoras  himself,  studied 
proportion  in  their  own  way,  and  that  the  three  "  medieties  ” 
(^0-0X7,7-69)  in  particular  go  back  to  the  founder,  especially 
as  the  most  complicated  of  them,  the  “  harmonic,”  stands 
in  close  relation  to  his  discovery  of  the  octave.  If  we  take 
the  harmonic  proportion  12  :  8  :  6, 2  we  find  that  12  :  6  is 
the  octave,  12  :  8  the  fifth,  and  8  :  6  the  fourth,  and  it  can 
hardly  be  doubted  that  Pythagoras  himself  discovered  these 
intervals.  The  stories  about  his  observing  the  harmonic 
intervals  in  a  smithy,  and  then  weighing  the  hammers  that 
produced  them,  or  suspending  weights  corresponding  to  those 
of  the  hammers  to  equal  strings,  are,  indeed,  impossible  and 
absurd ;  but  it  is  sheer  waste  of  time  to  rationalise  them.3 


,  *  IhlS}  VevrS1°^  °f  !he  tradition  ^  mentioned  in  Iamblichos,  V.  Pyth 
247,  and  looks  older  than  the  other,  which  we  shall  come  to  later  (§  148) 

Jna%wm?rcatld  HiPPaSOS  iS  the  •»/«*  of  Pythagoreanism 

and  the  tradrtions  about  him  are  full  of  instruction.  See  p.  94  n  2 

.  ^  h™lc  ^an  is  thus  defined  by  Archytas  (fr  2,  Diels)'  d  » 

a  ^ea6Jas\  A"  «*«»/*«'  ap^OVLKdv,  tSKKa  *«m  <7-0101  (sc.  ol  Spot)  ■  <3> 
o  ir  purr  os  tpos  vreptxu  rod  Sevrtpov  ainairov  pipet,  riodry  6  pioos  rov  rplrol 
vveptxeC'Tovrplroi ,  ptp€l.  Cf.  Plato,  Tim.  36  a  3,  ^  .  .  .  Tal^  ptpJrQv 

&<pu,v  avruv  vir^xovaav  Kal  vrrfpeXo^Vy.  The  harmonic  mean  of  12  and  6 
is,  therefore,  8  ;  for  8  =  12  -  J^=6  +  §. 

trn  *  s™lth’s  hammers  belong  to  the  region  of  Mdrchen.  and  it  is  not 
true  that  the  notes  would  correspond  to  the  weight  of  the  hammers,  or 


SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION  107 

For  our  purpose  their  absurdity  is  their  chief  merit.  They 
are  not  stories  which  any  Greek  mathematician  could  pos¬ 
sibly  have  invented,  but  popular  tales  bearing  witness  to 
the  existence  of  a  real  tradition  that  Pythagoras  was  the 
author  of  this  momentous  discovery.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  statement  that  he  discovered  the  “  consonances  ”  by 
measuring  the  lengths  corresponding  to  them  on  the  mono- 
chord  is  quite  credible  and  involves  no  error  in  acoustics. 

52.  It  was  this,  no  doubt,  that  led  Pythagoras  to  say  all  . 
things  were  numbers.  We  shall  see  that,  at  a  later  date,  the  numbers. 
Pythagoreans  identified  these  numbers  with  geometrical 
figures  ;  but  the  mere  fact  that  they  called  them  “  numbers,” 
taken  in  connexion  with  what  we  are  told  about  the  method 
of  Eurytos,  is  sufficient  to  show  this  was  not  the  original 
sense  of  the  doctrine.  It  is  enough  to  suppose  that  Pytha¬ 
goras  reasoned  somewhat  as  follows.  If  musical  sounds  can 
be  reduced  to  numbers,  why  not  everything  else  ?  There 
are  many  likenesses  to  number  in  things,  and  it  may  well 
be  that  a  lucky  experiment,  like  that  by  which  the  octave 
was  discovered,  will  reveal  their  true  numerical  nature. 

The  Neopythagorean  writers,  going  back  in  this  as  in  other 
matters  to  the  earliest  tradition  of  the  school,  indulge  their 
fancy  in  tracing  out  analogies  between  things  and  numbers 
in  endless  variety  ;  but  we  are  fortunately  dispensed  from 
following  them  in  these  vagaries.  Aristotle  tells  us  dis¬ 
tinctly  that  the  Pythagoreans  explained  only  a  few  things 
by  means  of  numbers,* 1  which  means  that  Pythagoras  him¬ 
self  left  no  developed  doctrine  on  the  subject,  while  the 
Pythagoreans  of  the  fifth  century  did  not  care  to  add  any¬ 
thing  of  the  sort  to  the  tradition.  Aristotle  does  imply, 
however,  that  according  to  them  the  “  right  time  ”  (/ caipos ) 

that,  if  they  did,  the  weights  hung  to  equal  strings  would  produce  the 
notes.  The  number  of'  vibrations  really  varies  with  the  square  root  of 
the  weights.  These  inaccuracies  were  pointed  out  by  Montucla  (Martin, 

Etudes  sur  le  Tim&e,  i.  p.  391). 

1  Arist.  Met.  M,  4.  I078b2i  (R.  P.  78).  The  Theologumena  AHthmetica 
is  full  of  such  fancies  (R.  P.  78  a).  Alexander,  in  Met.  p.  38,  8,  gives  a 
few  definitions  which  may  be  old  (R.  P.  78  c). 


108  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 

was  seven,  justice  was  four,  and  marriage  three.  These 
identifications,  with  a  few  others  like  them,  we  may  safely 
refer  to  Pythagoras  or  his  immediate  successors  ;  but  we 
must  not  attach  too  much  importance  to  them.  We 
must  start,  not  from  them,  but  from  any  statements  we 
can  find  that  present  points  of  contact  with  the  teaching  of 
the  Milesian  school.  These,  we  may  fairly  infer,  belong  to 
the  system  in  its  most  primitive  form. 

Cosmology.  53.  Now  the  most  striking  statement  of  this  kind  is 
one  of  Aristotle’s.  The  Pythagoreans  held,  he  tells  us, 
that  there  was  “  boundless  breath  ”  outside  the  heavens, 
and  that  it  was  inhaled  by  the  world.1  In  substance,  that 
is  the  doctrine  of  Anaximenes,  and  it  becomes  practically 
certain  that  it  was  taught  by  Pythagoras,  when  we  find 
that  Xenophanes  denied  it.2  We  may  infer  that  the  further 
development  of  the  idea  is  also  due  to  Pythagoras.  We 
are  told  that,  after  the  first  unit  had  been  formed — however 
that  may  have  taken  place — the  nearest  part  of  the  Bound¬ 
less  was  first  drawn  in  and  limited  ; 3  and  that  it  is  the 
Boundless  thus  inhaled  that  keeps  the  units  separate  from 
each  other.4  It  represents  the  interval  between  them. 
This  is  a  primitive  way  of  describing  discrete  quantity. 

1  Arist.  Phys.  A,  6.  213  b  22  (R.  P.  75). 

Diog.  ix.  19  (R.  P.  X03  c),  8\ov  S’  opav  kclI  fi\ov  d.KoSeiv,  p.ij  pUvroi 
avairvelv  (<prj<n  Seva ^av-qs).  So  in  [Plut.]  Strom,  fr.  4  we  read  that 
Xenophanes  held  pp  /card  ko.v  pjpos  TrepUycrdai  vwS  atpos  {tt)v  yfjv).  We 
may  therefore  ascribe  the  statement  to  Theophrastos  without  hesitation, 
in  spite  of  the  fact  that  Diogenes  is  here  drawing  on  an  inferior  (bio¬ 
graphical)  source,  as  shown  by  Diels  (Dox.  p.  168).  Cf.  also  Hipp.  Ref. 

1  2,  ttju  8£  yr\v  dweipov  ilycu  ral  p7]T t  U7T  ddpos  pd]T(  vttS  tov  oSpavov  TTCfHC - 

XMtScu  (Sero(f>dvr]s  \iyei). 

3  Arist.  Met.  N,  3.  1091  a  13  (R.  P.  74). 

4  Arist-  Phys-  A>  6-  2I3  b  23  (R.  P.  75  a).  The  words  Stoplfei  rds 
<pv<recs  have  caused  unnecessary  difficulty,  because  they  have  been  supposed 
to  attribute  the  function  of  limiting  to  the  dxeipor.  Aristotle  makes  it 
quite  clear  that  his  meaning  is  that  stated  in  the  text.  Cf.  especially 
the  words  Xupurp.od  tivos  rQr  {<t>e£ijs  Kal  Siopiveuis.  The  term  5 iuptap.hov, 

discrete,  is  the  proper  antithesis  to  awext s,  “  continuous."  In  his 
work  on  the  Pythagorean  philosophy,  Aristotle  used  instead  the  phrase 
Siopl^i  Tds  xupas  (Stob.  i.  p.  156,  8  ;  R.  P.  75),  which  is  also  quite  in¬ 
telligible  if  we  remember  what  the  Pythagoreans  meant  by  y d>pa  (cf  p 
104,  n.  2).  '  r' 


SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION  I0g 

In  these  passages  of  Aristotle,  the  “  breath  ”  is  also 
spoken  of  as  the  void  or  empty.  This  is  a  confusion  we 
have  already  met  with  in  Anaximenes,  and  it  need  not 
surprise  us  to  find  it  here.1  We  find  also  clear  traces  of  the 
other  confusion,  that  of  air  and  vapour.  It  seems  certain, 
in  fact,  that  Pythagoras  identified  the  Limit  with  fire,  and 
the  Boundless  with  darkness.  We  are  told  by  Aristotle 
that  Hippasos  made  Fire  the  first  principle,2  and  we  shall 
see  that  Parmenides,  in  discussing  the  opinions  of  his  con¬ 
temporaries,  attributes  to  them  the  view  that  there  were 
two  primary  “  forms,”  Fire  and  Night.3  We  also  find  that 
Light  and  Darkness  appear  in  the  Pythagorean  table  of 
opposites  under  the  heads  of  the  Limit  and  the  Unlimited 
respectively.4  The  identification  of  breath  with  darkness 
here  implied  is  a  strong  proof  of  the  primitive  character  of 
the  doctrine  ;  for  in  the  sixth  century  darkness  was  supposed 
to  be  a  sort  of  vapour,  while  in  the  fifth  its  true  nature  was 
known.  Plato,  with  his  usual  historical  tact,  makes  the 
Pythagorean  Timaios  describe  mist  and  darkness  as  con¬ 
densed  air.5  We  must  think,  then,  of  a  "  field  ”  of  darkness 
or  breath  marked  out  by  luminous  units,  an  imagination 
the  starry  heavens  would  naturally  suggest.  It  is  even 
probable  that  we  should  ascribe  to  Pythagoras  the  Milesian 
view  of  a  plurality  of  worlds,  though  it  would  not  have  been 
natural  for  him  to  speak  of  an  infinite  number.  We  know, 
at  least,  that  Petron,  one  of  the  early  Pythagoreans,  said 
there  were  just  a  hundred  and  eighty-three  worlds  arranged 
in  a  triangle.6 

1  Cf.  Arist.  Phys.  A,  6.  213  a  27,  0l  S'  toOpwrot  .  .  .  Qaalv  iv  $  «Xcos 
!if]Uv  iari,  tout’  elvai  Kevbv,  Sib  rb  irXppes  dbpos  Kevbv  elvai',  De  part.  an.  B, 
10.  656  b  15,  rb  7 bp  Kevbv  Ka.Xovp.cvov  dtpos  TrXpph  can  ;  De  an.  B,  10.  419 
b  34,  Sokci  yap  elva  1  Kevbv  6  drjp. 

2  Arist.  Met.  A,  3.  984  a  7  (R.  P.  56  c).  3  See  Chap.  IV.  §  91. 

4  Arist.  Met.  A,  5.  986  a  25  (R.  P.  66).  ®  Plato,  Tim.  58  d  2. 

6  This  is  quoted  by  Plutarch,  De  def.  orac.  422  b,  d,  from  Phanias  of 
Eresos,  who  gave  it  on  the  authority  of  Hippys  of  Rhegion.  If  we  may 
follow  Wilamowitz  ( Hermes ,  xix.  p.  444)  in  supposing  that  this  really 
means  Hippasos  of  Metapontion  (and  it  was  in  Rhegion  that  the  Pytha¬ 
goreans  took  refuge),  this  is  a  very  valuable  piece  of  evidence. 


no 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


The 

heavenly 

bodies. 


54.  Anaximander  had  regarded  the  heavenly  bodies  as 
wheels  of  “  air  ”  filled  with  fire  which  escapes  through 
certain  orifices  (§  21),  and  there  is  evidence  that  Pythagoras 
adopted  the  same  view.1  We  have  seen  that  Anaximander 
only  assumed  the  existence  of  three  such  wheels,  and  it  is 
extremely  probable  that  Pythagoras  identified  the  intervals 
between  these  with  the  three  musical  intervals  he  had  dis¬ 
covered,  the  fourth,  the  fifth,  and  the  octave.  That  would  be 
the  most  natural  beginning  for  the  doctrine  of  the  “  harmony 
of  the  spheres,”  though  the  expression  would  be  doubly 
misleading  if  applied  to  any  theory  we  can  properly 
ascribe  to  Pythagoras  himself.  The  word  dp/jbovla  does 
not  mean  harmony,  but  octave,  and  the  “  spheres  ”  are  an 
anachronism.  We  are  still  at  the  stage  when  wheels  or  rings 
were  considered  sufficient  to  account  for  the  heavenly 
bodies. 

The  distinction  between  the  diurnal  revolution  of  the 
heavens  from  east  to  west,  and  the  slower  revolutions  of  the 
sun,  moon,  and  planets  from  west  to  east,  may  also  be 
referred  to  the  early  days  of  the  school,  and  probably  to 
Pythagoras  himself.2  It  obviously  involves  a  complete 
break  with  the  theory  of  a  vortex,  and  suggests  that  the 
heavens  are  spherical.  That,  however,  was  the  only  way 
to  get  out  of  the  difficulties  of  Anaximander’s  system.  If 
it  is  to  be  taken  seriously,  we  must  suppose  that  the  motions 
of  the  sun,  moon,  and  planets  are  composite.  On  the  one 

1  This  will  be  found  in  Chap.  IV.  §  93. 

2  I  formerly  doubted  this  on  the  ground  that  Plato  appeared  to 
represent  the  theory  as  a  novelty  in  Laws,  822  a,  but  Professor  Taylor 
has  convinced  me  that  I  was  wrong.  What  Plato  is  denying  in  that 
passage  is  this  very  doctrine,  and  the  theory  he  is  commending  must  be 
that  of  a  simple  motion  in  a  new  form.  This  was  a  discovery  of  Plato’s 
old  age  ;  in  the  Myth  of  Er  in  the  Republic  and  in  the  Timaeus  we  still 
have  the  Pythagorean  theory  of  a  composite  motion.  It  is  true  that  no 
writer  earlier  than  Theon  of  Smyrna  (p.  150,  12)  expressly  ascribes  this 
theory  to  Pythagoras,  but  Aetios  (ii.  16,  2)  says  that  Alkmaion,  a  younger 
contemporary  of  Pythagoras,  agreed  with  the  mathematicians  in  holding 
that  the  planets  had  an  opposite  motion  to  the  fixed  stars.  His  other 
astronomical  views  were  so  crude  (§  96)  that  he  can  hardly  have  invented 
this. 


Ill 


SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION 

hand,  they  have  their  own  revolutions  with  varying  angular 
velocities  from  west  to  east,  but  they  are  also  carried  along 
by  the  diurnal  revolution  from  east  to  west.  Apparently 
this  was  expressed  by  saying  that  the  motions  of  the 
planetary  orbits,  which  are  oblique  to  the  celestial  equator, 
are  mastered  (lepaTeircu)  by  the  diurnal  revolution.  The 
Ionians,  down  to  the  time  of  Demokritos,  never  accepted 
this  view.  They  clung  to  the  theory  of  the  vortex,  which 
made  it  necessary  to  hold  that  all  the  heavenly  bodies 
revolved  in  the  same  direction,  so  that  those  which,  on  the 
Pythagorean  system,  have  the  greatest  angular  velocity 
have  the  least  on  theirs.  On  the  Pythagorean  view,  Saturn, 
for  instance,  takes  about  thirty  years  to  complete  its  re¬ 
volution  ;  on  the  Ionian  view  it  is  “  left  behind  ”  far  less 
than  any  other  planet,  that  is,  it  more  nearly  keeps  pace 
with  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac.1 

For  reasons  which  will  appear  later,  we  may  confi¬ 
dently  attribute  to  Pythagoras  himself  the  discovery  of 
the  sphericity  of  the  earth,  which  the  Ionians,  even 
Anaxagoras  and  Demokritos,  refused  to  accept.  It  is 
probable,  however,  that  he  still  adhered  to  the  geocentric 
system,  and  that  the  discovery  that  the  earth  was  a  planet 
belongs  to  a  later  generation  (§  150). 

The  account  just  given  of  the  views  of  Pythagoras  is, 
no  doubt,  conjectural  and  incomplete.  We  have  simply 
assigned  to  him  those  portions  of  the  Pythagorean  system 
which  appear  to  be  the  oldest,  and  it  has  not  even  been 
possible  at  this  stage  to  cite  fully  the  evidence  on  which 
our  discussion  is  based.  It  will  only  appear  in  its  true  light 
when  we  have  examined  the  second  part  of  the  poem  of 
Parmenides  and  the  system  of  the  later  Pythagoreans.2 

1  See  the  account  of  the  theory  of  Demokritos  in  Lucretius,  v.  621  sqq., 
and  cf.  above,  p.  70.  The  technical  term  is  MXeirpi s.  Strictly  speaking, 
the  Ionian  view  is  only  another  way  of  describing  the  same  phenomena, 
but  it  does  not  lend  itself  so  easily  to  a  consistent  theory  of  the  real 
planetary  motions. 

2  See  Chap.  IV.  §§  92-93,  and  Chap.  VII.  §§  150-152. 


112 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Life. 


It  is  clear  at  any  rate  that  the  great  contribution  of  Pytha¬ 
goras  to  science  was  his  discovery  that  the  concordant 
intervals  could  be  expressed  by  simple  numerical  ratios. 
In  principle,  at  least,  that  suggests  an  entirely  new  view  of 
the  relation  between  the  traditional  “  opposites.”  If  a 
perfect  attunement  (appbovLa)  of  the  high  and  the  low  can 
be  attained  by  observing  these  ratios,  it  is  clear  that  other 
opposites  may  be  similarly  harmonised.  The  hot  and  the 
cold,  the  wet  and  the  dry,  may  be  united  in  a  just  blend 
(icpacns),  an  idea  to  which  our  word  “  temperature  ”  still 
bears  witness.1  The  medical  doctrine  of  the  “  tempera¬ 
ments  ”  is  derived  from  the  same  source.  Moreover,  the 
famous  doctrine  of  the  Mean  is  only  an  application  of 
the  same  idea  to  the  problem  of  conduct.2  It  is  not  too 
much  to  say  that  Greek  philosophy  was  henceforward  to  be 
dominated  by  the  notion  of  the  perfectly  tuned  string. 


II.  Xenophanes  of  Kolophon 

55.  We  have  seen  how  Pythagoras  gave  a  deeper 
meaning  to  the  religious  movement  of  his  time  ;  we  have 
now  to  consider  a  very  different  manifestation  of  the  reaction 
against  the  view  of  the  gods  which  the  poets  had  made 
familiar.  Xenophanes  denied  the  anthropomorphic  gods 
altogether,  but  was  quite  unaffected  by  the  revival  of 
religion  going  on  all  round  him.  We  still  have  a  fragment 
of  an  elegy  in  which  he  ridiculed  Pythagoras  and  the  doctrine 
of  transmigration.3  We  are  also  told  that  he  opposed  the 
views  of  Thales  and  Pythagoras,  and  attacked  Epimenides, 

It  is  impossible  not  to  be  struck  by  the  resemblance  between  this 
doctrine  and  Dalton’s  theory  of  chemical  combination.  A  formula  like 
HaO  is  a  beautiful  example  of  a  ^ea6rVs.  The  diagrams  of  modern  stereo¬ 
chemistry  have  also  a  curiously  Pythagorean  appearance.  We  sometimes 
feel  tempted  to  say  that  Pythagoras  had  really  hit  upon  the  secret  of 
the  world  when  he  said,  “  Things  are  numbers.” 

2  Aristotle  derived  his  doctrine  of  the  Mean  from  Plato’s  Philebus, 
where  it  is  clearly  expounded  as  a  Pythagorean  doctrine. 

3  See  fr.  7,  below. 


SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION 


ii  3 

which  is  likely  enough,  though  no  fragments  of  the  kind 
have  come  down  to  us.1 

It  is  not  easy  to  determine  the  date  of  Xenophanes. 
Timaios,  whose  testimony  in  such  matters  carries  weight, 
said  he  was  a  contemporary  of  Hieron  and  Epicharmos, 
and  he  certainly  seems  to  have  played  a  part  in  the  anec- 
dotical  romance  of  Hieron’s  court  which  amused  the  Greeks 
of  the  fourth  century  as  that  of  Croesus  and  the  Seven  Wise 
Men  amused  those  of  the  fifth.2  As  Hieron  reigned  from 
478  to  467  b.c.,  that  would  make  it  impossible  to  date  the 
birth  of  Xenophanes  earlier  than  570  b.c.,  even  if  we  suppose 
him  to  have  lived  till  the  age  of  a  hundred.  On  the  other 
hand,  Clement  says  that  Apollodoros  gave  01.  XL.  (620- 
616  b.c  )  as  the  date  of  his  birth,  and  adds  that  his  days 
were  prolonged  till  the  time  of  Dareios  and  Cyrus.3  Again, 
Diogenes,  whose  information  on  such  matters  mostly  comes 
from  Apollodoros,  says  he  flourished  in  01.  LX.  (540-537  b.c.), 
and  Diels  holds  that  Apollodoros  really  said  so.4  However 
that  may  be,  it  is  evident  that  the  date  540  b.c.  is  based 
on  the  assumption  that  he  went  to  Elea  in  the  year  of  its 
foundation,  and  is,  therefore,  a  mere  combination,  which 
need  not  be  taken  into  account.5 

1  Diog.  ix.  18  (R.  P.  97).  We  know  that  Xenophanes  referred  to  the 
prediction  of  an  eclipse  by  Thales  (Chap.  I.  p.  42,  n.  1). 

2  Timaios  ap.  Clem.  Strom,  i.  p.  353  (R.  P.  95).  There  is  only  one 
anecdote  which  actually  represents  Xenophanes  in  conversation  with 
Hieron  (Plut.  Reg.  apophth.  175  e),  but  it  is  natural  to  understand  Arist. 
Met.  r,  5.  1010  a  4  as  an  allusion  to  a  remark  made  by  Epicharmos  to 
him.  Aristotle's  anecdotes  about  Xenophanes  probably  come  from  the 
romance  of  which  Xenophon's  Hieron  is  also  an  echo. 

3  Clem,  loc  cit.  The  mention  of  Cyrus  is  confirmed  by  Hipp.  Ref.  i. 
94.  Diels  thinks  Dareios  was  mentioned  first  for  metrical  reasons  ;  but 
no  one  has  satisfactorily  explained  why  Cyrus  should  be  mentioned  at 
all,  unless  the  early  date  was  intended.  On  the  whole  subject,  see  Jacoby, 
pp.  204  sqq.,  who  is  certainly  wrong  in  supposing  that  &xp>-  tQv  Aapdov  ko.1 
Kupov  v  can  mean  “  during  the  times  of  Dareios  and  Cyrus.” 

4  Rh.  Mus.  xxxi.  p.  22.  He  adopts  the  suggestion  of  Ritter  to  read 
irevT'pKoa'rTjv  for  TetT(TcLpciK6(TTT)v  in  Clem.  loc.  cit.  (N  for  MJ-,  But  Apollodoros 
gave  Athenian  archons,  not  Olympiads. 

8  As  Elea  was  founded  by  the  Phokaians  six  years  after  they  left 
Phokaia  (Herod,  i.  164  sqq.)  its  date  is  just  540-39  b.c.  Cf.  the  way  in 
which  Apollodoros  dated  Empedokles  by  the  era  of  Thourioi  (§  98). 

8 


H4  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 

What  we  do  know  for  certain  is  that  Xenophanes  had 
led  a  wandering  life  from  the  age  of  twenty-five,  and  that 
he  was  still  alive  and  making  poetry  at  the  age  of  ninety-two. 
He  says  himself  (fr.  8  =  24  Karst. ;  R.  P.  97)  : 

There  are  by  this  time  threescore  years  and  seven  that  have 
tossed  my  careworn  soul 1  up  and  down  the  land  of  Hellas  ;  and 
there  were  then  five-and-twenty  years  from  my  birth,  if  I  can 
say  aught  truly  about  these  matters. 

It  is  tempting  to  suppose  that  in  this  passage  Xenophanes 
was  referring  to  the  conquest  of  Ionia  by  Harpagos,  and 
that  he  is,  in  fact,  answering  the  question  asked  in  another 
poem 2  (fr.  22  =  17  Karst. ;  R.  P.  95  a)  : 

This  is  the  sort  of  thing  we  should  say  by  the  fireside  in  the 
winter-time,  as  we  lie  on  soft  couches  after  a  good  meal,  drinking 
sweet  wine  and  crunching  chickpeas  ;  ‘  Of  what  country  are  you, 
and  how  old  are  you,  good  sir  ?  And  how  old  were  you  when 
the  Mede  appeared  ?  ” 

In  that  case,  his  birth  would  fall  in  565  b.c.,  and  his 
connexion  with  Hieron  would  be  quite  credible.  We  note 
also  that  he  referred  to  Pythagoras  in  the  past  tense,  and 
is  in  turn  so  referred  to  by  Herakleitos.3 

Theophrastos  said  that  Xenophanes  had  “-heard” 
Anaximander,4  and  we  shall  see  that  he  was  acquainted 
with  the  Ionian  cosmology.  When  driven  from  his  native 
city>  he  lived  in  Sicily,  chiefly,  we  are  told,  at  Zankle  and 
Katana.5  Like  Archilochos  before  him,  he  unburdened  his 
soul  in  elegies  and  satires,  which  he  recited  at  the  banquets 
where,  we  may  suppose,  the  refugees  tried  to  keep  up  the 

1  Bergk  (Litter atm gesch.  ii.  p.  418,  *.  23)  took  <ppovrk  here  to  mean 
the  literary  work  of  Xenophanes,  but  it  is  surely  an  anachronism  to 
suppose  that  at  this  date  it  could  be  used  like  the  Latin  cura. 

2  It  was  certainly  another  poem  ;  for  it  is  in  hexameters,  while  the 
preceding  fragment  is  in  elegiacs. 

3  Xenophanes,  fr.  7;  Herakleitos,  frs.  16,  17. 

4  Diog.  ix.  21  (R.  P.  96  a). 

6  Diog.  ix.  18  (R.  P.  96).  The  use  of  the  old  name  Zankle,  instead  of 
the  later  Messene,  points  to  an  early  source  for  this  statement — probably 
the  elegies  of  Xenophanes  himself. 


SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION 


ii5 

usages  of  good  Ionian  society.  The  statement  that  he  was 
a  rhapsode  has  no  foundation  at  all.1  The  singer  of  elegies 
was  no  professional  like  the  rhapsode,  but  the  social  equal 
of  his  listeners.  In  his  ninety-second  year  he  was  still,  we 
have  seen,  leading  a  wandering  life,  which  is  hardly  consist¬ 
ent  with  the  statement  that  he  settled  at  Elea  and  founded 
a  school  there,  especially  if  we  are  to  think  of  him  as 
spending  his  last  days  at  Hieron’s  court.2  It  is  very 
remarkable  that  no  ancient  writer  expressly  says  he  ever 
was  at  Elea,3  and  all  the  evidence  we  have  seems  inconsistent 
with  his  having  settled  there  at  all. 

56.  According  to  Diogenes,  Xenophanes  wrote  in  hexa¬ 
meters  and  also  composed  elegies  and  iambics  against 
Homer  and  Hesiod.4  No  good  authority  says  anything 
of  his  having  written  a  philosophical  poem.5  Simplicius 
tells  us  he  had  never  met  with  the  verses  about  the  earth 

1  Diog.  ix.  18  (R.  P.  97)  says  cuVAs  ippa^Se t  ra  eavrou,  which  is  a  very 
different  thing.  Nothing  is  said  anywhere  of  his  reciting  Homer.  Gom- 
perz  s  imaginative  picture  ( Greek  Thinkers,  vol.  i.  p.  155)  has  no  further 
support  than  this  single  word. 

2  Diog.  ix.  20  (R.  P.  97)  says  he  wrote  a  poem  in  2000  hexameters 
on  the  colonisation  of  Elea.  Even  if  true,  this  would  not  prove  he 
lived  there  ;  for  the  foundation  of  Elea  would  be  a  subject  of  interest 
to  all  the  Ionian  Emigres.  Moreover,  the  statement  is  very  suspicious. 
The  stichometric  notices  of  the  Seven  Wise  Men,  Epimenides,  etc.,  in 
Diogenes  come  from  the  forger  Lobon,  and  this  seems  to  be  from  the 
same  source. 

3  The  only  passage  which  brings  him  into  connexion  with  Elea  is 
Aristotle’s  anecdote  about  the  answer  he  gave  the  Eleates  when  they 
asked  him  whether  they  should  sacrifice  to  Leukothea.  “  If  you  think 
her  a  goddess,”  he  said,  “  do  not  lament  her ;  if  you  do  not,  do  not 
sacrifice  to  her  ”  ( Rhet .  B,  26.  1400  b  5  ;  R.  P.  98  a).  Even  this  does 
not  necessarily  imply  that  he  settled  at  Elea,  and  in  any  case  such 
anecdotes  are  really  anonymous.  Plutarch  tells  the  story  more  than 
once,  but  he  makes  it  a  remark  of  Xenophanes  to  the  Egyptians  (Diels, 
Vors.  11  a  13),  while  others  tell  it  of  Herakleitos. 

4  Diog.  ix.  18  (R.  P.  97).  The  word  irnKbirruv  is  a  reminiscence  of 
Timon,  fr.  60  (Diels),  'Seirtxp&vps  uirarurpos  'Op.rjpairi.Tris  im/dirTT/s. 

5  The  oldest  reference  to  a  poem  Tlepl  (pvaews  is  in  the  Geneva  scholium 
on  II.  xxi.  196  (quoting  fr.  30),  and  this  goes  back  to  Krates  of  Mallos. 
We  must  remember  that  such  titles  are  of  later  date,  and  Xenophanes 
had  been  given  a  place  among  philosophers  long  before  the  time  of  Krates. 
All  we  can  say,  therefore,  is  that  the  Pergamene  librarians  gave  the  title 
Uepl  <f>v<reus  to  some  poem  of  Xenophanes. 


Poems. 


The 

fragments. 


116  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 

stretching  infinitely  downwards  (fr.  28), 1  and  this  means  that 
the  Academy  possessed  no  copy  of  such  a  poem,  which  would 
be  very  strange  if  it  had  ever  existed.  Simplicius  was  able 
to  find  the  complete  works  of  much  smaller  men.  Nor  does 
internal  evidence  lend  any  support  to  the  view  that  Xeno¬ 
phanes  wrote  a  philosophical  poem.  Diels  refers  about 
twenty-eight  fines  to  it,  but  they  would  all  come  in  quite 
as  naturally  in  his  attacks  on  Homer  and  Hesiod,  as  I  have 
endeavoured  to  show.  It  is  also  significant  that  a  number 
of  them  are  derived  from  commentators  on  Homer.2  It 
is  more  probable,  then,  that  Xenophanes  expressed  such 
scientific  opinions  as  he  had  incidentally  in  his  satires.  That 
would  be  in  the  manner  of  the  time,  as  we  can  see  from  the 
remains  of  Epicharmos. 

The  satires  are  called  Silloi  by  late  writers,  and  this 
name  may  go  back  to  Xenophanes  himself.  It  may,  how¬ 
ever,  originate  in  the  fact  that  Timon  of  Phleious,  the 
‘  siHographer  ”  (c.  259  b.c.),  put  much  of  his  satire  upon 
philosophers  into  the  mouth  of  Xenophanes.  Only  one 
iambic  fine  has  been  preserved,  and  that  is  immediately 
followed  by  a  hexameter  (fr.  14).  This  suggests  that  Xeno¬ 
phanes  inserted  iambic  fines  among  his  hexameters  in  the 
manner  of  the  Margites. 

57-  I  give  the  fragments  according  to  the  text  and 
arrangement  of  Diels. 


Elegies 

(!) 

Now  is  the  floor  clean,  and  the  hands  and  cups  of  all ;  one 
sets  twisted  garlands  on  our  heads,  another  hands  us  fragrant 
ointment  on  a  salver.  The  mixing  bowl  stands  ready,  full  of 

fragUSsPlf2fanTS^-  7  (V'  97  b)‘  is  true  that  two  of. our 
Alexander  Probawi  fh  pr6SerVed  ^  Simplicius,  but  he  got  them  from 

<30.^£Th"*£c  scU3a,C°me  'r0m  A,U^'  *»° 


SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION  117 

gladness,  and  there  is  more  wine  at  hand  that  promises  never  to 
leave  us  in  the  lurch,  soft  and  smelling  of  flowers  in  the  jars.  In 
the  midst  the  frankincense  sends  up  its  holy  scent,  and  there  is 
cold  water,  sweet  and  clean.  Brown  loaves  are  set  before  us 
and  a  lordly  table  laden  with  cheese  and  rich  honey.  The  altar 
in  the  midst  is  clustered  round  with  flowers  ;  song  and  revel  fill 
the  halls. 

But  first  it  is  meet  that  men  should  hymn  the  god  with  joy, 
with  holy  tales  and  pure  words  ;  then  after  libation  and  prayer 
made  that  we  may  have  strength  to  do  right — for  that  is  in  truth 
the  first  thing  to  do — no  sin  is  it  to  drink  as  much  as  a  man  can 
take  and  get  home  without  an  attendant,  so  he  be  not  stricken 
in  years.  And  of  all  men  is  he  to  be  praised  who  after  drinking 
gives  goodly  proof  of  himself  in  the  trial  of  skill,1  as  memory  and 
strength  will  serve  him.  Let  him  not  sing  of  Titans  and  Giants 
those  fictions  of  the  men  of  old — nor  of  turbulent  civil  broils 
in  which  is  no  good  thing  at  all ;  but  to  give  heedful  reverence 
to  the  gods  is  ever  good. 


(2) 

What  if  a  man  win  victory  in  swiftness  of  foot,  or  in  the 
pentathlon,  at  Olympia,  where  is  the  precinct  of  Zeus  by  Pisa’s 
springs,  or  in  wrestling, — what  if  by  cruel  boxing  or  that  fearful 
sport  men  call  pankration  he  become  more  glorious  in  the  citizens’ 
eyes,  and  win  a  place  of  honour  in  the  sight  of  all  at  the  games, 
his  food  at  the  public  cost  from  the  State,  and  a  gift  to  be  an  heir¬ 
loom  for  him, — what  if  he  conquer  in  the  chariot-race, — he  will 
not  deserve  all  this  for  his  portion  so  much  as  I  do.  Far  better 
is  our  art  than  the  strength  of  men  and  of  horses  !  These  are 
but  thoughtless  judgements,  nor  is  it  fitting  to  set  strength  before 
goodly  art.2  Even  if  there  arise  a  mighty  boxer  among  a  people, 
or  one  great  in  the  pentathlon  or  at  wrestling,  or  one  excelling  in 
swiftness  of  foot — and  that  stands  in  honour  before  all  tasks  of 
men  at  the  games — the  city  would  be  none  the  better  governed 
for  that.  It  is  but  little  joy  a  city  gets  of  it  if  a  man  conquer 
at  the  games  by  Pisa’s  banks ;  it  is  not  this  that  makes  fat  the 
store-houses  of  a  city. 

1  So  I  understand  apup’  dperijs.  The  r6voi  is  "  strength  of  lungs.” 
The  next  verses  are  directed  against  Hesiod  and  Alkaios  (Diels). 

2  At  this  date  "  art  ”  is  the  natural  translation  of  ao<pl-p  in  such  a  writer 
as  Xenophanes. 


n8 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


(3) 

They  learnt  dainty  and  unprofitable  ways  from  the  Lydians, 
so  long  as  they  were  free  from  hateful  tyranny ;  they  went  to  the 
market-place  with  cloaks  of  purple  dye,  not  less  than  a  thousand 
of  them  all  told,  vainglorious  and  proud  of  their  comely  tresses, 
reeking  with  fragrance  from  cunning  salves. 

(4) 

Nor  would  a  man  mix  wine  in  a  cup  by  pouring  out  the  wine 
first,  but  water  first  and  wine  on  the  top  of  it. 

(5) 

Thou  didst  send  the  thigh-bone  of  a  kid  and  get  for  it  the  fat 
leg  of  a  fatted  bull,  a  worthy  guerdon  for  a  man  to  get,  whose 
glory  is  to  reach  every  part  of  Hellas  and  never  to  pass  away,  so 
long  as  Greek  songs  last.1 


(7) 

And  now  I  will  turn  to  another  tale  and  point  the  way. 

Once  they  say  that  he  (Pythagoras)  was  passing  by  when  a  dog 
was  being  beaten  and  spoke  this  word  :  "  Stop  !  don’t  beat  it  ! 
For  it  is  the  soul  of  a  friend  that  I  recognised  when  I  heard  its 
voice.”  2 

<.  W 

See  p.  1 14. 


(9) 


Much  weaker  than  an  aged  man. 


Satires 

(10) 

Since  all  at  first  have  learnt  according  to  Homer. 


1  Diels  suggests  that  this  is  an  attack  on  a  poet  like  Simonides,  whose 
greed  was  proverbial. 

2  The  name  ot  Pythagoras  does  not  occur  in  the  lines  that  have  been 
preserved  ;  but  the  source  of  Diogenes  viii.  36  must  have  had  the  complete 

ele^efore  111111 :  for  he  said  the  verses  occurred  iv  tXeyel?,  dpvv  Nuv 
avr  d\\ov  ihrei/M  \6yov  kt\, 


SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION 


119 


(11) 

Homer  and  Hesiod  have  ascribed  to  the  gods  all  things 
that  are  a  shame  and  a  disgrace  among  mortals,  stealings  and 
adulteries  and  deceivings  of  one  another.  R.  P.  99. 

(12) 

Since  they  have  uttered  many  lawless  deeds  of  the  gods, 
stealings  and  adulteries  and  deceivings  of  one  another.  R.  P.  ib. 


(14) 

But  mortals  deem  that  the  gods  are  begotten  as  they  are, 
and  have  clothes  like  theirs,  and  voice  and  form.  R.  P.  100. 

(15) 

Yes,  and  if  oxen  and  horses  or  lions  had  hands,  and  could 
paint  with  their  hands,  and  produce  works  of  art  as  men  do, 
horses  would  paint  the  forms  of  the  gods  like  horses,  and  oxen 
like  oxen,  and  make  their  bodies  in  the  image  of  their  several 
kinds.  R.  P.  ib. 

(16) 

The  Ethiopians  make  their  gods  black  and  snub-nosed  ;  the 
Thracians  say  theirs  have  blue  eyes  and  red  hair.  R.  P.  100  b. 

(18) 

The  gods  have  not  revealed  all  things  to  men  from  the  begin¬ 
ning,  but  by  seeking  they  find  in  time  what  is  better.  R.  P. 
104  b. 

(23) 

One  god,  the  greatest  among  gods  and  men,  neither  in  form 
like  unto  mortals  nor  in  thought.  .  .  .  R.  P.  100. 

(24) 

He  sees  all  over,  thinks  all  over,  and  hears  all  over.  R.  P. 
102. 

(25) 

But  without  toil  he  swayeth  all  things  by  the  thought  of  his 
mind.  R.  P.  108  b. 


i 


120 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


(26) 

And  he  abideth  ever  in  the  selfsame  place,  moving  not  at 
all ;  nor  doth  it  befit  him  to  go  about  now  hither  now  thither. 
R.  P.  no  a. 

(27) 

All  things  come  from  the  earth,  and  in  earth  all  things  end. 
R.  P.  103  a. 

(28) 

This  limit  of  the  earth  above  is  seen  at  our  feet  in  contact  with 
the  air  ; 1  below  it  reaches  down  without  a  limit.  R.  P.  103. 


(29) 

All  things  are  earth  and  water  that  come  into  being  and  grow. 
R.  P.  103. 

(30) 

The  sea  is  the  source  of  water  and  the  source  of  wind  ;  for 
neither  in  the  clouds  (would  there  be  any  blasts  of  wind  blowing 
forth)  from  within  without  the  mighty  sea,  nor  rivers’  streams 
nor  rain-water  from  the  sky.  The  mighty  sea  is  father  of  clouds 
and  of  winds  and  of  rivers.2  R.  P.  103. 

(31) 

The  sun  swinging  over  3  the  earth  and  warming  it.  . 

(32) 

She  that  they  call  Iris  is  a  cloud  likewise,  purple,  scarlet  and 
green  to  behold.  R.  P.  103. 


(33) 

For  we  all  are  born  of  earth  and  water.  R.  P.  ib. 


1  Reading  17^51  for  Kal  pel  with  Diels. 

This  fragment  has  been  recovered  from  the  Geneva  scholia  on  Homer 
vsee  Arch.  iv.  p.  652).  The  words  in  brackets  are  added  by  Diels. 

“  The  word  is  s-  This  is  quoted  from  the  Allegories  as  an 

explanation  of  the  name  Hyperion,  and  doubtless  Xenophanes  so  meant  it. 


SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION 


121 


(34) 

There  never  was  nor  will  be  a  man  who  has  certain  knowledge 
about  the  gods  and  about  all  the  things  I  speak  of.  Even  if  he 
should  chance  to  say  the  complete  truth,  yet  he  himself  knows 
not  that  it  is  so.  But  all  may  have  their  fancy.1  R.  P.  104. 

(35) 

Let  these  be  taken  as  fancies  2  something  like  the  truth. 
R.  P.  104  a. 


(36) 

All  of  them  3  that  are  visible  for  mortals  to  behold. 


(37) 


And  in  some  caves  water  drips.  .  .  . 


(38) 

If  god  had  not  made  brown  honey,  men  would  think  figs  far 
sweeter  than  they  do. 

58.  Most  of  these  fragments  are  not  in  any  way  philo-  The 
sophical,  and  those  that  appear  to  be  so  are  easily  accounted  bodIS!ly 
for  otherwise.  The  intention  of  one  of  them  (fr.  32)  is  clear. 

"  Iris  too  ”  is  a  cloud,  and  we  may  infer  that  the  same  thing 
had  been  said  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  ;  for  the  doxo- 
graphers  tell  us  that  these  were  all  explained  as  “  clouds 
ignited  by  motion.”  4  To  the  same  context  clearly  belongs 
the  explanation  of  the  St.  Elmo’s  fire  which  Aetios  has 
preserved.  “  The  things  like  stars  that  appear  on  ships,”  we 

1  It  is  more  natural  to  take  xacn  as  masculine  than  as  neuter,  and 
ixi  xacri  can  mean  “  in  the  power  of  all.” 

2  Reading  SeSotjdadco  with  Wilamowitz. 

3  As  Diels  suggests,  this  probably  refers  to  the  stars,  which  Xenophanes 
held  to  be  clouds> 

4  Cf.  Diels  ad  loc.  ( P .  Ph.  Fr.  p.  44),  “  lit  Sol  et  cetera  astra,  quae 
cum  in  nebulas  evanescerent,  deorum  simul  opinio  casura  erat.” 


122 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


are  told,  “which  some  call  the  Dioskouroi,  are  little  clouds 
made  luminous  by  motion.”  1  In  the  doxographers  the 
same  explanation  is  repeated  with  trifling  variations 
under  the  head  of  moon,  stars,  comets,  lightning, 
shooting  stars,  and  so  forth,  which  gives  the  appearance 
of  a  systematic  cosmology.2  But  the  system  is  due  to 
the  arrangement  of  the  work  of  Theophrastos,  and  not 
to  Xenophanes ;  for  it  is  obvious  that  a  very  few 
additional  hexameters  would  amply  account  for  the  whole 
doxography. 

What  we  hear  of  the  sun  presents  some  difficulties. 
We  are  told  that  it  is  an  ignited  cloud ;  but  this  is  not 
very  consistent  with  the  statement  that  the  evaporation 
of  the  sea  from  which  clouds  arise  is  due  to  the  sun’s 
heat.  Theophrastos  stated  that  the  sun,  according  to 
Xenophanes,  was  a  collection  of  sparks  from  the  moist 
exhalation ;  but  even  this  leaves  the  exhalation  itself 
unexplained.3  That,  however,  matters  little,  if  the  chief 
aim  of  Xenophanes  was  to  discredit  the  anthropo¬ 
morphic  gods,  rather  than  to  give  a  scientific  theory  of 
the  heavenly  bodies.  The  important  thing  is  that  Helios 
too  is  a  temporary  phenomenon.  The  sun  does  not  go 
round  the  earth,  as  Anaximander  taught,  but  straight 
on,  and  the  appearance  of  a  circular  path  is  solely  due  to 
its  increasing  distance.  So  it  is  not  the  same  sun  that 
rises  next  morning,  but  a  new  one  altogether ;  while 
eclipses  occur  because  the  sun  “tumbles  into  a  hole” 
when  it  comes  to  certain  uninhabited  regions  of  the  earth. 
An  eclipse  may  last  a  month.  Besides  that,  there  are 


1  Aet.  11.  18,  l  (Dox.  p.  347),  Zevo<t>dvT,s  robs  4wl  ruv  ttXoIuv  <f>cuvou4vovs 
,  aaripas,  oOs  Kal  AioaKobpovs  KaXoval  rives,  ve&Xia.  ehcu  Kara  t>  ttoiclv 

Kivr)(TLv  TTapaX&jjLTrovTa. 

2  The  passages  from  Aetios  are  collected  in  Diels,  Vors.  1 1  a  38  sqq. 

,  et;  ”  «2°’  3  ^D0X'  P'  348),  Eevoip&vris  4k  ve<f>0>v  TeTrvpwp.4vuv  elvcu 

ThV  J.1"-  .  0e^pa<rro!  iv  T0“  *vnKott  ytypcupev  4k  wvpiSiuv  p4v  rwv 

r t  TVS  84  rbv  rjXtov 

Ilrhr?  ^  °m  th6Se  WOrds  that  Theophrastos  pointed  out  the  con¬ 
tradiction,  as  his  manner  was. 


SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION  123 

many  suns  and  moons,  one  of  each  for  every  region  of  the 
earth.1 

The  vigorous  expression  “  tumbling  into  a  hole  ”  2  seems 
clearly  to  come  from  the  verses  of  Xenophanes  himself, 
and  there  are  others  of  a  similar  kind,  which  we  must 
suppose  were  quoted  by  Theophrastos.  The  stars  go  out 
in  the  daytime,  but  glow  again  at  night  “  like  charcoal 
embers.  3  The  sun  is  of  some  use  in  producing  the  world 
and  the  living  creatures  in  it,  but  the  moon  "  does  no  work 
in  the  boat.”  4  Such  expressions  can  only  be  meant  to 
make  the  heavenly  bodies  appear  ridiculous,  and  it  will 
therefore  be  well  to  ask  whether  the  other  supposed  cosmo¬ 
logical  fragments  can  be  interpreted  on  the  same  principle. 

59.  In  fr.  29  Xenophanes  says  that  “  all  things  are  earth  Earth  and 
and  water,”  and  Hippolytos  has  preserved  the  account  water' 
given  by  Theophrastos  of  the  context  in  which  this  occurred. 

It  was  as  follows  : 

Xenophanes  said  that  a  mixture  of  the  earth  with  the  sea  is 
taking  place,  and  that  it  is  being  gradually  dissolved  by  the 
moisture.  He  says  that  he  has  the  following  proofs  of  this. 

Shells  are  found  in  midland  districts  and  on  hills,  and  he  says 
that  in  the  quarries  at  Syracuse  has  been  found  the  imprint  of 
a  fish  and  of  seaweed,  at  Paros  the  form  of  a  bayleaf  in  the  depth 
of  the  stone,  and  at  Malta  flat  impressions  of  all  marine  animals. 

These,  he  says,  were  produced  when  all  things  were  formerly 
mud,  and  the  outlines  were  dried  in  the  mud.  All  human  beings 


1  Aet.  ii.  24,  9  (Dox.  p.  3 55) >  rroXXo i)j  etvai  rjXiovs  Kal  creX'fivas  Karb 
KXlpara  rrjs  yrjs  Kal  arroropAs  Kal  bvas,  Karb  5b  rev  a  Kaipbv  iprrlrrrtiv  rbv 
SUtkov  ets  TLva  arroToprjv  rrjs  yrjs  oSk  oiKovpbvpv  v<p’  rjpQv  Kal  ottrics  (otrirep  Ktvep.- 
fiarovvra  tKXei\piv  vrroipalveiv  ■  6  S’  avrds  rdv  rjXiov  els  brrtipov  pbv  rrpoiivai,  SoKtiv 
St  KVK\ei<r0ai  Sib  rpv  birbaracnv . 

2  That  this  is  the  meaning  of  Ktvep./3o.r^io  appears  sufficiently  from 
the  passages  referred  to  in  Liddell  and  Scott,  and  it  describes  a  total 
eclipse  very  well. 

3  Aet.  ii.  13,  14  (Dox.  p.  343),  ava^wrrvptlv  vbKrup  KaObrrep  robs  bvdpaKas. 

4  Aet.  ii.  30,  8  (Dox.  p.  362),  rdv  piv  ijXio v  xpvaipx >v  elvai  wpbs  r^v 
rou  Koapov  Kal  rpv  rdv  iv  avrip  fywv  yivtalv  re  Kal  SiolKrjcnv,  rr}v  5b  <re\ijvrjv 
rrapiXKtiv.  The  verb  7 rapbXKtiv  means  “  to  cork.”  (Cf.  Aristophanes, 
Pax,  1306.)  In  Hellenistic  Greek  the  metaphor  is  no  longer  felt,  and 
rrapbXKti  means  “  is  redundant,”  “  is  superfluous.” 


124 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Finite  or 
infinite  ? 


are  destroyed  when  the  earth  has  been  carried  down  into  the 
sea  and  turned  to  mud.  This  change  takes  place  for  all  the 
worlds. — Hipp.  Ref.  i.  14  (R.  P.  103  a). 


This  is,  of  course,  the  theory  of  Anaximander,  and  we 
may  perhaps  credit  him  rather  than  Xenophanes  with  the 
observations  of  fossils.1  Most  remarkable  of  all,  however, 
is  the  statement  that  this  change  applies  to  “  all  the  worlds.” 
It  seems  impossible  to  doubt  that  Theophrastos  attributed 
a  belief  in  “  innumerable  worlds  ”  to  Xenophanes.  As  we 
have  seen,  Aetios  includes  him  in  his  list  of  those  who  held 
this  doctrine,  and  Diogenes  ascribes  it  to  him  also,2  while 
Hippolytos  seems  to  take  it  for  granted.  We  shall  find, 
however,  that  in  another  connexion  he  said  the  World 
or  God  was  one.  If  our  interpretation  of  him  is  correct, 
there  is  no  great  difficulty  here.  The  point  is  that,  so  far 
from  being  ‘‘  a  sure  seat  for  all  things  ever,”  Gaia  too  is  a 
passing  appearance.  That  belongs  to  the  attack  on  Hesiod, 
and  if  in  this  connexion  Xenophanes  spoke,  with  Anaxi¬ 
mander,  of  "  innumerable  worlds,”  while  elsewhere  he  said 
that  God  or  the  World  was  one,  that  may  be  connected  with 
a  still  better  attested  contradiction  which  we  have  now  to 
examine. 

60.  Aristotle  tried  without  success  to  discover  from  the 
poems  of  Xenophanes  whether  he  regarded  the  world  as 
finite  or  infinite.  “  He  made  no  clear  pronouncement  on 
the  subject,”  he  tells  us.3  Theophrastos,  on  the  other  hand. 


1  There  is  an  interesting  note  on  these  in  Gomperz’s  Greek  Thinkers 
,,  g  anS’  f  T-  55  r)-  I  have  translated  his  conjecture  <f>i ikCiv  instead  of 
ttie  Mb.  QukGw,  as  this  is  said  to  involve  a  palaeontological  impossibility 
and  impressions  of  fucoids  are  found,  not  indeed  in  the  quarries  of  Syracuse’ 

bUtfi?eArcthem^  U  iS  Said  als°  that  there  are  no  marine  fossils  in  Paros’ 
so  the  MS.  reading  Sd<f,VVs  need  not  be  changed  to  with  Gronovius. 

The  fact  that  the  fossil  was  in  the  depth  of  the  stone  seemed  to  show  that 
.Farian  marble  was  once  mud.  It  was  no  doubt  imaginary 

”  U'  X’  2  {D<°t  P'  327)  :  Di°g-  ix'  19  (R‘  R  io3  c).  It  is  true 
that  this  Passage  of  Diogenes  comes  from  the  biographical  compendium 

(D°x.  p.  168)  ;  but  it  is  difficult  to  doubt  the  Theophrastean  origin  of  a 
statement  found  in  Aetios,  Hippolytos,  and  Diogenes. 

3  Anst.  Met.  A,  5.  986  b  23  (R.  P.  101),  0vSh>  Siera^vurev. 


SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION 


125 

decided  that  he  regarded  it  as  spherical  and  finite,  because 
he  said  it  was  ‘  equal  every  way.”  1  It  really  appears  that 
Xenophanes  did  not  feel  the  contradiction  involved  in  calling 
the  world  "  equal  every  way  ”  and  infinite.  We  have  seen 
that  he  said  the  sun  went  right  on  to  infinity,  and  that  agrees 
with  his  view  of  the  earth  as  an  infinitely  extended  plain. 
He  also  held  (fr.  28)  that,  while  the  earth  has  an  upper  limit 
which  we  see,  it  has  no  limit  below.  This  is  attested  by 
Aristotle,  who  speaks  of  the  earth  being  “  infinitely  rooted,” 
and  adds  that  Empedokles  criticised  Xenophanes  for  holding 
this  view.2  It  further  appears  from  the  fragment  of  Empe¬ 
dokles  quoted  by  Aristotle  that  Xenophanes  said  the  vast 
Air  extended  infinitely  upwards.3  We  are  therefore  bound 
to  try  to  find  room  for  an  infinite  earth  and  an  infinite  air 
in  a  spherical  finite  world  !  That  comes  of  trying  to  find 
science  in  satire.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  regard  these 
statements  from  the  same  point  of  view  as  those  about  the 
heavenly  bodies,  we  shall  see  what  they  probably  mean. 
The  story  of  Ouranos  and  Gaia  was  always  the  chief  scandal 
of  the  Theogony,  and  the  infinite  air  gets  rid  of  Ouranos 
altogether.  As  to  the  earth  stretching  infinitely  downwards, 
that  gets  rid  of  Tartaros,  which  Homer  described  as  situated 
at  the  bottommost  limit  of  earth  and  sea,  as  far  beneath 
Hades  as  heaven  is  above  the  earth.4  This  is  pure  con¬ 
jecture,  of  course ;  but,  if  it  is  even  possible,  we  are 
entitled  to  disbelieve  that  it  was  in  a  cosmological  poem 
such  startling  contradictions  occurred. 

1  This  is  given  as  an  inference  by  Simpl.  Phys.  p.  23,  18  (R.  P.  108  b), 
Sid  to  iravTaxbdev  6fj.oi.ov.  It  does  not  merely  come  from  M.X.G. 
(R.  P.  108),  TrdvTTj  S’  Spoiov  6vra  tripaipoecdrj  elvai.  Hippolytos  has  it  too 
(Ref.  i.  14 ;  R.  P.  102  a),  so  it  goes  back  to  Theophrastos.  Timon 
of  Phleious  understood  Xenophanes  in  the  same  way  ;  for  he  makes  him 
call  the  One  tcrov  dirdvru  (fr.  60,  Diels  ;  R.  P.  102  a). 

2  Arist.  De  caelo,  B,  13.  294  a  21  (R.  P.  103  b). 

3  I  take  SafiKis  as  an  attribute  and  awelpova  as  predicate  to  both 
subjects. 

4  II.  viii.  13-16,  478-481,  especially  the  words  06S’  d  Ke  rd  velara  7 rdpad’ 
Tktjcu  I  yalps  Kai  ttovtolo  kt\.  Iliad  viii.  must  have  seemed  a  particularly 
bad  book  to  Xenophanes. 


126 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


God  and 
the  world. 


A  more  subtle  explanation  of  the  difficulty  commended 
itself  to  the  late  Peripatetic  who  wrote  an  account  of  the 
Eleatic  school,  part  of  which  is  still  extant  in  the  Aristotelian 
corpus,  and  is  generally  known  now  as  the  treatise  on 
Melissos,  Xenophanes,  and  Gorgias.1  He  said  that  Xeno¬ 
phanes  declared  the  world  to  be  neither  finite  nor  infinite, 
and  composed  a  series  of  arguments  in  support  of  this  thesis, 
to  which  he  added  another  like  it,  namely,  that  the  world 
is  neither  in  motion  nor  at  rest.  This  has  introduced  endless 
confusion  into  our  sources.  Alexander  used  this  treatise 
as  well  as  the  work  of  Theophrastos,  and  Simplicius  supposed 
the  quotations  from  it  to  be  from  Theophrastos  too.  Having 
no  copy  of  the  poems  he  was  completely  baffled,  and  until 
recently  all  accounts  of  Xenophanes  were  vitiated  by  the 
same  confusion.  It  may  be  suggested  that,  but  for  this,  we 
should  never  have  heard  of  the  “  philosophy  of  Xenophanes,” 
a  way  of  speaking  which  is  really  a  survival  from  the  days 
before  this  scholastic  exercise  was  recognised  as  having  no 
authority. 

61.  In  the  passage  of  the  Metaphysics  just  referred  to, 
Aristotle  speaks  of  Xenophanes  as  “  the  first  partisan  of 
the  One,”  2  and  the  context  shows  he  means  to  suggest  he 
was  the  first  of  the  Eleatics.  We  have  seen  already  that 

1  In  Bekker’s  edition  this  treatise  bears  the  title  He  pi  Zevop&vovs, 
wepl  Zfyiovos,  rrepl  Topyiov,  but  the  best  MS.  gives  as  the  titles  of  its 
three  sections  :  (i)  n epl  Zjvwos,  (2)  Ilepi  3evo<pd.vovs,  (3)  IRpl  Topyiov. 
Ihe  first  section,  however,  plainly  refers  to  Melissos,  so  the  whole  treatise 
is  now  entitled  De  Melisso,  Xenophane,  Gorgia  (M.X.G.).  It  has  been 
edited  by  Apelt  in  the  Teubner  Series,  and  more  recently  by  Diels  (Abh. 
der  k.  Preuss.  A  had.  1900),  who  has  also  given  the  section  dealing  with 
Xenophanes  in  Vors.  11  a  28.  He  has  now  withdrawn  the  view  main¬ 
tained  in  Dox.  p.  108  that  the  work  belongs  to  the  third  century  b.c., 
and  holds  that  it  was  a  Peripatetico  eclectico  (i.e.  sceptica,  platonica ,  stoic  'a 
admiscente)  circa  Christi  natalem  conscnptum.  The  writer  would  have  no 
first-hand  knowledge  of  his  poems,  and  the  order  in  which  the  philosophers 
are  discussed  is  that  of  the  passage  in  the  Metaphysics  which  suggested 
the  whole  thing.  It  is  possible  that  a  section  on  Parmenides  preceded 
what  we  now  have.  * 

*  Met.  A,  5.  986  b  21  (R.  P.  1 01 ),  irpuros  Totiruv  ivluai.  The  verb  evlteir 
occurs  nowhere  else,  but  is  plainly  formed  on  the  analogy  of  uvSlteir 
<pi\Linrl{tiv,  and  the  like.  ’ 


SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION 


127 

the  certain  facts  of  his  life  make  it  very  unlikely  that  he 
settled  at  Elea  and  founded  a  school  there,  and  it  is  probable 
that,  as  usual  in  such  cases,  Aristotle  is  simply  reproducing 
certain  statements  of  Plato.  At  any  rate,  Plato  had  spoken 
of  the  Eleatics  as  the  “  partisans  of  the  Whole/’ 1  and  he 
had  also  spoken  of  the  school  as  “  starting  with  Xenophanes 
and  even  earlier.”  2  The  last  words,  however,  show  clearly 
what  he  meant.  Just  as  he  called  the  Herakleiteans 
“  followers  of  Homer  and  still  more  ancient  teachers,”  3 
so  he  attached  the  Eleatics  to  Xenophanes  and  still  earlier 
authorities.  We  have  seen  before  how  these  plajdul  and 
ironical  remarks  of  Plato  were  taken  seriously  by  his  suc¬ 
cessors,  and  we  must  not  make  too  much  of  this  fresh 
instance  of  Aristotelian  literalness. 

Aristotle  goes  on  to  tell  us  that  Xenophanes,  “  referring 
to  the  whole  world,4  said  the  One  was  god.”  This 
clearly  alludes  to  frs.  23-26,  where  all  human  attributes 
are  denied  of  a  god  who  is  said  to  be  one  and  “  the 
greatest  among  gods  and  men.”  It  may  be  added  that 
these  verses  gain  much  in  point  if  we  think  of  them 
as  closely  connected  with  frs.  11-16,  instead  of  referring 
the  one  set  of  verses  to  the  Satires  and  the  other  to  a 

1  Theaet.  181  a  6,  rod  b\ov  uTaaiurai.  The  noun  araaidn-ps  has  no  other 
meaning  than  “  partisan,”  and  the  context  shows  that  this  is  what  it 
means  here.  The  derivation  araa^as  .  .  .  dwd  rrjs  ardaew  appears  first 
in  Sext.  Math.  x.  46,  where  the  term  a-raaiunai  is  incorrectly  ascribed  to 
Aristotle  and  supposed  to  mean  those  who  made  the  universe  stationary 
an  impossible  interpretation. 

2  Soph.  242  d  5  (R.  P.  101  b).  If  the  passage  implies  that  Xenophanes 
settled  at  Elea,  it  equally  implies  this  of  his  imaginary  predecessors.  But 
Elea  was  not  founded  till  Xenophanes  was  in  the  prime  of  life. 

3  Theaet.  179  e  3,  tCjv  'H paKXeneLwv  1j,  wcrwep  av  Xiyeis,  'Op.Vpeluv  rai  (Tl 
tt aXaiortpuv.  Here  Homer  stands  to  the  Herakleiteans  in  just  the  same 
relation  as  Xenophanes  does  to  the  Eleatics  in  the  Sophist.  In  just  the 
same  spirit,  Epicharmos,  the  contemporary  of  Xenophanes,  is  mentioned, 
along  with  Homer,  as  a  predecessor  of  the  p^ovres  (Theaet.  152  e) 

4  Met.  986  b  24.  The  words  cannot  mean  “  gazing  up  at  the  whole 
heavens,”  or  anything  of  that  sort.  They  are  taken  as  I  take  them  by 
Bonitz  (mi  Hinblicke  auf  den  ganzen  Himmel)  and  Zeller  (im  Hinblick  auf 
das  Weltganze).  The  word  airo^Xineiv  had  become  too  colourless  to  mean 
more,  and  oiipa vis  means  what  was  later  called  Kbap.o%. 


128 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Mono¬ 
theism  or 
poly¬ 
theism. 


cosmological  poem.  It  was  probably  in  the  same  context 
that  Xenophanes  called  the  world  or  god  “  equal  every 
way  1  and  denied  that  it  breathed.2  The  statement 
that  there  is  no  mastership  among  the  gods 3  also  goes 
very  well  with  fr.  26.  A  god  has  no  wants,  nor  is  it 
fitting  for  one  god  to  be  the  servant  of  others,  like  Iris 
and  Hermes  in  Homer. 

62.  That  this  “god”  is  just  the  world,  Aristotle  tells 
us,  and  the  use  of  the  word  #eo?  is  quite  in  accordance 
with  Ionian  usage.  Xenophanes  regarded  it  as  sentient, 
though  without  any  special  organs  of  sense,  and  it 
sways  all  tilings  by  the  thought  of  its  mind.  He 
also  calls  it  one  god,  and,  if  that  is  monotheism, 
then  Xenophanes  was  a  monotheist,  though  this  is 
surely  not  how  the  word  is  generally  understood.  The 
fact  is  that  the  expression  “  one  god  ”  wakens  all  sorts 
of  associations  in  our  mind  which  did  not  exist  for  the 
Greeks  of  this  time.  What  Xenophanes  is  really  con¬ 
cerned  to  deny  is  the  existence  of  any  gods  in  the  proper 
sense,  and  the  words  “  One  god  ”  mean  “  No  god  but  the 
world.”  4 

It  is  certainly  wrong,  then,  to  say  with  Freudenthal 
that  Xenophanes  was  in  any  sense  a  polytheist.5  That  he 
should  use  the  language  of  polytheism  in  his  elegies  is  only 
what  we  should  expect,  and  the  other  references  to  “  gods  ” 
can  be  best  explained  as  incidental  to  his  attack  on  the 
anthropomorphic  gods  of  Homer  and  Hesiod.  In  one  case, 
Freudenthal  has  pressed  a  proverbial  way  of  speaking  too 


1  See  above,  p.  125,  n.  1. 

2  Diog.  ix.  19  (R.  P.  103  c),  S\ov  S’  dpav  Kal  8\ ov  aKoveiv,  ptvru  dvairvelv. 
See  above,  p.  108,  n.  2. 

3  Str0m"  fr-  4>  dirotaluerai  St  Kal  nepi  deCdv  oiSepuas  rye^las 

tv  avrois  o6aVs  '  0,  yap  Sacov  Se^eadat  rcva  rcbv  0e Qv,  i^SeM  re 

wSevbsavTuv  MSiva  MS’  S\w,  dfcotecv  St  Kal  dpav  Kad&Xov  Kal  p.r,  Kard  utoos. 

The  fact  that  he  speaks  of  the  world  as  living  and  sentient  makes 
no  difference.  No  Greek  ever  doubted  that  the  world  was  in  some  sense 
a  foov. 


6  Freudenthal,  Die  Theologie  des  Xenophanes  (Breslau,  1886). 


SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION 


129 

hard.1  Least  of  all  can  we  admit  that  Xenophanes  allowed 
the  existence  of  subordinate  or  departmental  gods  ;  for  it 
was  just  the  existence  of  such  that  he  was  chiefly  concerned 
to  deny.  At  the  same  time,  I  cannot  help  thinking  that 
Freudenthal  was  more  nearly  right  than  Wilamowitz,  who 
says  that  Xenophanes  “  upheld  the  only  real  monotheism 
that  has  ever  existed  upon  earth.”  2  Diels,  I  fancy,  comes 
nearer  the  mark  when  he  calls  it  a  “  somewhat  narrow 
pantheism.”  3  But  all  these  views  would  have  surprised 
Xenophanes  himself  about  equally.  He  was  really  Goethe’s 
Weltkind,  with  prophets  to  right  and  left  of  him,  and  he 
would  have  smiled  if  he  had  known  that  one  day  he  was 
to  be  regarded  as  a  theologian. 

1  Xenophanes  calls  his  god  “  greatest  among  gods  and  men,”  but  this 
is  simply  a  case  of  “  polar  expression,”  to  which  parallels  will  be  found  in 
Wilamowitz’s  note  to  Euripides’  Herakles,  v.  1106.  Cf.  especially  the 
statement  of  Herakleitos  (fr.  20)  that  “  no  one  of  gods  or  men  ”  made 
the  world. 

2  Griechische  Liter atur,  p.  38. 

3  Parmenides  Lehrgedicht,  p.  9. 


9 


Life  of 

Mera- 

kleitos. 


CHAPTER  III 


HERAKLEITOS  OF  EPHESOS 

63.  Herakleitos  of  Ephesos,  son  of  Bloson,  is  said  to 
have  “  flourished  ”  in  01.  LXIX.  (504/3-501/0  b.c.)  ; 1  that 
is  to  say,  just  in  the  middle  of  the  reign  of  Dareios,  with 
whom  several  traditions  connected  him.2  It  is  more 
important,  however,  for  our  purpose  to  notice  that,  while 
Herakleitos  refers  to  Pythagoras  and  Xenophanes  by  name 
and  in  the  past  tense  (fr.  16),  he  is  in  turn  alluded  to  by 
Parmenides  (fr.  6).  These  references  mark  his  place  in  the 
history  of  philosophy.  Zeller  held,  indeed,  that  he  could 
not  have  published  his  work  till  after  478  b.c.,  on  the  ground 
that  the  expulsion  of  Hermodoros,  alluded  to  in  fr.  114, 
could  not  have  taken  place  before  the  downfall  of  Persian 
rule.  If  that  were  so,  it  might  be  hard  to  see  how  Par¬ 
menides  could  have  known  the  views  of  Herakleitos  at 
the  time  he  wrote  his  poem ; 3  but  there  is  no  difficulty 
in  supposing  that  the  Ephesians  may  have  sent  one 
of  their  citizens  into  banishment  when  they  were  still 
paying  tribute  to  the  Great  King.  The  spurious  Letters 
of  Herakleitos  show  that  the  expulsion  of  Hermodoros 
was  believed  to  have  taken  place  during  the  reign  of 

Diog.  ix.  1  (R.  P.  29),  no  doubt  from  Apollodoros  through  some 
intermediate  authority.  The  name  Bloson  is  better  attested  than  Blyson 
(see  Diels,  Vors.  12  a-  i,  n.),  and  is  known  from  inscriptions  as  an  Ionic 
name. 

3  Bernays,  Die  heraklitischen  Briefe,  pp.  13  sqq. 

3  For  the.  date  of  Parmenides,  see  p.  169. 

130 


HERAKLEITOS  OF  EPHESOS 


131 

Dareios,1  and  it  seems  probable  that  the  party  led  by 
him  had  enjoyed  the  confidence  of  the  Persian  govern¬ 
ment.  His  expulsion  would  mark  the  beginnings  of  the 
movement  against  Persian  rule,  rather  than  its  successful 
issue. 

Sotion  quotes  a  statement  that  Herakleitos  was  a  disciple 
of  Xenophanes,2  which  is  not  probable  ;  for  Xenophanes 
left  Ionia  before  Herakleitos  was  born.  More  likely  he 
was  not  a  disciple  of  any  one  ;  but  it  is  clear  that  he  was 
acquainted  both  with  the  Milesian  cosmology  and  with  the 
poems  of  Xenophanes.  He  also  knew  something  of  the 
theories  taught  by  Pythagoras  (fr.  17).  Of  his  life  we  really 
know  nothing,  except,  perhaps,  that  he  belonged  to  the 
ancient  royal  house  and  resigned  the  nominal  position  of 
Basileus  in  favour  of  his  brother.3  The  origin  of  the  other 
statements  bearing  on  it  is  quite  transparent.4 

64.  We  do  not  know  the  title  of  the  work  of  Herakleitos 5  His  book. 
— if,  indeed,  it  had  one — and  it  is  not  easy  to  form  a  clear 
idea  of  its  contents.  We  are  told  that  it  was  divided  into 
three  discourses :  one  dealing  with  the  universe,  one  political, 

1  Bemays,  op.  cit.  pp.  20  sqq.  This  is  quite  consistent  with  the  Roman 
tradition  that  Hermodoros  took  part  later  in  the  legislation  of  the  Twelve 
Tables  at  Rome  (Dig.  1,  2,  2,  4  ;  Strabo,  xiv.  p.  642).  There  was  a  statue 
of  him  in  the  Comitium  (Pliny,  H.N.  xxxiv.  21).  The  Romans  were  well 
aware  that  the  Twelve  Tables  were  framed  on  a  Greek  model ;  and,  as 
Bemays  said  (op.  cit.  p.  85),  the  fact  is  attested  as  few  things  are  in  the 
early  history  of  Rome. 

3  Sotion  ap.  Diog.  ix.  5  (R.  P.  29  c). 

3  Diog.  ix.  6  (R.  P.  31). 

1  Herakleitos  said  (fr.  68)  that  it  was  death  to  souls  to  become  water  ; 
and  we  are  told  accordingly  that  he  died  of  dropsy.  He  said  (fr.  114) 
that  the  Ephesians  should  leave  their  city  to  their  children,  and  (fr.  79) 
that  Time  was  a  child  playing  draughts.  We  are  therefore  told  that  he 
refused  to  take  any  part  in  public  life,  and  went  to  play  with  the  children 
in  the  temple  of  Artemis.  He  said  (fr.  85)  that  corpses  were  more  fit  to 
be  cast  out  than  dung  l  and  we  are  told  that  he  covered  himself  with 
dung  when  attacked  with  dropsy.  Lastly,  he  is  said  to  have  argued  at 
great  length  with  his  doctors  because  of  fr.  58.  For  these  tales  see  Diog. 
ix.  3-5. 

6  The  variety  of  titles  enumerated  in  Diog.  ix.  12  (R.  P.  3°  b)  seems  to 
show  that  none  was  authentically  known.  That  of  Muses  comes  from 
Plato,  Soph.  242  d  7.  The  others  are  mere  "  mottoes  ”  (Schuster)  prefixed 
by  Stoic  editors  (Diog.  ix.  15  ;  R.  P.  30  c). 


The 

fragments. 


132  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


and  one  theological.1  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  this 
division  is  due  to  Herakleitos  himself ;  all  we  can  infer  is 
that  the  work  fell  naturally  into  these  three  parts  when  the 
Stoic  commentators  took  their  editions  of  it  in  hand. 

The  style  of  Herakleitos  is  proverbially  obscure,  and,  at 
a  later  date,  got  him  the  nickname  of  “  the  Dark.”  2  Now 
the  fragments  about  the  Delphic  god  and  the  Sibyl  (frs.  11 
and  12)  seem  to  show  that  he  was  conscious  of  writing  an 
oracular  style,  and  we  have  to  ask  why  he  did  so.  In  the 
first  place,  it  was  the  manner  of  the  time.3  The  stirring 
events  of  the  age,  and  the  influence  of  the  religious  revival, 
gave  something  of  a  prophetic  tone  to  all  the  leaders  of 
thought.  Pindar  and  Aischylos  have  it  too.  It  was  also 
an  age  of  great  individualities,  and  these  are  apt  to  be 
solitary  and  disdainful.  Herakleitos  at  least  was  so.  If 
men  cared  to  dig  for  the  gold  they  might  find  it  (fr.  8) ;  if 
not,  they  must  be  content  with  straw  (fr.  51).  This  seems 
to  have  been  the  view  taken  by  Theophrastos,  who  said  the 
headstrong  temperament  of  Herakleitos  sometimes  led  him 
into  incompleteness  and  inconsistencies  of  statement.4 

65.  I  give  a  version  of  the  fragments  according  to  the 
arrangement  of  Bywater’s  exemplary  edition  :  5 


(I}  It  is  wise  to  hearken,  not  to  me,  but  to  my  Word,  and  to 
confess  that  all  things  are  one.6  R.  P.  40. 


Phleionsai^y  Jled  ^  ^  Ti”“”  °* 

3  See  the  valuable  observations  of  Dipls  in  Tn*  a  j.- 

Herakleitos  von  Ephesos,  pp.  iv.  sqq  Introduction  to  his 

4  Cf.  Diog.  ix.  6  (R.  P.  31). 

6  In  his  edition,  Diels  has  given  up  all  attemot  to  ammo  n.  t 
a°d  this  m*k‘s  Ms  ,ex*  uns“itebi' 

I  think,  too,  that  he  overestimates  the  difficnltv  of  an  o  ,  ”  pose. 

n*„t.  and  make,  too  much  of  the v ewttatTe ,,S  Zlr,"”8" 
'aphoristic/'  That  it  was  so,  is  an  important  a nd ^valuabfo “emaT  S 
it  does  not  follow  that  Herakleitos  wrote  like  Nietzsche  For  a  r  u 


HERAKLEITOS  OF  EPHESOS 


133 


(2)  Though  this  Word  1  is  true  evermore,  yet  men  are  as 
unable  to  understand  it  when  they  hear  it  for  the  first  time  as 
before  they  have  heard  it  at  all.  For,  though  all  things  come  to 
pass  in  accordance  with  this  Word,  men  seem  as  if  they  had  no 
experience  of  them,  when  they  make  trial  of  wrords  and  deeds 
such  as  I  set  forth,  dividing  each  thing  according  to  its  kind  and 
showing  how  it  truly  is.  But  other  men  know  not  what  they 
are  doing  when  awake,  even  as  they  forget  what  they  do  in  sleep. 
R.  P.  32. 

(3)  Fools  when  they  do  hear  are  like  the  deaf :  of  them  does 
the  saying  bear  witness  that  they  are  absent  when  present. 
R.  P.  31  a. 

(4)  Eyes  and  ears  are  bad  witnesses  to  men  if  they  have  souls 
that  understand  not  their  language.  R.  P.  42. 

(5)  The  many  do  not  take  heed  of  such  things  as  those  they 
meet  with,  nor  do  they  mark  them  when  they  are  taught,  though 
they  think  they  do. 

(6)  Knowing  not  how  to  listen  nor  how  to  speak. 

(7)  If  you  do  not  expect  the  unexpected,  you  will  not  find  it ; 
for  it  is  hard  to  be  sought  out  and  difficult.2 

(8)  Those  who  seek  for  gold  dig  up  much  earth  and  find  a 
little.  R.  P.  44  b. 

(10)  Nature  loves  to  hide.  R.  P.  34  f. 

(n)  The  lord  whose  is  the  oracle  at  Delphoi  neither  utters 
nor  hides  his  meaning,  but  shows  it  by  a  sign.  R.  P.  30  a. 

(12)  And  the  Sibyl,  with  raving  lips  uttering  things  mirthless, 


1  The  Aoyos  is  primarily  the  discourse  of  Herakleitos  himself  ;  though, 
as  he  is  a  prophet,  we  may  call  it  his  "  Word.”  It  can  neither  mean  a 
discourse  addressed  to  Herakleitos  nor  yet  "  reason.”  (Cf.  Zeller,  p.  630, 
n.  1  ;  Eng.  trans.  ii.  p.  7,  n.  2.)  A  difficulty  has  been  raised  about  the 
words  £6vtos  aid.  How  could  Herakleitos  say  that  his  discourse  had 
always  existed  ?  The  answer  is  that  in  Ionic  tibv  means  “  true  ”  when 
coupled  with  words  like  \6yos.  Cf.  Herod,  i.  30,  rip  tt> vti  xPrla<*tJievos 
X^yet ;  and  even  Aristoph.  Frogs,  1052,  ovk  6 vra  \byov.  It  is  only  by  taking 
the  words  in  this  way  that  we  can  understand  Aristotle's  hesitation  as  to 
the  proper  punctuation  ( Rhet .  T,  5.  1407  b  15  ;  R.  P.  30  a).  The  Stoic 
interpretation  given  by  Marcus  Aurelius,  iv.  46  (R.  P.  32  b),  must  be 
rejected.  In  any  case,  the  Johannine  doctrine  of  the  A  Ay  os  has  nothing 
to  do  with  Herakleitos  or  with  anything  at  all  in  Greek  philosophy,  but 
comes  from  the  Hebrew  Wisdom  literature.  See  Rendel  Harris,  “  The 
.Origin  of  the  Prologue  to  St.  John's  Gospel,”  in  The  Expositor,  1916, 
pp.  147  sqq. 

2  I  have  departed  from  the  punctuation  of  Bywater  here,  and  supplied 
a  fresh  object  to  the  verb  as  suggested  by  Gomperz  {Arch.  i.  100). 


134 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


unbedizened,  and  unperfumed,  reaches  over  a  thousand  years 
with  her  voice,  thanks  to  the  god  in  her.  R.  P.  30  a. 

(13)  The  things  that  can  be  seen,  heard,  and  learned  are 
what  I  prize  the  most.  R.  P.  42. 

(14)  .  .  .  bringing  untrustworthy  witnesses  in  support  of 
disputed  points. 

(15)  The  eyes  are  more  exact  witnesses  than  the  ears.1 
R.  P.  42  c. 

(16)  The  learning  of  many  things  teacheth  not  understanding, 
else  would  it  have  taught  Hesiod  and  Pythagoras,  and  again 
Xenophanes  and  Hekataios.  R.  P.  31. 

(17)  Pythagoras,  son  of  Mnesarchos,  practised  scientific 
inquiry  beyond  all  other  men,  and  making  a  selection  of  these 
writings,  claimed  for  his  own  wisdom  what  was  but  a  knowledge 
of  many  things  and  an  imposture.2  R.  P.  31  a. 

(18)  Of  all  whose  discourses  I  have  heard,  there  is  not  one 
who  attains  to  understanding  that  wisdom  is  apart  from  all 
R.  P.  32  b. 

(19)  Wisdom  is  one  thing.  It  is  to  know  the  thought 
by  which  all  things  are  steered  through  all  things.  R  P 
40. 

(20)  This  world,3  which  is  the  same  for  all,  no  one  of  gods  or 
men  has  made  ;  but  it  was  ever,  is  now,  and  ever  shall  be  an 
ever-living  Fire,  with  measures  of  it  kindling,  and  measures 
going  out.  R.  P.  354 


1  Cf.  Herod,  i.  8. 

,  2  The  best  attested  reading  is  iiroi-fiaaTO,  not  iirolri<rev,  and  xfirouWro 

eavrov  means  “  claimed  as  his  own.”  The  words  £***&*,„  rauras  rds 
rvyypafd,  have  deen  doubted  since  the  time  of  Schleiermacher,  and  Diels 
now  regards  the  whole  fragment  as  spurious.  This  is  because  i't  was  used 
to  prove  that  Pythagoras  wrote  books  (cf.  Diels,  Arch.  iii.  p.  45I).  As 
ywater  pointed  out,  however,  the  fragment  itself  only  says  that  he  read 
books  I  would  further  suggest  that  the  old-fashioned  avyypa<pds  is  too 
good  for  a  forger,  and  that  the  omission  of  the  very  thing  to  be  proved 
would  be  remarkable.  The  last  suggestion  of  a  book  by  Pythagoras 
disappears  with  the  reading  roifaaro  for  iwolVcer.  For  the  rendering  given 
lor  KaKOTexvtv,  compare  its  legal  sense  of  “  falsified  evidence.” 

3  The  word  *607105  must  mean  “  world  ”  here,  not  merely  "  order  ”  • 
for  only  the  world  could  be  identified  with  fire.  This  use  of  the  word  is 
Pythagorean,  and  Herakleitos  may  quite  well  have  known  it. 

,  *  Xt  1S  ,™portant  t0  notice  that  ^ Tpa  is  internal  accusative  with 

OTT rdperor,  with  its  measures  kindling  and  its  measures  going  out  ” 

1  *”*  “  *“ edition- is  °°w  adop,ed  ty 


HERAKLEITOS  OF  EPHESOS 


135 

(21)  The  transformations  of  Fire  are,  first  of  all,  sea  ;  and 
half  of  the  sea  is  earth,  half  whirlwind.1  .  .  .  R.  P.  35  b. 

(22)  All  things  are  an  exchange  for  Fire,  and  Fire  for  all  things, 
even  as  wares  for  gold  and  gold  for  wares.  R.  P.  35. 

(23)  It  becomes  liquid  sea,  and  is  measured  by  the  same  tale 
as  before  it  became  earth.2  R.  P.  39. 

(24)  Fire  is  want  and  surfeit.  R.  P.  36  a. 

(25)  Fire  lives  the  death  of  air,3  and  air  lives  the  death  of 
fire  ;  water  lives  the  death  of  earth,  earth  that  of  water.  R.  P.  37. 

(26)  Fire  in  its  advance  will  judge  and  convict  4  all  things. 
R.  P.  36  a. 

(27)  How  can  one  hide  from  that  which  never  sets  ? 

(28)  It  is  the  thunderbolt  that  steers  the  course  of  all  things. 
R.  P-  35  b. 

(29)  The  sun  will  not  overstep  his  measures  ;  if  he  does,  the 
Erinyes,  the  handmaids  of  Justice,  will  find  him  out.  R.  P.  39. 

(30)  The  limit  of  dawn  and  evening  is  the  Bear  ;  and  opposite 
the  Bear  is  the  boundary  of  bright  Zeus.5 

(31)  If  there  were  no  sun  it  would  be  night,  for  all  the  other 
stars  could  do.6 * 8 

(32)  The  sun  is  new  every  day. 


1  On  the  word  irpriaT-rip,  see  below,  p.  149,  n.  1. 

2  The  subject  of  fr.  23  is  yij,  as  we  see  from  Diog.  ix.  9  (R.  P.  36), 
tt6.Xlv  re  ab  tt}v  yyv  x^a^aL  >  an<^  Aet.  i.  3,  II  ( Dox .  p.  284  a  1  ;  b  5), 
?7reira  ivaxo.Xuip6vijv  rr)v  yrjv  virb  toC  irvpbs  x^61  (Diibner  :  <pv<xei,  libri) 
GScop  6.TroTeXei<r6at.  Herakleitos  may  have  said  yfj  OdXacraa  Siax^ertu,  and 
Clement  {Strom,  v.  p.  712)  seems  to  imply  this.  The  phrase  perpterai 
ets  rbv  a-urbv  Xbyov  can  only  mean  that  the  proportion  of  the  measures 
remains  constant.  So  Zeller  (p.  690,  n.  1),  zu  derselben  Grosse.  Diels 
(Vors.  12  b  31  n.)  renders  “  nach  demselben  Wort  ( Gesetz ),”  but  refers  to 
Lucr.  v.  257,  which  supports  the  other  interpretation  (pro  parte  sua). 

3  It  is  doubtful  whether  this  fragment  is  quoted  textually.  It  seems 
to  imply  the  four  elements  of  Empedokles. 

4  I  understand  tireXdbv  of  the  irvpbs  f<po5os,  for  which  see  p.  151,  n.  1. 

Diels  has  pointed  out  that  KaTa.Xap.p6.veLv  is  the  old  word  for  "  to  convict.” 

6  Here  it  is  clear  that  obpos=T6pp.ara,  and  therefore  means  “boundary,” 

not  “  hill.”  Strabo,  who  quotes  the  fragment  (i.  6,  p.  3),  is  probably 
right  in  taking  r/oOs  ko.1  irrrrtpas  as  equivalent  to  avaToXrjs  xal  Sucrews  and 
making  the  words  refer  to  the  “  arctic  ”  circle.  As  aWpios  Zeds  means 
the  bright  blue  sky,  it  is  impossible  for  its  oSpos  to  be  the  South  Pole,  as 
Diels  suggests.  It  is  more  likely  the  horizon.  I  take  the  fragment  as 
a  protest  against  the  Pythagorean  theory  of  a  southern  hemisphere. 

8  We  learn  from  Diog.  ix.  10  (quoted  below,  p.  147)  that  Herakleitos 
explained  why  the  sun  was  warmer  and  brighter  than  the  moon,  and  this 
is  doubtless  a  fragment  of  that  passage. 


136 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


(33)  (Thales  foretold  an  eclipse.) 

(34)  ...  the  seasons  that  bring  all  things. 

(35)  Hesiod  is  most  men’s  teacher.  Men  are  sure  he  knew 
very  many  things,  a  man  who  did  not  know  day  or  night  !  Thev 
are  one.1  R.  P.  39  b. 

(36)  God  is  day  and  night,  winter  and  summer,  war  and 
peace,  surfeit  and  hunger ;  but  he  takes  various  shapes,  just  as 

fire,2  when  it  is  mingled  with  spices,  is  named  according  to  the 
savour  of  each.  R.  P.  39  b. 

(37)  If  Ml  things  were  turned  to  smoke,  the  nostrils  would 
distinguish  them. 

(38)  Souls  smell  in  Hades.  R.  P.  46  d. 

(39)  Cold  things  become  warm,  and  what  is  warm  cools  * 
what  is  wet  dries,  and  the  parched  is  moistened. 

(40)  It  scatters  and  it  gathers  ;  it  advances  and  retires. 

(4L  42)  You  cannot  step  twice  into  the  same  rivers  ;  for 
fresh  waters  are  ever  flowing  in  upon  you.  R.  P.  33. 

(43)  Homer  was  wrong  in  saying  :  "  Would  that  strife  might 
pensh  from  among  gods  and  men  !  ”  He  did  not  see  that 
he  was  praying  for  the  destruction  of  the  universe  •  for  if 
his  prayer  were  heard,  all  things  would  pass  away.2 
R.  P.  34  d.  y  '  ‘  • 


(44)  War  is  the  father  of  all  and  the  king  of  all ;  and  some 

he  has  made  gods  and  some  men,  some  bond  and  some  free 
K.  f.  34. 


itself4^  P  6n  d°  n°,l  kn°W  h°W  What  is  at  variance  agrees  with 

in  u  1  !  I”  fttunement  of  opposite  tensions,4  like  that  of 
the  bow  and  the  lyre.  R.  P.  34. 

(46)  It  is  the  opposite  which  is  good  for  us.5 

(47)  The  hidden  attunement  is  better  than  the  open.  R  P  14 

things  Ct  “  n°‘  COniecture  at  random  about  the  greatest 


!  peS1,0d  said  Day  was  the  child  of  Night  (Theog.  124). 

,  ^eadln£  faucnrep  7 rvp  for  SKio<nrep  with  Diels 

W,  and  I  prefeTpift (R ^34  b)°to * 

This  refers  to  the  medical  rule  al  89  in™  *  ~  ^ 

Povdelv  tv  6epw  M  Tt,  ^vxpiv.  ^rpeuu  Sea  rwr  <WrW,  e.g. 


HERAKLEITOS  OF  EPHESOS  i37 

(49)  Men  that  love  wisdom  must  be  acquainted  with  very 
many  things  indeed. 

(50)  The  straight  and  the  crooked  path  of  the  fuller’s  comb 
is  one  and  the  same. 

(51)  Asses  would  rather  have  straw  than  gold.  R.  P.  31  a. 

(5i«)  1  Oxen  are  happy  when  they  find  bitter  vetches  to  eat 
R.  P.  48  b. 

.  (52)  rhe  sea  is  the  purest  and  the  impurest  water.  Fish  can 
drink  it,  and  it  is  good  for  them  ;  to  men  it  is  undrinkable  and 
destructive.  R.  P.  47  c. 

(53)  Swine  wash  in  the  mire,  and  barnyard  fowls  in  dust. 

(54)  ...  to  delight  in  the  mire. 

(55)  Every  beast  is  driven  to  pasture  with  blows.2 

(56)  Same  as  45. 

(57)  Good  and  ill  are  one.  R.  P.  47  c. 

(58)  Physicians  who  cut,  burn,  stab,  and  rack  the  sick, 
demand  a  fee  for  it  which  they  do  not  deserve  to  get  R  P 
47  c.3 

(59)  Couples  are  things  whole  and  things  not  whole,  what 
is  drawn  together  and  what  is  drawn  asunder,  the  harmonious 
and  the  discordant.  The  one  is  made  up  of  all  things,  and  all 
things  issue  from  the  one.4 5 

(60)  Men  would  not  have  known  the  name  of  justice  if  these 
things  were  not.6 

(61)  To  God  all  things  are  fair  and  good  and  right,  but  men 
hold  some  things  wrong  and  some  right.  R.  P.  45. 

(62)  We  must  know  that  war  is  common  to  all  and  strife  is 
justice,  and  that  all  things  come  into  being  and  pass  away  (?) 
through  strife. 

(64)  All  the  things  we  see  when  awake  are  death,  even  as  all 
we  see  in  slumber  are  sleep.  R.  P.  42  c.6 


1  See  Bywater  in  Journ.  Phil.  ix.  p.  230. 

2  On  fr.  55  see  Diels  in  Berl.  Sitzb.,  1901,  p.  188. 

3  I  now  read  iiraiTtovTai  with  Bernays  and  Diels. 

4  On  fr.  59  see  Diels  in  Berl.  Sitzb.,  1901,  p.  188.  The  reading 
tawdries  seems  to  be  well  attested  and  gives  an  excellent  sense.  The 
alternative  reading  <rv\\d\f/ie s  is  preferred  by  Hoffmann,  Gr.  Dial.  iff. 
240. 

5  By  “  these  things  ”  he  probably  meant  all  kinds  of  injustice. 

6  Diels  supposes  that  fr.  64  went  on  or 6a a  66  roOpyjKor  oy  (0x6.  “  Life, 

Sleep,  Death  is  the  threefold  ladder  in  psychology,  as  in  physics  Fire 
Water,  Earth." 


138 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


(65)  The  wise  is  one  only.  It  is  unwilling  and  willing  to  be 
called  by  the  name  of  Zeus.  R.  P.  40. 

(66)  The  bow  (/Los)  is  called  life  (/Los),  but  its  work  is  death. 
R.  P.  49  a. 

(67)  Mortals  are  immortals  and  immortals  are  mortals,  the 
one  living  the  others’  death  and  dying  the  others’  life.  R.  P.  46. 

(68)  For  it  is  death  to  souls  to  become  water,  and  death  to 
water  to  become  earth.  But  water  comes  from  earth  ;  and  from 
water,  soul.  R.  P.  38. 

(69)  The  way  up  and  the  way  down  is  one  and  the  same. 
R.  P.  36  d. 

(70)  In  the  circumference  of  a  circle  the  beginning  and  end 
are  common. 


(71)  You  will  not  find  the  boundaries  of  soul  by  travelling  in 
any  direction,  so  deep  is  the  measure  of  it.1  R.  P.  41  d. 

(72)  It  is  pleasure  to  souls  to  become  moist.  R.  P.  46  c. 

.  ^  A  man’  when  he  gets  drunk,  is  led  by  a  beardless  lad, 
trapping,  knowing  not  where  he  steps,  having  his  soul  moist! 
R.  P.  42. 


(74-76)  The  dry  soul  is  the  wisest  and  best.2  R.  P.  42. 

(77)  Man  kindles  a  light  for  himself  in  the  night-time,  when 
he  has  died  but  is  alive.  The  sleeper,  whose  vision  has  been  put 

out,  lights  up  from  the  dead  ;  he  that  is  awake  lights  up  from 
the  sleeping.3 


that  XAhC  ™°rdS  Pad{,V  Uy°V  *X'L  present  no  difficulty  if  we  remember 
that  \6yos  means  measurement,"  as  in  fr.  23. 

2  This  fragment  is  interesting  because  of  the  antiquity  of  the  corrup- 

weUSh  ^  SUfffred-  According  to  Stephanus,  who  is  followed  by  Bywater, 

upon  °g  m  ’  A0V  (T0<f>U3TdTr>  Kal  dPl^V,  Zvpv  being  a  mere  gloss 

P  ,When  ,°nce  got  mto  the  text,  aev  became  atyfi  and  we 

r  Z  J  l  ,  , Now  thls  reading  is  as  old  as  Plutarch,  who  in  his 

doe,  &  “s  -*2 

= rrl 

432  tatn,  yap  frph  ^xn  m  the  MSS.).  The  next  stage  is  the  corruption  of 
the  avy-f)  into  05  yf).  This  yields  the  sentiment  that  “  where  the  earth 

l  Taz  rrr  n  oid  “  phii»  <s“  b^‘  “«4 

,  •  d  pt  the  fuller  text  of  Diels  here.  It  is  clear  that  rva+p '  ci 

tofnk^oT^Tw  °  Earth’  Wat6r’  Air  111  Herakleitos  (c t  fr  68 
trunk,  nowever,  that  we  must  talrp  /*__  '  *  /•  •*■ 

t  iuubx:  uiKe  a-TTrercu  in  the  same  sense  all  f  h rri)1 

the  fragment,  so  I  do  not  translate  rs  in  contact  with,”“ TSb  d0«  * 


HERAKLEITOS  OF  EPHESOS 


139 

(78)  And  it  is  the  same  thing'  in  us  that  is  quick  and  dead, 
awake  and  asleep,  young  and  old  ;  the  former  are  shifted  1  and 
become  the  latter,  and  the  latter  in  turn  are  shifted  and  become 
the  former.  R.  P.  47. 

(79)  Time  is  a  child  playing  draughts,  the  kingly  power  is  a 
child’s.  R.  P.  40  a. 

(80)  I  have  sought  for  myself.  R.  P.  48. 

(81)  We  step  and  do  not  step  into  the  same  rivers ;  we  are 
and  are  not.  R.  P.  33  a. 

(82)  It  is  a  weariness  to  labour  for  the  same  masters  and  be 
ruled  by  them. 

(83)  It  rests  by  changing. 

(84)  Even  the  posset  separates  if  it  is  not  stirred. 

(85)  Corpses  are  more  fit  to  be  cast  out  than  dung. 

(86)  When  they  are  born,  they  wish  to  live  and  to  meet  with 
their  dooms — or  rather  to  rest— and  they  leave  children  behind 
them  to  meet  with  their  dooms  in  turn. 

(87-89)  A  man  may  be  a  grandfather  in  thirty  years. 

(90)  Those  who  are  asleep  are  fellow-workers  (in  what  goes 
on  in  the  world). 

(9i«)  Thought  is  common  to  all. 

(91&)  Those  who  speak  with  understanding  must  hold  fast 
to  what  is  common  to  all  as  a  city  holds  fast  to  its  law,  and  even 
more  strongly.  For  all  human  lawTs  are  fed  by  the  one  divine 
law.  It  prevails  as  much  as  it  will,  and  suffices  for  all  things  with 
something  to  spare.  R.  P.  43. 

(92)  So  we  must  follow  the  common,2  yet  though  my  Word  is 
common,  the  many  five  as  if  they  had  a  wisdom  of  their  own. 
R.  P.  44. 

(93)  They  are  estranged  from  that  with  which  they  have 
most  constant  intercourse.3  R.  P.  32  b. 

(94)  It  is  not  meet  to  act  and  speak  like  men  asleep. 

1  I  understand  p-eTaweabvTa  here  as  meaning  “  moved  ”  from  one  ypap.p.-f) 
or  division  of  the  draught-board  to  another. 

2  Sext.  Math.  vii.  133,  8  id  Set  tireadat  rip  Koivtp  (so  the  MSS.  :  (ut><p 
Schleiermacher) .  %wds  yap  6  koiv6s.  Bywater  omits  the  words,  but  I 
think  they  must  belong  to  Herakleitos.  Diels  adopts  Bekker’s  suggestion 
to  read  Sid  Set  execrOai  rip  <fi wip,  Tovricm  ripy  Koivip.  I  now  think  also  that, 
if  we  understand  the  term  \670s  in  the  sense  explained  above  (p.  133,  n.  1), 
there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  the  words  which  follow. 

3  The  words  \6yip  rtf  ra  SXa  Sioikovvti  belong  to  Marcus  Aurelius  and 
not  to  Herakleitos. 


140 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


(95)  The  waking  have  one  common  world,  but  the  sleeping 
turn  aside  each  into  a  world  of  his  own. 

(96)  The  way  of  man  has  no  wisdom,  but  that  of  God  has. 
R.  P.  45. 

(97)  Man  is  called  a  baby  by  God,  even  as  a  child  by  a  man. 

R.  P.  45- 

(98,  99)  The  wisest  man  is  an  ape  compared  to  God,  just  as 
the  most  beautiful  ape  is  ugly  compared  to  man. 

(100)  The  people  must  fight  for  its  law  as  for  its  walls. 
R.  P.  43  b. 

(101)  Greater  deaths  win  greater  portions.  R.  P.  49  a. 

(102)  Gods  and  men  honour  those  who  are  slain  in  battle. 
R.  P.  49  a. 

(103)  Wantonness  needs  putting  out,  even  more  than  a  house 
on  fire.  R.  P.  49  a. 

(104)  It  is  not  good  for  men  to  get  all  they  wish  to  get.  It 
is  sickness  that  makes  health  pleasant ,‘  evil,1  good  ;  hunger, 
plenty  ;  weariness,  rest.  R.  P.  48  b. 

(105-10 7)  It  is  hard  to  fight  with  one’s  heart’s  desire.2 
Whatever  it  wishes  to  get,  it  purchases  at  the  cost  of  soul. 
R.  P.  49  a. 

(108,  109)  It  is  best  to  hide  folly  ;  but  it  is  hard  in  times  of 
relaxation,  over  our  cups. 

(no)  And  it  is  law,  too,  to  obey  the  counsel  of  one.  R.  P.  49  a. 

(m)  For  what  thought  or  wisdom  have  they  ?  They  follow 
the  poets  and  take  the  crowd  as  their  teacher,  knowing  not  that 
there  are  many  bad  and  few  good.  For  even  the  best  of  them 
choose  one  thing  above  all  others,  immortal  glory  among  mortals, 
while  most  of  them  are  glutted  like  beasts.3  R.  P.  31  a. 

(112)  In  Priene  lived  Bias,  son  of  Teutamas,  who  is 
of  more  account  than  the  rest.  (He  said,  “Most  men  are 
.bad.”) 

(113)  One  is  ten  thousand  to  me,  if  he  be  the  best.  R.  P.  31  a. 

(114)  The  Ephesians  would  do  well  to  hang  themselves, 
every  grown  man  of  them,  and  leave  the  city  to  beardless  lads  ; 
for  they  have  cast  out  Hermodoros,  the  best  man  among  them, 

1  Adopting  Heitz’s  ko.k6v  for  Kai  with  Diels. 

2  -The  word  gv;^  has  its  Homeric  sense.  The  gratification  of  desire 
implies  the  exchange  of  dry  soul-fire  (fr.  74)  for  moisture  (fr.  72).  Aristotle 
misunderstood  0v/j.6s  here  as  anger  (Eth.  Nic.  B,  2.  1 105  a  8) 

3  This  seems  to  refer  to  the  “  three  fives,”  Chap.  II.  §  45  p  g8 


HERAKLEITOS  OF  EPHESOS  I41 

saying,  “  We  will  have  none  who  is  best  among  us  ;  if  there  be 
any  such,  let  him  be  so  elsewhere  and  among  others.”  1  R.  P.  29  b. 

(115)  Dogs  bark  at  every  one  they  do  not  know.  R.  P 
31  a. 

(116)  .  .  .  (The  wise  man)  is  not  known  because  of  men’s 
want  of  belief. 

(117)  The  fool  is  fluttered  at  every  word.  R.  P.  44  b.  ' 

(118)  The  most  esteemed  of  them  knows  but  fancies,2  and 
holds  fast  to  them,  yet  of  a  truth  justice  shall  overtake  the 
artificers  of  lies  and  the  false  witnesses. 

(119)  Homer  should  be  turned  out  of  the  fists  and  whipped, 
and  Archilochos  likewise.  R.  P.  31. 

(120)  One  day  is  like  any  other. 

(12 1)  Man’s  character  is  his  fate.3 

(122)  There  awaits  men  when  they  die  such  things  as  they 

look  not  for  nor  dream  of.  R.  P.  46  d.  y 

(123)  ...  4  that  they  rise  up  and  become  the  wakeful 
guardians  of  the  quick  and  dead.  R.  P.  46  d. 

(124)  Night-walkers,  Magians,  Bakchoi,  Lenai,  and  the 
initiated  .  .  . 

(•^25)  The  mysteries  practised  among  men  are  unholy 
mysteries.  R.  P.  48. 

(126)  And  they  pray  to  these  images,  as  if  one  were  to  talk 
with  a  man’s  house,  knowing  not  what  gods  or  heroes  are. 
R.  P.  49  a. 

(127)  For  if  it  were  not  to  Dionysos  that  they  made  a  proces¬ 
sion  and  sang  the  shameful  phallic  hymn,  they  would  be  acting 
most  shamelessly.  But  Hades  is  the  same  as  Dionysos  in  whose 
honour  they  go  mad  and  rave.  R.  P.  49. 

(129,  130)  They  vainly  purify  themselves  by  defiling  them¬ 
selves  with  blood,  just  as  if  one  who  had  stepped  into  the  mud 
were  to  wash  his  feet  in  mud.  Any  man  who  marked  him  doing 
thus,  would  deem  him  mad.  R.  P.  49  a. 


1  He  went  to  Italy  and  took  part  in  framing  the  Twelve  Tables  at 
Rome.  See  p.  131,  n.  1. 

2  Reading  SoKeovra  with  Schleiermacher  (or  SokIovt  Cbv  with  Diels). 
I  also  read  yivuvKiu,  <pv\d<r<rei  with  Diels,  who  quotes  the  combination 
<pv\d<Taov<ri  Kal  yunlxrKoucn  from  Hippokrates. 

3  On  the  meaning  of  Salfuav  here,  see  my  edition  of  Aristotle’s  Ethics 
pp.  1  sq. 

4  I  have  not  ventured  to  include  the  words  Zv6a  S’  iSvn  at  the  beginning, 
as  the  text  seems  to  me  too  uncertain.  See,  however,  Diels’s  note. 


142 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


The  doxo- 
graphical 
tradition. 


66.  Some  of  these  fragments  are  far  from  clear,  and 
there  are  probably  not  a  few  of  which  the  meaning  will 
never  be  recovered.  We  turn,  then,  to  the  doxographers 
for  a  clue  ;  but  unfortunately  they  are  less  instructive  with 
regard  to  Herakleitos  than  we  have  found  them  in  other 
cases.  Hippolytos,  on  whom  we  can  generally  rely  for  a 
fairly  accurate  account  of  what  Theophrastos  said,  derived 
the  material  for  his  first  four  chapters,  which  treat  of  Thales, 
Pythagoras,  Herakleitos,  and  Empedokles,  not  from  the 
excellent  epitome  he  afterwards  used,  but  from  a  bio¬ 
graphical  compendium,1  mostly  consisting  of  apocryphal 
anecdotes  and  apophthegms.  It  was  based,  further,  on 
some  writer  of  Successions  who  regarded  Herakleitos  as  a 
Pythagorean.  The  link  between  him  and  the  Pythagoreans 
was  Hippasos,  in  whose  system  fire  played  an  important 
part.  Theophrastos,  following  Aristotle,  had  spoken  of  the 
two  in  the  same  sentence,  and  that  was  enough  for  the 
writers  of  Successions .2  We  are  forced,  then,  to  look  to  the 
more  detailed  of  the  two  accounts  of  the  opinions  of  Hera¬ 
kleitos  given  in  Diogenes,3  which  goes  back  to  the  Vetusta 
Placita,  and  is,  fortunately,  pretty  full  and  accurate. 

Another  difficulty  we  have  to  face  is  that  most  of  the 
commentators  on  Herakleitos  mentioned  in  Diogenes  were 
Stoics.4  Now,  the  Stoics  held  the  Ephesian  in  peculiar 
veneration,  and  sought  to  interpret  him  as  far  as  possible 
in  accordance  with  their  own  system.  Further,  they  were 
fond  of  “  accommodating”5  the  views  of  earlier  thinkers 
to  their  own,  and  this  has  had  serious  consequences.  In 


as 


1  See  Diels,  Dox.  p.  145.  We  must  distinguish  Ref.  i.  and  Ref.  ix 
sources  of  information  about  Herakleitos.  The  latter  book  is  an 


AicicHuciiub.  iue  latter  Dook  is  an 
attempt  to  show  that  the  Monarchian  heresy  of  Noetos  was  derived  from 
Herakleitos,  and  is  a  rich  mine  of  Herakleitean  fragments. 

2  Arist.  Met.  A,  3-  984  a  7  (R.  P.  56  c)  ;  Theophr.  ap.  Simpl.  Phys  21 

33  (R.  P.  36  c).  J 

3  For  these  double  accounts  see  Note  on  Sources,  §  15. 

4  Diog.  ix.  15  (R.  P.  30  c).  Schleiermacher  rightly  insisted  upon  this. 

*  The  word  avvoinuodv  is  used  of  the  Stoic  method  of  interpretation  by 

Philodemos  (cf.  Dox.  547  b,  n.),  and  Cicero  (N.D.  i.  41)  renders  it  by 
accommodate. 


HERAKLEITOS  OF  EPHESOS 


143 

particular,  the  Stoic  theories  of  the  \o<yo?  and  the  iKTrvpcdcns 
are  constantly  ascribed  to  Herakleitos,  and  the  very  frag¬ 
ments  are  adulterated  with  scraps  of  Stoic  terminology. 

67.  Herakleitos  looks  down  not  only  on  the  mass  of  men,  The 
but  on  all  previous  inquirers  into  nature.  This  must  mean  ^s^overy 
that  he  believed  himself  to  have  attained  insight  into  some  kleitos. 
truth  not  hitherto  recognised,  though  it  was  staring  men  in 

the  face  (fr.  93).  To  get  at  the  central  thing  in  his  teaching, 
we  must  try  then  to  find  out  what  he  was  thinking  of  when 
he  launched  into  those  denunciations  of  human  dulness  and 
ignorance.  The  answer  seems  to  be  given  in  two  fragments, 

18  and  45.  From  them  we  gather  that  the  truth  hitherto 
ignored  is  that  the  many  apparently  independent  and  con¬ 
flicting  things  we  know  are  really  one,  and  that,  on  the  other 
hand,  this  one  is  also  many.  The  “  strife  of  opposites  ”  is 
really  an  “  attunement  ”  (< ip/iovia ).  From  this  it  follows 
that  wisdom  is  not  a  knowledge  of  many  things,  but  the 
perception  of  the  underlying  unity  of  the  warring  opposites. 

That  this  really  was  the  fundamental  thought  of  Herakleitos 
is  stated  by  Philo.  He  says  :  “  For  that  which  is  made  up 
of  both  the  opposites  is  one  ;  and,  when  the  one  is  divided, 
the  opposites  are  disclosed.  Is  not  this  just  what  the  Greeks 
say  their  great  and  much  belauded  Herakleitos  put  in  the 
forefront  of  his  philosophy  as  summing  it  all  up,  and  boasted 
of  as  a  new  discovery  ?  ”  1 

68.  Anaximander  had  taught  that  the  opposites  were  The  one 
separated  out  from  the  Boundless,  but  passed  away  into  it  ^yhe 
once  more,  so  paying  the  penalty  to  one  another  for  their 
unjust  encroachments.  It  is  here  implied  that  there  is 
something  wrong  in  the  war  of  opposites,  and  that  the 
existence  of  the  opposites  is  a  breach  in  the  unity  of  the  One. 

The  truth  Herakleitos  proclaimed  was  that  the  world  is  at 
once  one  and  many,  and  that  it  is  just  the  “  opposite  tension  ” 
of  the  opposites  that  constitutes  the  unity  of  the  One.  It 
is  the  same  conclusion  as  that  of  Pythagoras,  though  it  is 

1  Philo,  Rer.  div.  her.  43  (R.  P.  34  e). 


i44 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


put  in  another  way.  The  use  of  the  word  apfMov'irj  suggests 
that  Herakleitos  had  come  under  the  influence  of  his  older 
contemporary  to  some  extent. 

Plato  clearly  states  that  this  was  the  central  thought 
of  Herakleitos.  In  the  Sophist  (242  d),  the  Eleatic  stranger, 
after  explaining  how  the  Eleatics  maintained  that  what  we 
call  many  is  really  one,  proceeds  : 

But  certain  Ionian  and  (at  a  later  date)  certain  Sicilian 
Muses  remarked  that  it  was  safest  to  unite  these  two  things,  and 
to  say  that  reality  is  both  many  and  one,  and  is  kept  together  by 
Hate  and  Love.  For,  say  the  more  severe  Muses,  “in  its 
division  it  is  always  being  brought  together  ”  (cf.  fr.  59)  ;  while 
the  softer  Muses  relaxed  the  requirement  that  this  should  always 
be  so,  and  said  that  the  All  was  alternately  one  and  at  peace 
through  the  power  of  Aphrodite,  and  many  and  at  war  with  itself 
because  of  something  they  called  Strife. 


In  this  passage  the  Ionian  Muses  stand,  of  course,  for 
Herakleitos,  and  the  Sicilian  for  Empedokles.  According 
to  Plato,  then,  Herakleitos  taught  that  reality  was  at  once 
many  and  one.  This  was  not  meant  as  a  logical  principle.1 
The  identity  which  Herakleitos  explains  as  consisting  in 
difference  is  just  that  of  the  primary  substance  in  all  its 
manifestations.  This  identity  had  been  realised  already 
by  the  Milesians,  but  they  had  found  a  difficulty  in  the 
difference.  .  Anaximander  had  treated  the  strife  of  opposites 
as  an  “injustice,”  and  what  Herakleitos  set  himself  to 


1  This  was  the  mistake  of  Lassalle's  book.  The  source  of  his  error 
was  Hegeis  statement  that  there  was  no  proposition  of  Herakleitos  that 
he  had  not  taken  up  into  his  own  logic  (Gesch.  d.  Phil  i  528)  The 
example  which  he  cites  is  the  statement  that  Being  does  not  exist  any 
more  than  not- Being,  for  which  he  refers  to  Arist .Met.  A,  4.  This  how- 
ever,  is  not  there  ascribed  to  Herakleitos,  but  to  Leukippos  or  Demo- 
kntos  with  whom  it  meant  that  space  was  as  real  as  body  (§  175) 
Aristotle  does,  indeed,  tell  us  in  the  Metaphysics  that  “some’’  think 
Herakleitos  says  that  the  same  thing  can  be  and  not  be  ;  but  he  adds 
that  it  does  not  follow  that  a  man  thinks  what  he  says  (Met.  r,  3.  1005  b  24) 
This  is  explained  by  K.  5-  1062  a  31,  where  we  are  told  that  by  bei™ 
questioned  in  a  certain  manner  Herakleitos  could  be  made  to  admit  the 

In  otlf  T  f  0n  ’’  ^  ^  WaS’  hG  dM  DOt  Understand  he  said. 
In  other  words,  he  was  unconscious  of  its  logical  bearing. 


HERAKLEITOS  OF  EPHESOS  145 

show  was  that,  on  the  contrary,  it  was  the  highest  justice 
(fr.  62). 

69.  All  this  made  it  necessary  for  him  to  seek  out  a  new  Fire, 
primary  substance.  He  wanted  not  merely  something 
from  which  opposites  could  be  “  separated  out,”  but  some¬ 
thing  which  of  its  own  nature  would  pass  into  everything 
else,  while  everything  else  would  pass  in  turn  into  it.  This 

he  found  in  Fire,  and  it  is  easy  to  see  why,  if  we  consider 
the  phenomenon  of  combustion.  The  quantity  of  fire  in  a 
flame  burning  steadily  appears  to  remain  the  same,  the 
flame  seems  to  be  what  we  call  a  “  thing.”  And  yet  the 
substance  of  it  is  continually  changing.  It  is  always  passing 
away  in  smoke,  and  its  place  is  always  being  taken  by  fresh 
matter  from  the  fuel  that  feeds  it.  This  is  just  what  we 
want.  If  we  regard  the  world  as  an  "  ever-living  fire  ” 

(fr.  20),  we  can  understand  how  it  is  always  becoming  all 
things,  while  all  things  are  always  returning  to  it.1 

70.  This  necessarily  brings  with  it  a  certain  way  of  Flux, 
looking  at  the  change  and  movement  of  the  world.  Fire 
bums  continuously  and  without  interruption.  It  is  always 
consuming  fuel  and  always  liberating  smoke.  Everything  is 
either  mounting  upwards  to  serve  as  fuel,  or  sinking  down- 

1  That  the  Fire  of  Herakleitos  was  something  on  the  same  level  as  the 
“  Air  ”  of  Anaximenes  is  clearly  implied  in  such  passages  as  Arist.  Met. 

A,  3.  984  a  5.  In  support  of  the  view  that  something  different  from 
literal  fire  is  meant,  Plato,  Crat.  413  b,  is  sometimes  quoted  ;  but  the  con¬ 
text  shows  the  passage  will  not  bear  this  interpretation.  Sokrates  is  dis¬ 
cussing  the  derivation  of  SiKaiov  from  Sia-i6v,  and  certainly  oiK-q  was  a 
prominent  Herakleitean  conception,  and  a  good  deal  that  is  here  said 
may  be  the  authentic  doctrine  of  the  school.  He  goes  on  to  complain 
that  when  he  asks  what  this  is  which  “  goes  through  ”  everything,  he  gets 
inconsistent  answers.  One  says  it  is  the  sun.  Another  asks  if  there  is 
no  justice  after  sunset,  and  says  it  is  simply  fire.  A  third  says  it  is  not 
fire  itself,  but  the  heat  which  is  in  fire.  A  fourth  identifies  it  with  Mind. 

Now  all  we  are  entitled  to  infer  from  this  is  that  different  accounts  were 
given  in  the  Herakleitean  school  at  a  later  date.  The  view  that  it  was 
not  fire  itself,  but  Heat,  which  “passed  through”  all  things,  is  reh'ted  to 
the  theory  of  Herakleitos  as  Hippo’s  Moisture  is  to  the  Water  of  Thales. 

It  is  quite  likely,  too,  that  some  Herakleiteans  attempted  to  fuse  the 
system  of  Anaxagoras  with  their  own,  just  as  Diogenes  of  Apollonia  tried 
to  fuse  it  with  that  of  Anaximenes.  We  shall  see,  indeed,  that  we  still 
have  a  work  in  which  this  attempt  is  made  (p.  150,  n.  2). 


10 


The  Up¬ 
ward  and 
Down¬ 
ward 
path. 


146  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


wards  after  having  nourished  the  flame.  It  follows  that 
the  whole  of  reality  is  like  an  ever-flowing  stream,  and  that 
nothing  is  ever  at  rest  for  a  moment.  The  substance  of  the 
things  we  see  is  in  constant  change.  Even  as  we  look  at 
them,  some  of  the  stuff  of  which  they  are  composed  has 
already  passed  into  something  else,  while  fresh  stuff  has 
come  into  them  from  another  source.  This  is  usually 
summed  up,  appropriately  enough,  in  the  phrase  “All 
things  are  flowing  ’’  (7 rdvra  pel),  though  this  does  not  seem 
to  be  a  quotation  from  Herakleitos.  Plato,  however, 
expresses  the  idea  quite  clearly.  “  Nothing  ever  is,  everv- 
thmg  is,  becoming  ”  ;  “All  things  are  in  motion  like 
streams  ;  “All  things  are  passing,  and  nothing  abides  ’’  ; 
“Herakleitos  says  somewhere  that  all  things  pass  and 
naught  abides  ;  and,  comparing  things  to  the  current  of  a 
river,  he  says  you  cannot  step  twice  into  the  same  stream  ” 
(cf.  fr.  41)  these  are  the  terms  in  which  he  describes  the 
system.  And  Aristotle  says  the  same  thing,  “  All  things  are 
in  motion,”  “  nothing  steadfastly  is.”  1  Herakleitos  held,  in 
fact,  that  any  given  thing,  however  stable  in  appearance  was 
merely  a  section  in  the  stream,  and  that  the  stuff  composing 
it  was  never  the  same  in  any  two  consecutive  moments.  We 
shall  see  presently  how  he  conceived  the  process  to  operate  ; 
meanwhile  we  remark  that  this  is  not  the  most  original 
feature  of  the  system.  The  Milesians  had  held  a  similar  view. 

71.  Herakleitos  appears  to  have  worked  out  the  details 
with  reference  to  the  theories  of  Anaximenes.2  It  is  unlikely, 
however,  that  he  explained  the  transformations  of  matter 
by  means  of  rarefaction  and  condensation.3  Theophrastos 
it  appears,  suggested  that  he  did  ;  but  he  allowed  it  was  by 
no  means  clear.  The  passage  from  Diogenes  we  are  about 
to  quote  has  faithfully  preserved  this  touch.4  In  the 


b 


1  Plato,  Theaet.  152  e  1  ;  Crat.  401  d  5,  402  a  8  ;  Arist.  Top.  A  n  104 

22  ,  De  caelo,  r,  1.  298  b  30  ;  Phys.  0,  3.  233  b  2  *  4 

2  See  above,  Chap.  I.  §  29. 


3  See,  however,  the  remark  of  Diels 
Diog.  ix.  8,  <xa<fi£>s  8'  ovdtv  itcrldeTai. 


(Dox.  p.  165)  quoted  R. 


P.  36  c. 


HERAKLEITOS  OF  EPHESOS 


147 


fragments  we  find  nothing  about  rarefaction  and  condensa¬ 
tion.  The  expression  used  is  “  exchange  ”  (fr.  22),  a  very 
good  name  for  what  happens  when  fire  gives  out  smoke  and 
takes  in  fuel  instead. 

It  has  been  pointed  out  that,  in  default  of  Hippolytos, 
our  best  account  of  the  Theophrastean  doxography  of 
Herakleitos  is  the  fuller  of  the  two  accounts  given  in  Laertios 
Diogenes.  It  is  as  follows  : 

His  opinions  on  particular  points  are  these  : 

He  held  that  Fire  was  the  element,  and  that  all  things  were 
an  exchange  for  fire,  produced  by  condensation  and  rarefaction. 
But  he  explains  nothing  clearly.  All  things  were  produced  in 
opposition,  and  all  things  were  in  flux  like  a  river. 

The  all  is  finite  and  the  world  is  one.  It  arises  from  fire,  and  is 
consumed  again  by  fire  alternately  through  all  eternity  in  certain 
cycles.  This  happens  according  to  fate.  Of  the  opposites,  that 
which  leads  to  the  becoming  of  the  world  is  called  War  and  Strife ; 
that  which  leads  to  the  final  conflagration  is  Concord  and  Peace. 

He  called  change  the  upward  and  the  downward  path,  and 
held  that  the  world  comes  into  being  in  virtue  of  this.  When 
fire  is  condensed  it  becomes  moist,  and  when  compressed  it  turns 
to  water  ;  water  being  congealed  turns  to  earth,  and  this  he  calls 
the  downward  path.  And,  again,  the  earth  is  in  turn  liquefied, 
and  from  it  water  arises,  and  from  that  everything  else  ;  for 
he  refers  almost  everything  to  the  evaporation  from  the  sea. 
This  is  the  path  upwards.  R.  P.  36. 

He  held,  too,  that  exhalations  arose  both  from  the  sea  and 
the  land  ;  some  bright  and  pure,  others  dark.  Fire  was  nourished 
by  the  bright  ones,  and  moisture  by  the  others. 

He  does  not  make  it  clear  what  is  the  nature  of  that  which 
surrounds  the  world.  He  held,  however,  that  there  were  bowls 
in  it  with  the  concave  sides  turned  towards  us,  in  which  the 
bright  exhalations  were  collected  and  produced  flames.  These 
were  the  heavenly  bodies. 

The  flame  of  the  sun  was  the  brightest  and  wannest ;  for 
the  other  heavenly  bodies  were  more  distant  from  the  earth  ; 
and  for  that  reason  gave  less  light  and  heat.  The  moon,  on  the 
other  hand,  was  nearer  the  earth  ;  but  it  moved  through  an 
impure  region.  The  sun  moved  in  a  bright  and  unmixed  region 


148  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 

and  at  the  same  time  was  at  just  the  right  distance  from  us. 
That  is  why  it  gives  more  heat  and  light.  The  eclipses  of  the 
sun  and  moon  were  due  to  the  turning  of  the  bowls  upwards, 
while  the  monthly  phases  of  the  moon  were  produced  by  a 
gradual  turning  of  its  bowl. 

Day  and  night,  months  and  seasons  and  years,  rains  and 
winds,  and  things  like  these,  were  due  to  the  different  exhalations. 
The  bright  exhalation,  when  ignited  in  the  circle  of  the  sun, 
produced  day,  and  the  preponderance  of  the  opposite  exhalations 
produced  night.  The  increase  of  warmth  proceeding  from  the 
bright  exhalation  produced  summer,  and  the  preponderance  of 
moisture  from  the  dark  exhalation  produced  winter.  He  assigns 
the  causes  of  other  things  in  conformity  with  this. 

As  to  the  earth,  he  makes  no  clear  statement  about  its  nature, 
any  more  than  he  does  about  that  of  the  bowls. 

These,  then,  were  his  opinions.  R.  P.  39  b. 

Now,  if  we  can  trust  this  passage,  it  is  of  the  greatest 
value ;  and  that,  upon  the  whole,  we  can  trust  it  is  shown 
by  the  fact  that  it  follows  the  exact  order  of  topics  to  which 
all  the  doxographies  derived  from  the  work  of  Theophrastos 
adhere.  First  we  have  the  primary  substance,  then  the  world 
then  the  heavenly  bodies,  and  lastly,  meteorological  pheno¬ 
mena.  We  conclude,  then,  that  it  may  be  accepted  with  the 
exceptions,  firstly,  of  the  probably  erroneous  conjecture  of 
Theophrastos  as  to  rarefaction  and  condensation-  and 
secondly,  of  some  pieces  of  Stoical  interpretation  which  come 
from  the  Vetusta  Placita. 

Let  us  look  at  the  details.  The  pure  fire,  we  are  told  is 
to  be  found  chiefly  in  the  sun.  This,  like  the  other  heavenly 
bodies,  is  a  trough  or  bowl,  with  the  concave  side  turned 
towards  us,  m  which  the  bright  exhalations  from  the  sea 
collect  and  burn.  How  does  the  fire  of  the  sun  pass  into 
other  forms  ?  If  we  look  at  the  fragments  which  deal  with 
the  downward  path,  we  find  that  the  first  transformation  it 
undergoes  is  into  sea,  and  we  are  further  told  that  half  of 
the  sea  is  earth  and  half  of  it  Trp^crr^p  (fr.  21).  What  is 
this  7 rpvarrtp  ?  So  far  as  I  know,  no  one  has  yet  proposed 


HERAKLEITOS  OF  EPHESOS 


149 


to  take  the  word  in  the  sense  it  usually  bears  elsewhere, 
that,  namely,  of  hurricane  accompanied  by  a  fiery  water¬ 
spout.1  Yet  surely  this  is  just  what  is  wanted.  It  is  amply 
attested  that  Herakleitos  explained  the  rise  of  the  sea  to 
fire  by  means  of  the  bright  evaporations  ;  and  we  want  a 
similar  meteorological  explanation  of  the  passing  of  fire 
back  into  sea.  We  want,  in  fact,  something  which  will 
stand  equally  for  the  smoke  produced  by  the  burning  of  the 
sun  and  for  the  immediate  stage  between  fire  and  water. 
What  could  serve  the  turn  better  than  a  fiery  waterspout  ? 
It  sufficiently  resembles  smoke  to  be  accounted  for  as  the 
product  of  the  sun’s  combustion,  and  it  certainly  comes 
down  in  the  form  of  water.  And  this  interpretation  becomes 
practically  certain  when  taken  in  connexion  with  the  report 
of  Aetios  as  to  the  Herakleitean  theory  of  7775770-777/56?.  They 
were  due,  we  are  told,  “  to  the  kindling  and  extinction  of 
clouds.”  2  In  other  words,  the  bright  vapour,  after  kindling 
in  the  bowl  of  the  sun  and  going  out  again,  reappears  as 
the  dark  fiery  storm-cloud,  and  so  passes  once  more  into  sea. 
At  the  next  stage  we  find  water  continually  passing  into 
earth.  We  are  already  familiar  with  this  idea  (§  10). 
Turning  to  the  “  upward  path,”  we  find  that  the  earth  is 
liquefied  in  the  same  proportion  as  the  sea  becomes  earth, 
so  that  the  sea  is  still  “  measured  by  the  same  tale  ”  (fr.  23). 
Half  of  it  is  earth  and  half  of  it  is  7rpr]aTijp  (fr.  21).  This 
must  mean  that,  at  any  given  moment,  half  of  the  sea  is 
taking  the  downward  path,  and  has  just  been  fiery  storm- 
cloud,  while  half  of  it  is  going  up,  and  has  just  been  earth. 
In  proportion  as  the  sea  is  increased  by  rain,  water  passes 

1  This  was  written  in  1890.  In  his  Herakleitos  von  Ephesos  (1901) 
Diels  takes  it  as  I  did,  rendering  Glutwind.  Cf.  Herod,  vii.  42,  and 
Lucretius  vi.  424.  Seneca  ( Q.N .  ii.  56)  calls  it  igneus  turbo.  The  opinions 
of  early  philosophers  on  these  phenomena  are  collected  in  Aetios  iii.  3. 
The  irpyjarrip  of  Anaximander  (Chap.  I.  p.  68,  n.  2)  is  a  different  thing. 
Greek  sailors  probably  named  the  meteorological  phenomena  after  the 
familiar  bellows  of  the  smith. 

2  Aet.  iii.  3.  9,  Trp-paTripas  SI  Kara  vefpuv  i^irp-tiaeis  k al  crpicreis  (sc. 

'Hp(i/c\etros  in  ofpa.lv  era.i  ylyveaOai). 


i5o 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Measure 

for 

measure. 


into  earth  ;  in  proportion  as  the  sea  is  diminished  by 
evaporation,  it  is  fed  by  the  earth.  Lastly,  the  ignition  of 
the  bright  vapour  from  the  sea  in  the  bowl  of  the  sun 
completes  the  circle  of  the  “  upward  and  downward  path.” 

72.  How  is  it  that,  in  spite  of  this  constant  flux,  things 
appear  relatively  stable  ?  The  answer  of  Herakleitos  was 
that  it  is  owing  to  the  observance  of  the  “  measures,”  in 
virtue  of  which  the  aggregate  bulk  of  each  form  of  matter 
in  the  long  run  remains  the  same,  though  its  substance 
is  constantly  changing.  Certain  “  measures  ”  of  the 
“  ever-living  fire  ”  are  always  being  kindled,  while  like 
“  measures  ”  are  always  going  out  (fr.  20).  All  things 
are  "  exchanged  ”  for  fire  and  fire  for  all  things  (fr.  22), 
and  this  implies  that  for  everything  it  takes,  fire  will  give 
as  much.  "The  sun  will  not  exceed  his  measures”  (fr.  29). 

And  yet  the  “  measures  ”  are  not  absolutely  fixed.  We 
gather  from  the  passage  of  Diogenes  quoted  above  that 
Theophrastos  spoke  of  an  alternate  preponderance  of  the 
bright  and  dark  exhalations,  and  Aristotle  speaks  of  Hera¬ 
kleitos  as  explaining  all  things  by  evaporation.1  In  parti¬ 
cular,  the  alternation  of  day  and  night,  summer  and  winter, 
were  accounted  for  in  this  way.  Now,  in  a  passage  of  the 
pseudo-Hippokratean  treatise  Hep!  Suiltijs  which  is  almost 
certainly  of  Herakleitean  origin,2  we  read  of  an  “  advance  of 


1  Arist.  De  an.  B,  2.  405  a  26,  tt)v  avadvixla<nv  tJs  rSXXa  &vvl<TTr)<nv. 

The  presence  of  Herakleitean  matter  in  this  treatise  was  pointed  out 
by  Gesner,  but  Bernays  was  the  first  to  make  any  considerable  use  of  it  in 
reconstructing  the  system.  The  older  literature  of  the  subject  has  been  in 
the  mam  superseded  by  Carl  Fredrichs'  Hippokraiische  Untersuchungen 
(1899).  He  shows  that  (as  I  said  already  in  the  first  edition)  the  work 
belongs  to  the  period  of  eclecticism  and  reaction  briefly  characterised  in 
§  184  and  he  points  out  that  c  3,  which  was  formerly  supposed  to  be 
mainly  Herakleitean,  is  strongly  influenced  by  Empedokles  and  Anaxa¬ 
goras.  I  think  however,  that  he  goes  wrong  in  attributing  the  section  to 
a  nameiess  Physiker  "  of  the  school  of  Archelaos,  or  even  to  Archelaos 
lmself  it  is  far  more  like  what  we  should  expect  from  the  eclectic 
Herakleiteans  described  by  Plato  in  Crat.  413  c  (see  p.  145,  »  t)  He  is 
certainly  wrong  in  holding  the  doctrine  of  the  balance  of  fire  and  water 
not  to  be  Herakleitean,  and  there  is  no  justification  for  separating  the 
remark  quoted  m  the  text  from  its  context  because  it  happens  to  Lree 
almost  verbally  with  the  beginning  of  c  3, 


HERAKLEITOS  OF  EPHESOS 


I5i 

fire  and  water  ”  in  connexion  with  day  and  night  and  the 
courses  of  the  sun  and  moon.1  In  fr.  26,  again,  we  read  of 
fire  advancing,  and  all  these  things  seem  to  be  closely 
connected.  We  must  therefore  try  to  see  whether  there  is 
anything  in  the  remaining  fragments  that  bears  on  the 
subject. 

73.  In  studying  this  alternate  advance  of  fire  and  water, 
it  will  be  convenient  to  start  with  the  microcosm.  We  have 
more  definite  information  about  the  two  exhalations  in 
man  than  about  the  analogous  processes  in  the  world  at 
large,  and  it  would  seem  that  Herakleitos  himself  explained 
the  world  by  man  rather  than  man  by  the  world.  Aristotle 
implies  that  soul  is  identical  with  the  dry  exhalation,2  and 
this  is  confirmed  by  the  fragments.  Man  is  made  up  of 
three  things,  fire,  water,  and  earth.  But,  just  as  in  the 
macrocosm  fire  is  identified  with  the  one  wisdom,  so  in  the 
microcosm  the  fire  alone  is  conscious.  When  it  has  left  the 
body,  the  remainder,  the  mere  earth  and  water,  is  altogether 
worthless  (fr.  85).  Of  course,  the  fire  which  animates  man 
is  subject  to  the  “  upward  and  downward  path,”  just  as 
much  as  the  fire  of  the  world.  The  Uepl  SuUrw  has  pre¬ 
served  the  obviously  Herakleitean  sentence  :  “All  things 
are  passing,  both  human  and  divine,  upwards  and  down¬ 
wards  by  exchanges.”  3  We  are  just  as  much  in  perpetual 
flux  as  anything  else  in  the  world.  We  are  and  are  not  the 
same  for  two  consecutive  instants  (fr.  81).  The  fire  in  us  is 
perpetually  becoming  water,  and  the  water  earth  ;  but,  as 

1  Uepl  ScaLrijs,  i.  5  ■  ^  read  thus  :  Tjpbpij  Kal  ev<ppov7j  ex l  TO  ppkuttov  Kcil 
e\dxL<rrov  ■  ij\i os,  aeX-fivr)  8x1  t6  pr/KKTTov  Kal  8XAxi/ttov  •  xvpbs  8<j>o8os  teal 
vdo.To$'  In  any  case,  the  sentence  occurs  between  x copel  88  xAvra  Kal  Oeia 
Kal  Avdpuxiva  Aviv  Kal  kAtu  Apeifibpeva  and  xAvra  ravra  Kal  08  rA  abrd, 
which  are  surely  Herakleitean  utterances. 

2  Arist.  De  an.  A,  2.  405  a  25  (R.  P.  38).  Diels  attributes  to  Herakleitos 
himself  the  words  Kal  i/'t %al  88  ax8  tG>v  byp&u  Avadv^uCovrai,  which  are 
found  in  Areios  Didymos  after  fr.  42.  I  can  hardly  believe,  however, 
that  the  word  avadv/aiaais  is  Herakleitean.  He  seems  rather  to  have 
called  the  two  exhalations  Kaxvis  and  App  (cf.  fr.  37). 

3  Uepl  Bialr-ps  i.  5,  xwpei  88  xavra  Kal  _  0eia  Kal  avdpdixiva  &vu  Kal  Kara 
Ap.eil36p.eva. 


Man. 


152 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


(a)  Sleep¬ 
ing  and 
waking. 


the  opposite  process  goes  on  simultaneously,  we  appear  to 
remain  the  same.1 

74-  This,  however,  is  not  all.  Man  is  subject  to  a  certain 
oscillation  in  his  “  measures  ”  of  fire  and  water,  which  gives 
rise  to  the  alternations  of  sleeping  and  waking,  life  and  death. 
The  locus  classicus  on  this  is  a  passage  of  Sextus  Empiricus, 
which  reproduces  the  account  given  by  Ainesidemos.2  It  is 
as  follows  (R.  P.  41)  : 


The  natural  philosopher  is  of  opinion  that  what  surrounds 
us  3  is  rational  and  endowed  with  consciousness.  According  to 
Herakleitos,  when  we  draw  in  this  divine  reason  by  means  of 
respiration,  we  become  rational.  In  sleep  we  forget,  but  at  our 
waking  we  become  conscious  once  more.  For  in  sleep,  when  the 
openings  of  the  senses  close,  the  mind  which  is  in  us  is  cut  off 
from  contact  with  that  which  surrounds  us,  and  only  our  con¬ 
nexion  with  it  by  means  of  respiration  is  preserved  as  a  sort  of 
root  (from  which  the  rest  may  spring  again) ;  and,  when  it  is  thus 
separated,  it  loses  the  power  of  memory  that  it  had  before. 
When  we  awake  again,  however,  it  looks  out  through  the  openings 
of  the  senses,  as  if  through  windows,  and  coming  together  with 
the  surrounding  mind,  it  assumes  the  power  of  reason.  Just, 
then,  as  embers,  when  they  are  brought  near  the  fire,  change 
and  become  red-hot,  and  go  out  when  they  are  taken  away  from 
it  again,  so  does  the  portion  of  the  surrounding  mind  which 
sojourns  m  our  body  become  irrational  when  it  is  cut  off,  and  so 
does  it  become  of  like  nature  to  the  whole  when  contact  is  estab¬ 
lished  through  the  greatest  number  of  openings. 


1  We  seem  to  have  a  reference  to  this  in  Epicharmos  fr  2  Diels 

(170  b,  Kaibel)  :  "  Look  now  at  men  too.  One  grows  and  another’passes 
away  and  all  are  m  change  always.  What  changes  in  its  substance  („r4 
fV<riv)  a°d  "ever  abides  in  the  same  spot,  will  already  be  something  different 
from  what  has  passed  away.  So  thou  and  I  were  different  yesterday  and 
are  now  quite  other  people,  and  again  we  shall  become  others  and7  even 
the  same  again  and  so  on  in  the  same  way.”  This  is  said  by  a  debtor 
who  does  not  wish  to  pay.  y  ueuTOr 

2  Sextus  quotes  "Ainesidemos  according  to  Herakleitos.”  Natoro 
holds  (Forschungen,  p.  78)  that  Ainesidemos  really  did  combine  Herakleb 
teanism  with  Skepticism.  Diels  (Box.  pp.  2x0,  21 1),  insists  that  he  only 

ZZFJtr*  the,the0nes  of  Herakleitos.  This  controversy  does 
not  affect  the  use  we  make  of  the  passage. 

3  T6  it epctXov  opposed  to  but  parallel  with  rb  nep^Xoy  ray  k6^ov. 


HERAKLEITOS  OF  EPHESOS  153 

In  this  passage  there  is  clearly  a  large  admixture  of  later 
ideas.  In  particular,  the  identification  of  “  that  which 
surrounds  us  ”  with  the  air  cannot  be  Herakleitean  ;  for 
Herakleitos  knew  nothing  of  air  except  as  a  form  of  water 
(§  27)-  The  reference  to  the  pores  or  openings  of  the  senses 
is  probably  foreign  to  him  also  ;  for  the  theory  of  pores  is 
due  to  Alkmaion  (§  96).  Lastly,  the  distinction  between 
mind  and  body  is  far  too  sharply  drawn.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  important  role  assigned  to  respiration  may  very 
well  be  Herakleitean ;  for  we  have  met  with  it  already  in 
Anaximenes.  And  we  can  hardly  doubt  that  the  striking 
simile  of  the  embers  which  glow  when  brought  near  the  fire 
is  genuine  (cf.  fr.  77).  The  true  doctrine  doubtless  was,  that 
sleep  was  produced  by  the  encroachment  of  moist,  dark 
exhalations  from  the  water  in  the  body,  which  cause  the  fire 
to  bum  low.  In  sleep,  we  lose  contact  with  the  fire  in  the 
world  which  is  common  to  all,  and  retire  to  a  world  of 
our  own  (fr.  95).  In  a  soul  where  the  fire  and  water 
are  evenly  balanced,  the  equilibrium  is  restored  in  the 
morning  by  an  equal  advance  of  the  bright  exhalation. 

75-  But  in  no  soul  are  the  fire  and  water  thus  evenly  ^  Life 
balanced  for  long.  One  or  the  other  acquires  predominance, 
and  the  result  m  either  case  is  death.  Let  us  take  each  of 
these  cases  in  turn.  It  is  death,  we  know,  to  souls  to  become 
water  (fr.  68)  ;  but  that  is  what  happens  to  souls  which 
seek  after  pleasure.  For  pleasure  is  a  moistening  of  the 
soul  (fr.  72),  as  may  be  seen  in  the  case  of  the  drunken  man, 
who  has  so  moistened  his  soul  that  he  does  not  know  where 
he  is  going  (fr.  73).  Even  in  gentle  relaxation  over  our 
cups,  it  is  more  difficult  to  hide  folly  than  at  other  times 
(fr.  108).  That  is  why  we  must  quench  wantonness  (fr.  103)  ; 
for  whatever  our  heart’s  desire  insists  on  it  purchases  at 
the  price  of  fife,  that  is,  of  the  fire  within  us  (fr.  105).  Take 
now  the  other  case.  The  dry  soul,  that  which  has  least 
moisture,  is  the  best  (fr.  74)  ;  but  the  preponderance  of  fire 
causes  death  as  much  as  that  of  water.  It  is  a  very  different 


154 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


death,  however,  and  wins  “  greater  portions  ”  for  those 
who  die  it  (fr.  ioi). 

Further,  just  as  summer  and  winter  are  one,  and  neces¬ 
sarily  reproduce  one  another  by  their  “  opposite  tension,” 
so  do  life  and  death.  They,  too,  are  one,  we  are  told  ;  and 
so  are  youth  and  age  (fr.  78).  It  follows  that  the  soul  will 
be  now  living  and  now  dead  ;  that  it  will  only  turn  to  fire 
or  water,  as  the  case  may  be,  to  recommence  once  more  its 
unceasing  upward  and  downward  path.  The  soul  that  has 
died  from  excess  of  moisture  sinks  down  to  earth  )  but  from 
the  earth  comes  water,  and  from  water  is  once  more  exhaled 
a  soul  (fr.  68).  So,  too,  we  are  told  (fr.  67)  that  gods  and 
men  are  really  one.  They  live  each  others’  life,  and  die 
each  others  death.  Those  mortals  that  die  the  fiery  death 
become  immortal,1  they  become  the  guardians  of  the  quick 
and  the  dead  (fr.  123)  ;  2  and  those  immortals  become 
mortal  in  their  turn.  Everything  is  the  death  of  something 
else  (fr.  64).  The  living  and  the  dead  are  always  changing 
places  (fr.  78),  like  the  pieces  on  a  child’s  draught-board 
(fr.  79),  and  this  applies  not  only  to  the  souls  that  have 
become  water,  but  to  those  that  have  become  fire  and  are 
now  guardian  spirits.  The  real  weariness  is  continuance  in 
the  same  state  (fr.  82),  and  the  real  rest  is  change  (fr.  83). 
Rest  in  any  other  sense  is  tantamount  to  dissolution  (fr.  84), 3 
So  they  too  are  born  once  more.  Herakleitos  estimated 
the  duration  of  the  cycle  which  preserves  the  balance  of  life 

1  The  word  is  used  for  its  paradoxical  effect.  Strictly  speaking,  they 
are  all  mortal  from  one  point  of  view  and  immortal  from  another. 

2  Those  who  fall  in  battle  apparently  share  the  same  lot  (fr.  102). 
Rohde,  Psyche  (II.2  pp.  148  sqq.),  refused  to  admit  that  Herakleitos  believed 
the  soul  survived  death.  Strictly  speaking,  it  is  no  doubt  an  incon¬ 
sistency  ;  but  I  believe,  with  Zeller  and  Diels,  that  it  is  one  of  a  kind  we 
may  well  admit.  The  first  argument  which  Plato  uses  to  establish  the 
doctrine  of  immortality  m  the  Phaedo  is  just  the  Herakleitean  parallelism 
of  xife  and  death  with  sleeping  and  waking. 

3  These  fragments  are  quoted  by  Plotinos,  Iamblichos,  and  Noumenios 
tkis  connexion  (R.  P.  46  c),  and  it  does  not  seem  possible  to  hold,  with 

Kohde,  that  they  had  no  grounds  for  so  interpreting  them.  They  knew 
the  context  and  we  do  not.  3 


155 


HERAKLEITOS  OF  EPHESOS 

and  death  as  thirty  years,  the  shortest  time  in  which  a  man 
may  become  a  grandfather  (frs.  87-89). 1 

76.  Let  us  turn  now  to  the  world.  Diogenes  tells  us 
that  fire  was  kept  up  by  the  bright  vapours  from  land  and 
sea,  and  moisture  by  the  dark.2  What  are  these  “  dark  ” 
vapours  which  increase  the  moist  element  ?  If  we  remember 
the  Air  of  Anaximenes,  we  shall  be  inclined  to  regard 
them  as  darkness  itself.  We  know  that  the  idea  of  darkness 
as  privation  of  fight  is  not  primitive.  I  suppose,  then,  that 
Herakleitos  believed  night  and  winter  to  be  produced  by  the 
rise  of  darkness  from  earth  and  sea — he  saw,  of  course,  that 
the  valleys  were  dark  before  the  hill-tops— and  that  this 
darkness,  being  moist,  so  increased  the  watery  element  as 
to  put  out  the  sun’s  fight.  This,  however,  destroys  the 
power  of  darkness  itself.  It  can  no  longer  rise  upwards 
unless  the  sun  gives  it  motion,  and  so  it  becomes  possible 
for  a  fresh  sun  (fr.  32)  to  be  kindled,  and  to  nourish  itself  at 
the  expense  of  the  moist  element  for  a  time.  But  it  can 
only  be  for  a  time.  The  sun,  by  burning  up  the  bright 
vapour,  deprives  himself  of  nourishment,  and  the  dark 
vapour  once  more  gets  the  upper  hand.  It  is  in  this  sense 
that  day  and  night  are  one  ”  (fr.  35).  Each  implies  the 
other  ;  they  are  merely  two  sides  of  one  process,  in  which 
alone  their  true  ground  of  explanation  is  to  be  found  (fr.  36). 

Summer  and  winter  were  to  be  explained  in  the  same 
way.  We  know  that  the  “turnings  back”  of  the  sun  were  a 
subject  of  interest  in  those  days,  and  it  was  natural  for 
Herakleitos  to  see  in  its  retreat  to  the  south  the  advance  of 
the  moist  element,  caused  by  the  heat  of  the  sun  itself. 

1  Plut.  Def.  orac.  415  d,  trq  rpidKovra  7 roioutn  rrjr  yevpav  rad'  'Hpa/cXeiroi', 
ev  ip  XP^V  ytvvwvTa  Trapiya  rbv  aiirov  yeyevvi jpdvov  o  yevv-r)<Tas.  Philo, 
fr.  Harris,  p.  20,  dvrardr  iv  Tpiaroarp  trei  aS  tov  txvdpwKov  irainrov 
yeviadai  kt\.  Censorinus,  Be  die  nat.  17.  2,  "  hoc  enim  tempus  (triaginta 
annos)  genean  vocari  Heraclitus  auctor  est,  quia  orbis  aetatis  in  eo  sit  spatio  : 
orbem  autem  vocat  aetatis,  dum  natura  ab  sementi  humana  ad  sementim 
revertitur.”  The  words  orbis  aetatis  seem  to  mean  aiuvos  kvkXos,  “  the  circle 
of  life."  If  so,  we  may  compare  the  Orphic  kijk\os  yeviaem. 

2  Diog.  ix.  9  (R.  P.  39  b). 


The  day 
and  the 
year. 


The 

Great 

Year. 


156  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 

This,  however,  diminishes  the  power  of  the  sun  to  cause 
evaporation,  and  so  it  must  return  to  the  north  that  it  may 
supply  itself  with  nourishment.  Such  was,  at  any  rate,  the 
Stoic  doctrine,1  and  that  it  comes  from  Herakleitos  seems  to 
be  proved  by  its  occurrence  in  the  nepl  8iairr]<;.  The  follow¬ 
ing  passage  is  clearly  Herakleitean  : 

And  in  turn  each  (fire  and  water)  prevails  and  is  prevailed 
over  to  the  greatest  and  least  degree  that  is  possible.  For 
neither  can  prevail  altogether  for  the  following  reasons.  If  fire 
advances  towards  the  utmost  limit  of  the  water,  its  nourishment 
fails  it.  It  retires,  then,  to  a  place  where  it  can  get  nourishment. 
And  if  water  advances  towards  the  utmost  limit  of  the  fire,  move¬ 
ment  fails  it.  At  that  point,  then,  it  stands  still ;  and,  when  it 
has  come  to  a  stand,  it  has  no  longer  power  to  resist,  but  is  con¬ 
sumed  as  nourishment  for  the  fire  that  falls  upon  it.  For  these 
reasons  neither  can  prevail  altogether.  But  if  at  any  time 
either  should  be  in  any  way  overcome,  then  none  of  the  things 
that  exist  would  be  as  they  are  now.  So  long  as  things  are  as 
they  are,  fire  and  water  will  always  be  too,  and  neither  will 
ever  fail.2 

77.  Herakleitos  spoke  also  of  a  longer  period,  which  is 
identified  with  the  “  Great  Year,”  and  is  variously  described 
as  lasting  18,000  and  10,800  years.3  We  have  no  definite 
statement,  however,  of  what  process  Herakleitos  supposed 

1  Cf.  Cic.  N.D.  iii.  37  :  “  Quid  enim  ?  non  eisdem  vobis  placet  omnem 
ignem  pastus  indigere  nec  permanere  ullo  modo  posse,  nisi  alitur  :  ali 
autem  solem,  lunam,  reliqua  astra  aquis,  alia  dulcibus  (from  the  earth), 
aha  marinis  ?  eamque  causam  Cleanthes  (fr.  29  Pearson;  I.  501  v.  Arnim) 
adfert  cur  se  sol  referat  nec  longius  progrediatur  solstitiali  orbi  itemque 
brumali,  ne  longius  discedat  a  cibo.” 

3  For  the  Greek  text  see  below,  p.  162,  u.  3.  Fredrichs  allows  that 
it  is  from  the  same  source  as  that  quoted  above  (p.  151,  n.  1),  and,  as  that 
comes  from  Ilepi  SicUtijj,  i.  3,  he  denies  the  Herakleitean  origin  of  this 
passage  too.  He^has  not  taken  account  of  the  fact  that  it  gives  the  Stoic 
doctrine,  which  raises  a  presumption  in  favour  of  its  being  Herakleitean 
If  I  could  agree  with  Fredrichs'  theory,  I  should  still  say  that  the  present 
passage  was  a  Herakleitean  interpolation  in  the  Physiker  rather  than  that 
the  other  was  an  interpolation  from  the  Physiker  in  the  Herakleitean 
section.  See  p.  150,  n.  2. 

3  Aet.  ii.  32.  3.  'Hp&K\eiTos  iic  pvplwv  6icTaia<rxihLiov  tviavr&v  pXtaKLov 
(rbv  pAyav  iviavrbv  etvai).  Censorinus,  De  die  nat.  11,  Heraclitus  et  Linus 
Xdccc.  ’ 


I57 


HERAKLEITOS  OF  EPHESOS 

to  take  place  in  the  Great  Year.  The  period  of  36,000  years 
was  Babylonian,  and  18,000  years  is  just  half  that  period,  a 
fact  which  may  be  connected  with  Herakleitos’s  way  of 
dividing  all  cycles  into  an  “  upward  and  downward  path  ” 
The  Stoics,  or  some  of  them,  held  that  the  Great  Year  was 
the  period  between  one  world-conflagration  and  the  next. 
They  were  careful,  however,  to  make  it  a  good  deal  longer 
than  Herakleitos  did,  and,  in  any  case,  we  are  not  entitled 
without  more  ado  to  credit  him  with  the  theory  of  a  general 
conflagration.1  We  must  try  first  to  interpret  the  Great 
Year  on  the  analogy  of  the  shorter  periods  discussed  already. 

Now  we  have  seen  that  a  generation  is  the  shortest  time 
in  which  a  man  can  become  a  grandfather,  it  is  the  period  of 
the  upward  or  downward  path  of  the  soul,  and  the  most 
natural  interpretation  of  the  longer  period  would  surely  be 
that  it  represents  the  time  taken  by  a  “  measure  ”  of  the 
fire  in  the  world  to  travel  on  the  downward  path  to  earth  or 
return  to  fire  once  more  by  the  upward  path.  Plato  implies 
that  such  a  parallelism  between  the  periods  of  man  and  the 
world  was  recognised,2  and  this  receives  a  curious  confirma¬ 
tion  from  a  passage  in  Aristotle,  which  is  usually  supposed 
to  refer  to  the  doctrine  of  a  periodic  conflagration.  He  is 
discussing  the  question  whether  the  “  heavens,”  that  is  to 
say,  what  he  calls  the  “  first  heaven,”  is  eternal  or  not,  and 
naturally  enough,  from  his  own  point  of  view,  he  identifies 
this  with  the  Fire  of  Herakleitos.  He  quotes  him  along 
with  Empedokles  as  holding  that  the  “  heavens  ”  are  alter¬ 
nately  as  they  are  now  and  in  some  other  state,  one  of 
passing  away ;  and  he  goes  on  to  point  out  that  this  is  not 

1  For  the  Stoic  doctrine,  cf.  Nemesios,  De  nat.  hom.  38  (R.  P.  503). 
Adam  ( Republic ,  vol.  ii.  p.  303)  allowed  that  no  destruction  of  the  world 
or  conflagration  marked  the  end  of  Plato's  year,  but  he  declined  to  draw 
what  seems  to  me  the  natural  inference  that  the  connexion  between  the 
two  things  belongs  to  a  later  age,  and  should  not,  therefore,  be  ascribed 
to  Herakleitos  in  the  absence  of  any  evidence  that  he  did  so  connect  them. 

2  This  is  certainly  the  general  sense  of  the  parallelism  between  the* 
periods  of  the  avdptinretov  and  the  delov  yevvTjrov,  however  we  may  under¬ 
stand  the  details.  See  Adam,  Republic,  vol.  ii.  pp.  288  sqq. 


158 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Did  Hera- 
kleitos 
teach  a 
general 
conflagra¬ 
tion  ? 


really  to  say  they  pass  away,  any  more  than  it  would  be 


to  say  that  a  man  ceases  to  be,  if  we  said  that  he  turned 
from  boy  to  man  and  then  from  man  to  boy  again.1  It  is 
surely  clear  that  this  is  a  reference  to  the  parallel  between 
the  generation  and  the  Great  Year,  and,  if  so,  the  ordinary 
interpretation  of  the  passage  must  be  wrong.  It  is  not, 
indeed,  quite  consistent  with  the  theory  to  suppose  that  a 
“  measure  ”  of  Fire  could  preserve  its  identity  throughout 
the  whole  of  its  upward  and  downward  path  ;  but  that  is 
exactly  the  inconsistency  we  have  felt  bound  to  recognise 
with  regard  to  the  continuance  of  individual  souls.  Now, 
it  will  be  noted  that,  while  18,000  is  half  36,000,  10,800  is 
360  x  30,  which  would  make  each  generation  a  day  in  the 
Great  Year,  and  this  is  in  favour  of  the  higher  number.2 

78.  Most  writers  ascribe  to  Herakleitos  the  doctrine  of 
a  periodical  conflagration  or  eKirvpwai 5,  to  use  the  Stoic 
term.3  That  this  is  inconsistent  with  his  general  view  is 
obvious,  and  is  indeed  admitted  by  Zeller,  who  adds  to  his 
paraphrase  of  the  statement  of  Plato  quoted  above  (p.  144) 
the  words  :  “  Herakleitos  did  not  intend  to  retract  this 
principle  in  the  doctrine  of  a  periodic  change  in  the  constitu¬ 
tion  of  the  world  ;  if  the  two  doctrines  are  not  compatible, 
it  is  a  contradiction  which  he  has  not  observed.”  Now,  it 
is  quite  likely  that  there  were  contradictions  in  the  discourse 


of  Herakleitos,  but  it  is  very  unlikely  that  there  was  this 
particular  contradiction.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  inconsistent 
with  the  central  idea  of  his  system,  the  thought  that  pos- 

'  fnSt,  D<S  C“f°:  A'  IO'  2 79  b  14,  oi  S’  fraXMt  orb  &  ovrcos  orb 

£  ,  X,Z  /  °  ’AtcpayavTivos  Kal 

H pa-cXe.ro*  o  E*W  Aristotle  points  out  that  this  really  amounts  only 
to  saying  that  it  is  eternal  and  changes  its  form,  ef  iK  m 

<LvSpa  Mpb*  ir alba  orb  plv  ^elpeadac,  orb  S’  ehac  ato.ro  (280  a 

14).  The  point  of  the  reference  to  Empedokles  will  appear  from  De  Gen 

thaTtW  H334  ^  1  S??  a  rhat,AnSt°tle  findS  fault  With  in  both  theories  is 
that  they  do  not  regard  the  substance  of  the  heavens  as  something  outside 

the  upward  and  downward  motion  of  the  elements. 

,*  ^  Taanery>  SAcifnce  hfine-  P-  r68-  Diels,  accordingly,  now  reads 
fiupLwv  OKTa.Kocrlui'  in  Aetios  ( Vors .  12  a  13). 

3  Schleiermacher  and  Lassalle  are  notable  exceptions.  Zeller,  Diels 
and  Gomperz  are  all  positive  that  Herakleitos  believed  in  the  iKnHpuvit. 


HERAKLEITOS  OF  EPHESOS  i59 

sessed  his  whole  mind  (§  67),  and  we  can  only  admit  the 
possibility  of  that,  if  the  evidence  for  it  should  prove 
irresistible.  In  the  second  place,  such  an  interpretation 
destroys  the  whole  point  of  Plato's  contrast  between  Hera- 
kleitos  and  Empedokles  (§  68),  which  is  just  that,  while 
Herakleitos  said  the  One  was  always  many,  and  the  Many 
always  one,  Empedokles  said  the  All  was  many  and  one  by 
turns.  Zeller’s  interpretation  obliges  us,  then,  to  suppose 
that  Herakleitos  flatly  contradicted  his  own  discovery 
without  noticing  it,  and  that  Plato,  in  discussing  this  very 
discovery,  was  also  blind  to  the  contradiction.1 

Nor  is  there  anything  in  Aristotle  to  set  against  Plato’s 
statement.  We  have  seen  that  the  passage  in  which  he 
speaks  of  him  along  with  Empedokles  as  holding  that  the 
heavens  were  alternately  in  one  condition  and  in  another 
refers  not  to  the  world,  but  to  fire,  which  Aristotle  identified 
with  the  substance  of  his  own  “  first  heaven.”  2  It  is  also 
quite  consistent  with  our  interpretation  when  he  says  that 
all  things  at  one  time  or  another  become  fire.  This  need 
not  mean  that  they  all  become  fire  at  the  same  time,  but 
may  be  merely  a  statement  of  the  undoubted  Herakleitean 
doctrine  of  the  upward  and  downward  path.3 

The  earliest  statements  to  the  effect  that  Herakleitos 

1  In  his  fifth  edition  (p.  699)  Zeller  seems  to  have  felt  this  last  diffi¬ 
culty  ;  for  he  said  there  :  “  It  is  a  contradiction  which  he,  and  which 
probably  Plato  too  ( und  den  wa.hr scheinlich  auch  Plato )  has  not  observed.” 
This  seems  to  me  still  less  arguable.  Plato  may  or  may  not  be  mistaken  ; 
but  he  makes  the  perfectly  definite  statement  that  Herakleitos  says  del, 
while  Empedokles  says  iv  txipei.  The  Ionian  Muses  are  called  o-wrovtoTepai 
and  the  Sicilian  p-aXardirepai  just  because  the  latter  "  lowered  the  pitch  ” 
(exdXaaai’)  of  the  doctrine  that  this  is  always  so  (rd  del  ravra  ovtu s  eyeiv). 

2  See  above,  p.  158,  w.  1. 

3  Phys.  T  5,  205  a  3  (Met.  K,  xo.  1067  a  4),  &wwep  'BpdrXeiTis  <fyr,<nv 
tLiravra  ylveerOal  wore  wvp.  Zeller  translates  this  es  werde  alles  dereinst  zu 
Feuer  werden  ;  but  that  would  require  7 evycreadai.  Nor  is  there  anything 
in  his  suggestion  that  dwavra  ("  not  merely  wdrra  ")  implies  that  all  things 
become  fire  at  once.  In  Aristotle's  day,  there  was  no  distinction  of 
meaning  between  was  and  aw  as.  Of  course,  as  Diels  says,  the  present 
tense  might  be  used  of  a  "  constant  alternation  of  epochs  ”  (Vors.  12  a 
10  n.)  ;  but,  for  the  purpose  of  Zeller’s  argument,  we  want  something 
which  not  only  may  but  must  mean  that. 


i6o  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 

taught  the  doctrine  of  a  general  conflagration  are  found  in 
Stoic  writers.  The  Christian  apologists  too  were  interested 
in  the  idea  of  a  final  conflagration,  and  reproduce  the  Stoic 
view.  The  curious  thing,  however,  is  that  there  was  a 
difference  of  opinion  on  the  subject  even  among  the  Stoics. 
In  one  place,  Marcus  Aurelius  says  :  “So  that  all  these 
things  are  taken  up  into  the  Reason  of  the  universe,  whether 
by  a  periodical  conflagration  or  a  renovation  effected  by 
eternal  exchanges.”  1  Indeed,  there  were  some  who  said 
there  was  no  general  conflagration  at  all  in  Herakleitos. 

1  hear  all  that,”  Plutarch  makes  one  of  his  personages  say, 
“  from  many  people,  and  I  see  the  Stoic  conflagration 
spreading  over  the  poems  of  Hesiod,  just  as  it  does  over  the 
writings  of  Herakleitos  and  the  verses  of  Orpheus.”  2  We 
see  from  this  that  the  question  was  debated,  and  we  should 
therefore  expect  any  statement  of  Herakleitos  which  could 
settle  it  to  be  quoted  over  and  over  again.  It  is  highly 
significant  that  not  a  single  quotation  of  the  kind  can  be 
produced.3 

On  the  contrary,  the  absence  of  anything  to  show  that 
Herakleitos  spoke  of  a  general  conflagration  only  becomes 
more  patent  when  we  turn  to  the  few  fragments  which  are 
supposed  to  prove  it.  The  favourite  is  fr.  24,  where  we  are 

Marcus  Aurelius,  X.  7,  fi icrre  /cal  ra Ora  ava\ri<pOrjvai  eis  rbv  toO  8\ov 
\6yov,  etre  Kara  weploSov  iKirvpov^vov,  etre  dcdloit  dfioifiah  dvaveovfUvov.  The 
df/.oi/3al  are  specifically  Herakleitean,  and  the  statement  is  the  more 
remarkable  as  Marcus  elsewhere  follows  the  usual  Stoic  interpretation. 

2  Plut.  De  def.  orac.  415  f.,  Kai  6  K\e6/u(Sporos,  ’Akovuj  raur,  iroWwv 
/cal  bpu,  tV  Sra/c/cV  iicirtpwaiv  &<nrep  rd  'Hpa/cXecrou  /cal  ’Qp<ptm  twwm0fj.hr,v  eirv 
offra/  /cal  Ta  'H<rc65oi/  /cal  a-vve^dirrovcrar.  As  Zeller  admits  (p.  693  «.),  this 
proves  that  some  opponents  of  the  Stoic  iiarijpuais  tried  to  withdraw  the 
support  of  Herakleitos  from  it. 

This  has  been  called  a  mere  argumentum  ex  silentio  ;  but,  in  such 
cases,  the  argumentum  ex  silentio  is  stronger  than  any  other.  Positive 
statements  may  be  misinterpreted  ;  but,  when  we  know  that  a  subject 
was  keenly  debated,  and  when  we  find  that  neither  party  can  produce  an 
unambiguous  text  in  support  of  its  view,  the  conclusion  that  none  such 
existed  becomes  irresistible.  The  same  remark  applies  to  modem  pro¬ 
nouncements  on  the  subject.  Diels  briefly  says  that  my  view  “  is  wrong  ’’ 
(ist  irrig),  but  he  does  not  adduce  any  fresh  reason  for  saying  so  The 
conclusion  is  that  he  knows  of  none. 


i6i 


HERAKLEITOS  OF  EPHESOS 

told  that  Herakleitos  said  Fire  was  Want  and  Surfeit. 
That  is  just  in  his  manner,  and  it  has  a  perfectly  intelligible 
meaning  on  our  interpretation,  which  is  further  confirmed 
by  fr.  36.  The  next  is  fr.  26,  where  we  read  that  fire  in  its 
advance  will  judge  and  convict  all  things.  There  is  nothing 
m  this,  however,  to  suggest  that  fire  will  judge  all  things 
at  once  rather  than  in  turn,  and,  indeed,  the  phraseology 
reminds  us  of  the  advance  of  fire  and  water  which  we  have 
seen  reason  for  attributing  to  Herakleitos,  but  which  is 
expressly  said  to  be  limited  to  a  certain  maximum.1  These 
appear  to  be  the  only  passages  which  the  Stoics  and  the 
Christian  apologists  could  discover,  and,  whether  our  inter¬ 
pretation  of  them  is  right  or  wrong,  it  is  surely  clear  that 
they  cannot  bear  the  weight  of  their  conclusion,  and  that 
there  was  nothing  more  definite  to  be  found. 

It  is  much  easier  to  find  fragments  which  are  incon¬ 
sistent  with  a  general  conflagration.  The  “  measures  ”  of 
fr.  20  and  fr.  29  must  be  the  same  thing,  and  they  must 
be  interpreted  in  the  light  of  fr.  23.  If  this  be  so/fr.  20, 
and  more  especially  fr.  29,  directly  contradict  the  idea 
of  a  general  conflagration.  The  sun  will  not  overstep 
his  measures.”  *  Secondly,  the  metaphor  of  “  exchange,” 
which  is  applied  to  the  transformations  of  fire  in  fr.  22, 
points  in  the  same  direction.  When  gold  is  given  in 
exchange  for  wares  and  wares  for  gold,  the  sum  or  “  measure  ” 
of  each  remains  constant,  though  they  change  owners.  All 
the  wares  and  gold  do  not  come  into  the  same  hands.  In 
the  same  way,  when  anything  becomes  fire,  something  of 
equal  amount  must  cease  to  be  fire,  if  the  “  exchange  ”  is 
to  be  a  just  one  ;  and  that  it  will  be  just,  we  are  assured  by 
the  watchfulness  of  the  Erinyes  (fr.  29),  who  sees  to  it  that 
the  sun  does  not  take  more  than  he  gives.  Of  course  there 
is  a  certain  variation,  as  we  saw  ;  but  it  is  strictly  confined 

1  Ilepl  OLalTTjs,  i.  3,  it>  /xipet  Si  iK&repov  k  par  el  teal  Kpareirat  is  rb  p.-f)Ki<rTov 
teal  fXixto’rot'  cij  avvarov. 

2  If  any  one  doubts  that  this  is  really  the  meaning  of  the  "  measures," 
let  him  compare  the  use  of  the  word  by  Diogenes  of  Apollonia,  fr.  3. 


1 62 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


within  limits,  and  is  compensated  in  the  long  run  by  a 
variation  in  the  other  direction.  Thirdly,  fr.  43,  in  which 
Herakleitos  blames  Homer  for  desiring  the  cessation  of 
strife,  is  very  conclusive.  The  cessation  of  strife  would 
mean  that  all  things  should  take  the  upward  or  downward 
path  at  the  same  time,  and  cease  to  “  run  in  opposite 
directions.  If  they  all  took  the  upward  path,  we  should 
have  a  general  conflagration.  Now,  if  Herakleitos  had 
himself  held  this  to  be  the  appointment  of  fate,  would  he 
have  been,  likely  to  upbraid  Homer  for  desiring  so  necessary 
a  consummation  ?  1  Fourthly,  we  note  that  in  fr.  20  it  is 
this  world,2  and  not  merely  the  “  ever-living  fire,”  which  is 
said  to  be  eternal ;  and  it  appears  also  that  its  eternity 
depends  on  the  fact  that  it  is  always  kindling  and  always 
going  out  in  the  same  “  measures,”  or  that  an  encroachment 
in  one  direction  is  compensated  by  a  subsequent  encroach¬ 
ment  in  the  other.  Lastly,  Lassalle’s  argument  from  the 
concluding  sentence  of  the  passage  from  the  htatr^, 
quoted  above,  is  really  untouched  by  Zeller’s  objection,  that 
it  cannot  be  Herakleitean  because  it  implies  that  all  things 
are  fire  and  water.  It  does  not  imply  this,  but  only  that 
man,  like  the  heavenly  bodies,  oscillates  between  fire  and 
water  ;  and  that  is  just  what  Herakleitos  taught.  Now, 
in  this  passage  we  read  that  neither  fire  nor  water  can  prevail 
completely,  and  a  very  good  reason  is  given  for  this,  a  reason 
too  which  is  in  striking  agreement  with  the  other  views  of 
Herakleitos.3  And,  indeed,  it  is  not  easy  to  see  how,  in 


1  This  is  just  the  argument  which  Plato  uses  in  the  Phaedo  (72  c)  to 
prove  the  necessity  of  dxraTrdWis,  and  the  whole  series  of  arguments  in 
that  passage  is  distinctly  Herakleitean  in  character. 

t  /  ?°TeVer  We  understand  here,  the  meaning  is  the  same 

indeed,  if  we  suppose  with  Bernays  that  it  means  “  order,”  the  argument 
will  be  all  the  stronger.  In  no  sense  of  the  word  could  a  f^ive 

th^s^Sd^^rKe^  was  ***• 


HERAKLEITOS  OF  EPHESOS  163 

accordance  with  these  views,  the  world  could  ever  recover 
from  a  general  conflagration  if  such  a  thing  were  to  take 
place.  The  whole  process  depends  on  the  fact  that  Surfeit 
is  also  Want,  or,  in  other  words,  that  an  advance  of  fire 
increases  the  moist  exhalation,  while  an  advance  of  water 
deprives  the  fire  of  its  power  to  cause  evaporation.  The 
conflagration,  though  it  lasted  but  for  a  moment,* 1  would 
destroy  the  opposite  tension  on  w'hich  the  rise  of  a  new 
world  depends,  and  then  motion  would  become  impossible. 

79.  We  are  now  in  a  position  to  understand  more  clearly 
the  law  of  strife  or  opposition  which  manifests  itself  in  the 
“  upward  and  downward  path.”  At  any  given  moment, 
each  of  the  three  aggregates,  Fire,  Water,  and  Earth,  is 
made  up  of  two  equal  portions — subject,  of  course,  to  the 
oscillation  described  above — one  of  which  is  taking  the 
upward  and  the  other  the  downward  path.  Now,  it  is  just 
the  fact  that  the  two  halves  of  everything  are  being  “  drawn 
in  opposite  directions,”  this  “  opposite  tension,”  that 
“  keeps  things  together,”  and  maintains  them  in  an  equili¬ 
brium  which  can  only  be  disturbed  temporarily  and  within 
certain  limits.  It  thus  forms  the  “  hidden  attunement  ” 
of  the  universe  (fr.  47),  though,  in  another  aspect  of  it,  it  is 
Strife.  As  to  the  “  bow  and  the  lyre  ”  (fr.  45),  I  think  that 
Campbell  gave  the  best  explanation  of  the  simile.  "  As 
the  arrow  leaves  the  string,”  he  said,  "  the  hands  are  pulling 
opposite  ways  to  each  other,  and  to  the  different  parts  of 
the  bow  (cf.  Plato,  Rep.  iv.  439) ;  and  the  sweet  note  of  the 
lyre  is  due  to  a  similar  tension  and  retention.  The  secret  of 

iyKparif  itrTiv,  dXX’  ijo-r)  t<2  eprixTovn  mi  pi  is  tt)v  Tpopirjc  KaravaXla  ketch  ' 
ovSirepov  oi  did  raOra  Svvarai  Kparrjaai  xavre\Cis,  el  Si  wore  KpaT-qdtip  Kal 
oxbrepov,  obSiv  h.v  elij  twv  vvv  ebvrwv  &<rwep  Hxel  *'*'<'  '  ovtw  Si  ixbvTUv  del 
itrrai  to.  avra  Kal  ovSirepov  ovSapd  ixiXelxpet. 

1  In  his  note  on  fr.  66  (  =  26  Byw.)  Diels  seeks  to  minimise  the  diffi¬ 
culty  of  the  iKTnjputris  by  saying  that  it  is  only  a  little  one,  and  can  last 
but  a  moment ;  but  the  contradiction  remains.  Diels  holds  that  Hera- 
kleitos  was  “  dark  only  in  form,”  and  that  "  he  himself  was  perfectly 
clear  as  to  the  sense  and  scope  of  his  ideas  ”  ( Herakleitos ,  p.  i.).  To 
which  I  would  add  that  he  was  probably  called  “  the  Dark  "  just  because 
the  Stoics  sometimes  found  it  hard  to  read  their  own  ideas  into  his  words. 


Strife  and 
“  har¬ 
mony.” 


164  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 

the  universe  is  the  same.”  1  War,  then,  is  the  father  and 
king  of  all  things,  in  the  world  as  in  human  society  (fr.  44)  ; 
and  Homer’s  wish  that  strife  might  cease  was  really  a  prayer 
for  the  destruction  of  the  world  (fr.  43). 

We  know  from  Philo  that  Herakleitos  supported  his 
theory  by  a  multitude  of  examples  ;  and  some  of  these  can 
still  be  recovered.  There  is  a  remarkable  agreement  between 
a  passage  of  this  kind  in  the  pseudo- Aristotelian  nept  kocixov 
and  the  Hippokratean  nept  That  the  authors  of 

both  drew  from  the  same  source,  namely,  Herakleitos,  is 
made  practically  certain  by  the  fact  that  this  agreement 
extends  in  part  to  the  Letters  of  Herakleitos,  which,  though 
spurious,  were  certainly  composed  by  some  one  who  had 
access  to  the  original  work.  The  argument  was  that  men 
themselves  act  just  in  the  same  way  as  Nature,  and  it  is 
therefore  surprising  that  they  do  not  recognise  the  laws  by 
which  she  works.  The  painter  produces  his  harmonious 
effects  by  the  contrast  of  colours,  the  musician  by  that  of 
high  and  low  notes.  "  If  one  were  to  make  ah  things  alike, 
there  would  be  no  delight  in  them.”  There  are  many 
similar  examples,  some  of  which  must  certainly  come  from 
Herakleitos  ;  but  it  is  not  easy  to  separate  them  from  the 
later  additions.2 


1  Campbells  Theaetetus  (2nd  ed.),  p.  244.  Bemays  explained  the 
phrase  as  referring  to  the  shape  of  the  bow  and  lyre,  but  this  is  much 
less  likely.  Wilamowitz’s  interpretation  is  based  on  Campbell's.  "  Es  ist 
mit  der  Welt  wie  mit  dem  Bogen,  den  man  auseinanderzieht,  damit 
er  zusammenschnellt,  wie  mit  der  Saite,  die  man  ihrer  Spannung  entgegen- 
ziehen  muss,  damit  sie  klingt  ”  (Lesebuch,  ii.  p.  i29).  Here  we  seem  to  feel 
the  influence  of  the  Pythagorean  "  tuned  string  " 

*  The  sentence  (Ibyn  ftafr*.  i.  5),  xai  rd  &  vp^ovac,  0 iK  ofW,  a 
f  °"  7 Y™V£r‘  6ok^™  ■  <o.l  rd  pi,  6ptov<rcy  06  y^ovacv,  dW 

-S  ■  ■  ■  Kal  S  fM**™  «al  d  M  pofXamu,  has 

the  true  Herakleitean  ring.  This,  too,  can  hardly  have  had  another 

tho  vbVfl  7  t0  thdr  6763  rath6r  than  to  their  understanding, 
though  their  eyes  are  not  fit  to  judge  even  of  the  things  that  are  seem 

But  I  speak  these  things  from  understanding.”  These  words  are  gro¬ 
tesque  in  the  mouth  of  the  medical  compiler  ;  but  we  are  accustomed  to 
hear  such  things  from  the  Ephesian.  Other  examples  which  may  be 
erakleitean  are  the  image  of  the  two  men  sawing  wood—”  one  pushes 
the  other  pulls  — and  the  illustration  from  the  art  of  writing. 


HERAKLEITOS  OF  EPHESOS 


165 

80.  There  are  several  Herakleitean  fragments  which 
form  a  class  by  themselves,  and  are  among  the  most  striking 
of  the  utterances  that  have  come  down  to  us.  These  assert 
in  the  most  downright  way  the  identity  of  various  things 
usually  regarded  as  opposites.  The  clue  to  their  meaning 
is  to  be  found  in  the  account  already  given  of  the  assertion 
that  day  and  night  are  one.  We  have  seen  that  Herakleitos 
meant,  not  that  day  was  night  or  night  was  day,  but  that 
they  were  two  sides  of  the  same  process,  namely,  the  oscilla¬ 
tion  of  the  “  measures  ”  of  fire  and  water,  and  that  neither 
would  be  possible  without  the  other.  Any  explanation 
that  can  be  given  of  night  will  also  be  an  explanation  of 
day,  and  vice  versa  ;  for  it  will  be  an  account  of  what  is 
common  to  both,  and  manifests  itself  now  as  one  and  now 
as  the  other.  Now  this  is  only  a  particular  application  of 
the  principle  that  the  primary  fire  is  one  even  in  its  division. 
It  itself  is,  even  in  its  unity,  both  surfeit  and  want,  war  and 
peace  (fr.  36).  In  other  words,  the  “  satiety  ”  which  makes 
fire  pass  into  other  forms,  which  makes  it  seek  “  rest 
in  change  ”  (fr.  83),  and  “  hide  itself  ”  (fr.  10)  in  the 
“  hidden  attunement  ”  of  opposition,  is  only  one  side  of  the 
process.  The  other  is  the  “  want  ”  which  leads  it  to  con¬ 
sume  the  bright  vapour  as  fuel.  The  upward  path  is  nothing 
without  the  downward  (fr.  69).  If  either  were  to  cease,  the 
other  would  cease  too,  and  the  world  would  disappear ; 
for  it  takes  both  to  make  an  apparently  stable  reality. 

All  other  utterances  of  the  kind  are  to  be  explained  in 
the  same  way.  If  there  were  no  cold,  there  would  be  no 
heat ;  for  a  thing  can  only  grow  warm  if,  and  in  so  far  as, 
it  is  already  cold.  And  the  same  thing  applies  to  the  opposi¬ 
tion  of  wet  and  dry  (fr.  39).  These,  it  will  be  observed,  are 
just  the  two  primary  oppositions  of  Anaximander,  and 
Herakleitos  is  showing  that  the  war  between  them  is  really 
peace,  for  it  is  the  common  element  in  them  (fr.  62)  which 
appears  as  strife,  and  that  very  strife  is  justice,  and  not,  as 
Anaximander  had  taught,  an  injustice  which  they  commit 


Correla¬ 
tion  of 
opposites. 


i66 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


one  against  the  other,  and  which  must  be  expiated  by  a 
reabsorption  of  both  in  their  common  ground.1 

The  most  startling  of  these  sayings  is  that  which  affirms 
that  good  and  evil  are  the  same  (fr.  57).  This  does  not 
mean  that  good  is  evil  or  that  evil  is  good,  but  simply  that 
they  are  the  two  inseparable  halves  of  one  and  the  same 
thing.  A  thing  can  become  good  only  in  so  far  as  it  is  already 
evil,  and  evil  only  in  so  far  as  it  is  already  good,  and  every¬ 
thing  depends  on  the  contrast.  The  illustration  given  in 
fr.  58  shows  this  clearly.  Torture,  one  would  say,  was  an 
evil,  and  yet  it  is  made  a  good  by  the  presence  of  another 
evil,  namely,  disease  ;  as  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  surgeons 
expect  a  fee  for  inflicting  it  on  their  patients.  Justice,  on 
the  other  hand,  which  is  a  good,  would  be  unknown  were  it 
not  for  injustice,  which  is  an  evil  (fr.  60).  And  that  is  why 
it  is  not  good  for  men  to  get  everything  they  wish  (fr.  104). 
Just  as  the  cessation  of  strife  in  the  world  would  mean  its 
destruction,  so  the  disappearance  of  hunger,  disease,  and 
weariness  would  mean  the  disappearance  of  satisfaction, 
health,  and  rest. 

This  leads  to  a  theory  of  relativity  which  prepares  the 
way  for  the  doctrine  of  Protagoras,  that  “  Man  is  the 
measure  of  all  things.”  2  Sea- water  is  good  for  fish  and  bad 
for  men  (fr.  52),  and  so  with  many  other  things.  At  the 
same  time,  Herakleitos  is  not  a  believer  in  absolute  relativity. 
The  process  of  the  world  is  not  merely  a  circle,  but  an 
“  uPward  and  downward  path.”  At  the  upper  end,  where 
the  two  paths  meet,  we  have  the  pure  fire,  in  which,  as  there 
is  no  separation,  there  is  no  relativity.  We  are  told  that, 
while  to  man  some  things  are  evil  and  some  things  are  good] 
all  things  are  good  to  God  (fr.  61).  Now  by  God,  or  the 

1  Chap.  I.  §  16. 


8  Plato  s  exposition  of  the  relativity  of  knowledge  in  thp  , 

(152  d i  sqq.)  can  hardly  go  back  to  Herakleitos  himself,  but  is  meant  to 
s  ow  how  Herakleiteanism  might  give  rise  to  such  a  doctrine  If  the 

relative &  ^  the*  °f  course  knowledge": 

this  direction^  ^  6  ^  Heraklelteans  had  worked  out  the  theory  in 


HERAKLEITOS  OF  EPHESOS 


167 

one  wise,  there  is  no  doubt  Herakleitos  meant  Fire. 

There  can  hardly  be  any  question  that  what  he  meant  to 
say  was  that  in  it  the  opposition  and  relativity  universal  in 
the  world  disappear.  It  is  doubtless  to  this  that  frs.  96,  97, 
and  98  refer. 

81.  Herakleitos  speaks  of  “  wisdom  ”  or  the  “  wise  ”  in  The  wise, 
two  senses.  We  have  seen  already  that  he  said  wisdom  was 

something  apart  from  everything  else  ”  (fr.  18),  meaning 
by  it  the  perception  of  the  unity  of  the  many  ;  and  he  also 
applies  the  term  to  that  unity  itself  regarded  as  the  “  thought 
that  directs  the  course  of  all  things.”  This  is  synonymous 
with  the  pure  fire  which  is  not  differentiated  into  two  parts, 
one  taking  the  upward  and  the  other  the  downward  path. 

That  alone  has  wisdom  ;  the  partial  things  we  see  have 
not.  We  ourselves  are  only  wise  in  so  far  as  we  are  fiery 
(fr.  74). 

82.  With  certain  reservations,  Herakleitos  was  prepared  Theology, 
to  call  the  one  Wisdom  by  the  name  of  Zeus.  Such,  at 

least,  appears  to  be  the  meaning  of  fr.  65.  What  these 
reservations  were,  it  is  easy  to  guess.  It  is  not,  of  course, 
to  be  pictured  in  the  form  of  a  man.  In  saying  this,  Hera¬ 
kleitos  would  only  have  been  repeating  what  had  already 
been  said  by  Xenophanes.  He  agrees  further  with  Xeno¬ 
phanes  in  holding  that  this  “  god,”  if  it  is  to  be  called  so, 
is  one  ;  but  his  polemic  against  popular  religion  was  directed 
rather  against  the  rites  and  ceremonies  themselves  than 
their  mythological  outgrowth.  He  gives  a  list  (fr.  124)  of 
some  of  the  religious  figures  of  his  time,  and  the  context  in 
which  the  fragment  is  quoted  shows  that  he  in  some  way 
threatened  them  with  the  wrath  to  come.  He  comments 
on  the  absurdity  of  praying  to  images  (fr.  126),  and  the 
strange  idea  that  blood-guiltiness  can  be  washed  out  by 
the  shedding  of  blood  (fr.  130) .  He  seems  also  to  have  said 
that  it  was  absurd  to  celebrate  the  worship  of  Dionysos 
by  cheerful  and  licentious  ceremonies,  while  Hades  was  pro¬ 
pitiated  by  gloomy  rites  (fr.  127).  According  to  the  mystic 


1 68 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Ethics  of 

Hera- 

kleitos. 


doctrine  itself,  the  two  were  really  one  ;  and  the  one  Wisdom 
ought  to  be  worshipped  in  its  integrity. 

83.  The  moral  teaching  of  Herakleitos  is  summed  up  in 
the  rule  Follow  the  common.”  The  "  common  ”  upon 
which  Herakleitos  insists  is,  nevertheless,  something  very 
different  from  common  sense,  for  which,  indeed,  he  had  the 
greatest  possible  contempt  (fr.  in).  It  is,  in  fact,  his 
strongest  objection  to  “  the  many,”  that  they  live  each  in 
his  own  world  (fr.  95),  as  if  they  had  a  private  wisdom  of 
their  own  (fr.  92)  ;  and  public  opinion  is  therefore  just  the 
opposite  of  “  the  common.”  The  rule  is  really  to  be  inter¬ 
preted  as  a  corollary  of  his  anthropological  and  cosmological 
views.  The  first  requirement  is  that  we  keep  our  souls  dry, 
and  thus  assimilate  them  to  the  one  Wisdom,  which  is  fire. 
That  is  what  is  really  common,”  and  the  greatest  fault  is 
to  act  like  men  asleep  (fr.  94),  that  is,  by  letting  our  souls 
grow  moist,  to  cut  ourselves  off  from  the  fire  in  the  world. 

Herakleitos  prepared  the  way  for  the  Stoic  world-state 
by  comparing  "  the  common  ”  to  the  laws  of  a  city.  And 
these  are  even  more  than  a  type  of  the  divine  law  :  they 
are  imperfect  embodiments  of  it.  They  cannot,  however, 
exhaust  it  altogether ;  for  in  all  human  affairs  there  is  an 
element  of  relativity  (fr.  91).  “  Man  is  a  baby  compared  to 

God  (fr.  97).  Such  as  they  are,  however,  the  city  must 
fight  for  them  as  for  its  walls  ;  and,  if  it  has  the  good 
fortune  to  possess  a  citizen  with  a  dry  soul,  he  is  worth  ten 
thousand  (fr.  113)  ;  for  in  him  alone  is  “  the  common  ” 
embodied. 


CHAPTER  IV 


PARMENIDES  OF  ELEA 

84.  Parmenides,  son  of  Pyres,  was  a  citizen  of  Hyele,  Elea,  or  Life. 
Velia,  a  colony  founded  in  Oinotria  by  refugees  from  Phokaia 
in  540-39  b.c.1  Diogenes  tells  us  that  he  “  flourished  ”  in 
01.  LXIX.  (504-500  b.c.),  and  this  was  doubtless  the  date 
given  b}^  Apollodoros.2  On  the  other  hand,  Plato  says  that 
Parmenides  came  to  Athens  in  his  sixty-fifth  year,  accom¬ 
panied  by  Zeno,  and  conversed  with  Sokrates,  who  was  then 
quite  young.  Now  Sokrates  was  just  over  seventy  when 
he  was  put  to  death  in  399  b.c.  ;  and  therefore,  if  we  suppose 
him  to  have  been  an  ephebos,  that  is,  from  eighteen  to  twenty 
years  old,  at  the  time  of  his  interview  with  Parmenides,  we 
get  451-449  b.c.  as  the  date  of  that  event.  It  is  quite 
uncritical  to  prefer  the  estimate  of  Apollodoros  to  Plato’s 
express  statement,3  especially  as  Parmenides  himself  speaks 
of  visiting  “  all  towns,”  4  and  we  have  independent  evidence 
of  the  visit  of  Zeno  to  Athens,  where  Perikles  is  said  to  have 

1  Diog.  ix.  21  (R.  P.  111).  For  the  foundation  of  Elea,  see  Herod,  i. 

165  sqq.  It  was  on  the  coast  of  Lucania,  south  of  Poseidonia  (Paestum). 

2  Diog.  ix.  23  (R.  P.  in).  Cf.  Diels,  Rhein.  Mus.  xxxi.  p.  34;  and 
Jacoby,  pp.  231  sqq. 

3  Plato,  Parm.  127  b  (R.  P.  111  d).  Wilamowitz  once  said  that  there 
were  no  anachronisms  in  Plato,  though  he  now  ( Platon ,  vol.  i.  p.  507)  regards 
this  statement  as  an  “invention."  I  cannot  agree.  In  the  first  place,  we 
have  exact  figures  as  to  the  ages  of  Parmenides  and  Zeno,  which  imply 
that  the  latter  was  twenty-five  years  younger  than  the  former,  not  forty 
as  Apollodoros  said.  In  the  second  place,  Plato  refers  to  this  meeting  in 
two  other  places  (Theaet.  183  e  7  and  Soph.  217  c  5),  which  do  not  seem 
to  be  mere  references  to  the  dialogue  entitled  Parmenides. 

4  Cf.  p.  172,  n.  1. 

169 


170 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


‘  heard  ”  him.1  The  date  given  by  Apollodoros  depends 
solely  on  that  of  the  foundation  of  Elea  (540  b.c.),  which 
he  had  adopted  as  the  floruit  of  Xenophanes.  Parmenides 
is  bom  in  that  year,  just  as  Zeno  is  born  in  the  year 
when  Parmenides  “  flourished.”  I  do  not  understand  how 
any  one  can  attach  importance  to  such  combinations. 

We  have  seen  (§  55)  that  Aristotle  mentions  a  statement 
which  made  Parmenides  a  disciple  of  Xenophanes  ;  but  it  is 
practically  certain  that  the  statement  referred  to  is  only 
Plato  s  humorous  remark  in  the  Sophist,  which  we  have 
dealt  with  already.2  Xenophanes  tells  us  himself  that,  in 
his  ninety-second  year,  he  was  still  wandering  up  and  down 
(fr.  8).  At  that  time  Parmenides  would  be  well  advanced 
in  life.  And  we  must  not  overlook  the  statement  of  Sotion, 
preserved  by  Diogenes,  that,  though  Parmenides  “  heard  ” 
Xenophanes,  he  did  not  “  follow  ”  him.  He  was  really 
the  associate  of  a  Pythagorean,  Ameinias,  son  of  Dio- 
chaitas,  a  poor  but  noble  man  to  whom  he  afterwards 
built  a  shrine  as  to  a  hero.”  It  was  Ameinias  and  not 
Xenophanes  that  “  converted  ”  Parmenides  to  the  philo¬ 
sophic  life.3  This  does  not  read  like  an  invention.  The 
shrine  erected  by  Parmenides  would  still  be  there  in  later 
days,  like  the  grave  of  Pythagoras  at  Metapontion,  and 
would  have  a  dedicatory  inscription.  It  should  also  be 
mentioned  that  Strabo  describes  Parmenides  and  Zeno  as 
Pythagoreans,  and  that  Kebes  talks  of  a  Parmenidean  and 
Pythagorean  way  of  life.”  4  It  is  certain,  moreover,  that 


1  Plut.  Per.  4,  3.  See  below,  p.  31 1,  n.  1. 

*  See  above,  Chap.  II.  p.  127,  n.  2. 

*  Diog.  ix  21  (R.  P.  m),  reading  ’A/xetrl?  AwXaira  with  Diels  (Hermes, 

xxxv.  p.  197).  Sotion,  in  his  Successions,  separated  Parmenides  from 
Xenophanes  and  associated  him  with  the  Pythagoreans  (Box.  pp.  146 
14.  166).  So  Proclus  in  Parm.  iv.  5  (Cousin),  ’EXearcu  S’  (Parmenides 
and  Zeno)  kc xl  ov  toCto  pMvov,  dXXd  ral  rov  Ilvday opxrov  ScSaaraXelov  fiera- 
Timaios  *°V  NlK(5^aX0S  *<rr<Wrf>'-  Presumably  this  comes  from 

*  Strabo,  vi.  1,  p.  252  (p.  i7x,  n.  2)  ;  Ceb.  Tab.  2  (R.  P.  m  c).  The 
statements  of  Strabo  are  of  the  greatest  value  ;  for  they  are  based  upon 
historians  (especially  Timaios)  now  lost. 


I7I 


PARMENIDES  OF  ELEA 

the  opening  of  the  poem  of  Parmenides  is  an  allegorical 
description  of  his  conversion  from  some  form  of  error  to 
what  he  held  to  be  the  truth,  and  that  it  is  thrown  into  the 
form  of  an  Orphic  apocalypse.1  That  would  be  quite  natural 
xf  he  had  been  a  Pythagorean  in  his  early  days,  so  we  need 
net  hesitate  to  accept  the  tradition  that  he  had.  As  regards 
the  relation  of  Parmenides  to  the  Pythagorean  system,  we 
shah  have  something  to  say  later.  At  present  we  need 
oniy  note  that,  like  most  of  the  older  philosophers,  he  took 
part  m  politics  ;  and  Speusippos  recorded  that  he  legislated 
for  his  native  city.  Others  add  that  the  magistrates  of 
Elea  made  the  citizens  swear  every  year  to  abide  by  the 
laws  Parmenides  had  given  them.2 

85.  Parmenides  was  the  first  philosopher  to  expound  The  poem, 
his  system  in  metrical  language.  His  predecessors,  Anaxi¬ 
mander,  Anaximenes,  and  Herakleitos,  wrote  in  prose,  and 
the  only  Greeks  who  ever  wrote  philosophy  in  verse  at 
all  were  just  these  two,  Parmenides  and  Empedokles ;  for 
Xenophanes  was  not  a  philosopher  any  more  than  Epi- 
charmos.  Empedokles  copied  Parmenides ;  and  he,  no 
doubt,  was  influenced  by  the  Orphics.  But  the  thing 
was  an  innovation,  and  one  that  did  not  maintain  itself. 

The  fragments  of  Parmenides  are  preserved  for  the  most 
part  by  Simplicius,  who  fortunately  inserted  them  in  his 
commentary,  because  in  his  time  the  original  work  was 
already  rare.3  I  follow  the  arrangement  of  Diels. 

1  We  know  too  little  of  the  apocalyptic  poems  of  the  sixth  century 
B.c.  to  be  sure  of  the  details.  All  we  can  say  is  that  Parmenides  has 
taken  the  form  of  his  poem  from  some  such  source.  See  Diels,  “  t)ber 
die  poetischen  Vorbilder  des  Parmenides  "  (Berl.  Sitzb.  1896),  and  the 
Introduction  to  his  Parmenides  Lehrgedicht,  pp.  9  sqq. 

1  Diog.  ix.  23  (R.  P.  in).  Plut.  Adv.  Col.  1226  a,  n appevlS-qs  St  ttj* 
tavTov^irarplSa  SieKboppae  vopois  apiorois,  &are  rds  apyas  Kad'  (kolotop  hiavrSv 
H-opicovp  to  vs  TroXlras  ippevtlp  rots  Tlapp.fi/i8ov  vbpois.  Strabo,  vi.  1,  p. 

252,  (’EXtap)  «?£  ps  Tlapp-evlSris  Kal  Trqvoiv  tytropro  dpSpe s  Ilvday6peioi.  SoKel  St 
poi  Kal  Si  eKeivovs  Kal  Zti  irporopov  eipo/jer)dfjrai.  We  can  hardly  doubt  that 
this  too  comes  from  Timaios. 

Simpl.  Phys.  144,  25  (R.  P.  117).  Simplicius,  of  course,  had  the 
library  of  the  Academy  at  his  command.  Diels  estimates  that  we  have 
about  nine-tenths  of  the  ’AXt/deca  and  about  one-tenth  of  the  A6£a. 


172 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


(i) 

The  car  that  bears  me  carried  me  as  far  as  ever  my  heart 
desired,  when  it  had  brought  me  and  set  me  on  the  renowned  way 
of  the  goddess,  which  leads  the  man  who  knows  through  all  the 
towns.1  On  that  way  was  I  borne  along ;  for  on  it  did  the  wise 
5  steeds  carry  me,  drawing  my  car,  and  maidens  showed  the  way. 
And  the  axle,  glowing  in  the  socket — for  it  was  urged  round  by 
the  whirling  wheels  at  each  end — gave  forth  a  sound  as  of  a  pipe, 
when  the  daughters  of  the  Sun,  hasting  to  convey  me  into  the 
light,  threw  back  their  veils  from  off  their  faces  and  left  the 
io  abode  of  Night. 

There  are  the  gates  of  the  ways  of  Night  and  Day,2  fitted 
above  with  a  lintel  and  below  with  a  threshold  of  stone.  They 
themselves,  high  in  the  air,  are  closed  by  mighty  doors,  and 
Avenging  Justice  keeps  the  keys  that  fit  them.  Her  did  the 
15  maidens  entreat  with  gentle  words  and  cunningly  persuade  to 
unfasten  without  demur  the  bolted  bars  from  the  gates.  Then, 
when  the  doors  were  thrown  back,  they  disclosed  a  wide  opening, 
when  their  brazen  posts  fitted  with  rivets  and  nails  swung  back 
one  after  the  other.  Straight  through  them,  on  the  broad  way, 
20  did  the  maidens  guide  the  horses  and  the  car,  and  the  goddess 
greeted  me  kindly,  and  took  my  right  hand  in  hers,  and  spake 
to  me  these  words  : 

Welcome,  O  youth,  that  comest  to  my  abode  on  the  car  that 
a .  bears  thee  tended  by  immortal  charioteers  !  It  is  no  ill  chance, 
but  right  and  justice  that  has  sent  thee  forth  to  travel  on  this 
way.  Far,  indeed,  does  it  he  from  the  beaten  track  of  men  ! 
Meet  it  is  that  thou  shouldst  learn  all  things,  as  well  the  unshaken 
heart  of  well-rounded  truth,  as  the  opinions  of  mortals  in  which 
30  *S  n°  ^rue  belief  at  all.  Yet  none  the  less  shalt  thou  learn  these 
things  also,  how  passing  right  through  all  things  one  should 
judge  the  things  that  seem  to  be.3 


The  best  MS.  of  Sextus,  who  quotes  this  passage,  reads  Kara  tt&vt 
Parmemdes,  then,  was  an  itinerant  philosopher,  like  the  sophists 
of  the  next  generation,  and  this  makes  his  visit  to  the  Athens  of  Perikles 
all  the  more  natural. 

>  For  these  see  Hesiod,  Theog.  748. 

8  I  read  8oKi.fj.Qo-’  (i.e.  8oKip.Qoai)  with  Diels.  I  have  left  it  ambiguous 
in  my  rendering  whether  eZxcu  is  to  be  taken  with  So^Qaai  or  SoKovvra. 


PARMENIDES  OF  ELEA  173 

But  do  thou  restrain  thy  thought  from  this  way  of  inquiry, 
nor  let  habit  by  its  much  experience  force  thee  to  cast  upon  this 
way  a  wandering  eye  or  sounding  ear  or  tongue  ;  but  judge  by  35 
argument 1  the  much  disputed  proof  uttered  by  me.  There  is 
only  one  way  left  that  can  be  spoken  of.  .  .  .  R.  P.  113. 


The  Way  of  Truth 

(2) 

Look  steadfastly  with  thy  mind  at  things  though  afar  as  if 
they  were  at  hand.  Thou  canst  not  cut  off  what  is  from  holding 
fast  to  what  is,  neither  scattering  itself  abroad  in  order  nor 
coming  together.  R.  P.  118  a. 


(3) 


It  is  all  one  to  me  where  I  begin  ; 
again  there. 


(4.  5) 


for  I  shall  come  back 


Come  now,  I  will  tell  thee — and  do  thou  hearken  to  my 
saying  and  carry  it  away— the  only  two  ways  of  search  that 
can  be  thought  of.  The  first,  namely,  that  It  is,  and  that  it  is 
impossible  for  it  not  to  be,  is  the  way  of  belief,  for  truth  is  its 
companion.  The  other,  namely,  that  It  is  not,  and  that  it  must 
needs  not  be, — that,  I  tell  thee,  is  a  path  that  none  can  learn 
of  at  all.  For  thou  canst  not  know  what  is  not — that  is  im¬ 
possible — nor  utter  it ;  for  it  is  the  same  thing  that  can  be 
thought  and  that  can  be.2  R.  P.  114. 


1  This  is  the  earliest  instance  of  \6y os  in  the  sense  of  (dialectical) 
argument  which  Sokrates  made  familiar.  He  got  it,  of  course,  from  the 
Eleatics.  The  Herakleitean  use  is  quite  different.  (See  p.  133,  n.  1.) 

2  I  still  believe  that  Zeller’s  is  the  only  possible  interpretation  of  t6 
yap  avrb  voeiv  (anv  re  teal  elvai  ( denn  dasselbe  kann  gedacht  werden  und 
sein,  p.  558,  n.  1  :  Eng.  trans.  p.  584,  «.  1).  It  is  impossible  to  separate 
voei*  ianv  here  from  fr.  4,  elal  voijaai,  "  can  be  thought.”  No  rendering  is 
admissible  which  makes  voeiv  the  subject  of  the  sentence  ;  for  a  bare 
infinitive  is  never  so  used.  (Some  grammars  make  iroieiv  the  subject  in 
a  sentence  like  SLi iai&v  (an  tovto  iroieiv,  but  this  is  shown  to  be  wrong  by 
Sitcaios  elpu  tovto  iroieiv.)  The  use  of  the  infinitive  as  a  subject  only 
became  possible  when  the  articular  infinitive  was  developed  (cf.  Monro, 
H.  Gr.  §§  233,  234,  242).  The  original  dative  meaning  of  the  infinitive  at 
once  explains  the  usage  (voeiv  tanv,  “  is  for  thinking,”  "  can  be  thought,” 
(a tiv  elvai,  “is  for  being,”  “can  be”). 


174 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


(6) 

It  needs  must  be  that  what  can  be  spoken  and  thought  is  ; 
for  it  is  possible  for  it  to  be,  and  it  is  not  possible  for  what  is 
nothing  to  be.1  This  is  what  I  bid  thee  ponder.  I  hold  thee 
back  from  this  first  way  of  inquiry,  and  from  this  other  also, 
5  upon  which  mortals  knowing  naught  wander  two-faced  ;  for  help¬ 
lessness  guides  the  wandering  thought  in  their  breasts,  so  that 
they  are  borne  along  stupefied  like  men  deaf  and  blind.  Undis¬ 
cerning  crowds,  who  hold  that  it  is  and  is  not  the  same  and  not 
the  same,2  and  all  things  travel  in  opposite  directions  !  3  R.  P.  115. 


(7) 

For  this  shall  never  be  proved,  that  the  things  that  are  not 
are  ,  and  do  thou  restrain  thy  thought  from  this  way  of  inquiry 
R.  P.  116. 

(8) 

One  path  only  is  left  for  us  to  speak  of,  namely,  that  It  is.  In 
this  path  are  very  many  tokens  that  what  is  is  uncreated  and  inde¬ 
structible  ;  for  it  is  complete,4  immovable,  and  without  end.  Nor 
5  was  it  ever,  nor  will  it  be  ;  for  now  it  is,  all  at  once,  a  continuous 

1  The  construction  here  is  the  same  as  that  explained  in  the  last  note. 

The  words  rb  Xtyeiv  re  voeh  r  ib v  mean  “  that  which  it  is  possible 
to  speah  of  and  think,”  and  are  correctly  paraphrased  by  Simplicius 
(Phys.  p.  86,  29,  Diels),  el  o5x  Hrrep  ir  ns  7)  elrry  t)  vo-yay  rb  6v  ian.  Then 
iaTL  yap  elvai  means  "it  can  be,"  and  the  last  phrase  should  be  con- 
strued  ovk  tan  nyStv .(elvai) ,  “  there  is  no  room  for  nothing  to  be.” 

*  I  construe  oh  vevbpxarai  rb  rrtXeiv  re  zeal  ovk  ehai  rabrbr  Kal  ob 
ra.br bp.  The  subject  of  the  infinitives  rrtXeiv  Kal  ovk  ehcu  is  the  it,  which 
has  to  be  supplied  also  with  tanr  and  ovk  tanv.  This  way  of  taking  the 
words  makes  it  unnecessary  to  believe  that  Parmenides  said  fro)  ovk  eh  at 
instead  of  (rb)  m  thru  for  "  not-being.”  There  is  no  difference  between 
irfKeiv  and  eh  a  1  except  in  rhythmical  value. 

*  \  talk?  T™"  aS  neuter  and  understand  rraMvrporros  KtXevdos  as 
equivalent  to  the  oSbs  ivu  zcdrw  of  Herakleitos.  I  do  not  think  it  has 

anything  to  do  with  the  rraXlvrovos  (or  rraXlvr parrot)  bpp.ouly.  See  Chap 
111.  p.  136,  n.  4.  * 

4  I  prefer  to  read  tan  yip  obXop.eXh  with  Plutarch  ( Adv  Col  1114  c) 
Proklos  (in  Farm  1152,  24)  also  read  obXop.eXls.  SimpUcius,  who  has 
p.ovvoyevh  here,  calls  the  One  of  Parmenides  6Xop.eXts  elsewhere  (Phvs 
p.  137.  15).  The  reading  of  [Pint.]  Strom.  5,  ^Gpop  ^vvoyertt,  helps  to 
explain  the  confusion.  We  have  only  to  suppose  that  the  letters  J  ,  ° 

Zr  theKUne  ^  the  Academy  c°Py  of  Parmenides  by  some 

one  who  had  Tim.  31  b  3  in  mind.  Parmenides  could  not  call  what  it 
“  only-begotten,”  though  the  Pythagoreans  might  call  the  world  so. 


PARMENIDES  OF  ELEA 


175 


one.  For  what  kind  of  origin  for  it  wilt  thou  look  for  ?  In  what 
way  and  from  what  source  could  it  have  drawn  its  increase  ? 

I  shall  not  let  thee  say  nor  think  that  it  came  from  what  is  not  • 
for  it  can  neither  be  thought  nor  uttered  that  anything  is  not! 
And,  if  it  came  from  nothing,  what  need  could  have  made  it  I0 
anse  later  rather  than  sooner  ?  Therefore  must  it  either  be 
altogether  or  be  not  at  all.  Nor  will  the  force  of  truth  suffer 
aught  to  anse  besides  itself  from  that  which  is  not.  Wherefore 
Justice  doth  not  loose  her  fetters  and  let  anything  come  into 
being  or  pass  away,  but  holds  it  fast.  Our  judgment  thereon  *5 
depends  on  this  :  "  Is  it  or  is  it  not  1  ”  Surely  it  is  adjudged,  as 
it  needs  must  be,  that  we  are  to  set  aside  the  one  way  as  unthink¬ 
able  and  nameless  (for  it  is  no  true  way),  and  that  the  other  path 
is  real  and  true.  How,  then,  can  what  is  be  going  to  be  in  the 
tut  lire  .  Or  how  could  it  come  into  being  ?  If  it  came  into  20 
being,  it  is  not ;  nor  is  it  if  it  is  going  to  be  in  the  future.  Thus 

is  becoming  extinguished  and  passing  away  not  to  be  heard  of 
R.  P.  11 7. 


Nor  is  it  divisible,  since  it  is  all  alike,  and  there  is  no  more  1  of 
it  in  one  place  than  in  another,  to  hinder  it  from  holding  together, 
nor  less  of  it,  but  everything  is  full  of  what  is.  Wherefore  it  is  23 
wholly  continuous  ;  for  what  is,  is  in  contact  with  what  is. 

Moreover,  it  is  immovable  in  the  bonds  of  mighty  chains 
without  beginning  and  without  end  ;  since  coming  into  being 
and  passing  away  have  been  driven  afar,  and  true  belief  has  cast 
them  away.  It  is  the  same,  and  it  rests  in  the  self-same  place, 
abiding  in  itself.  And  thus  it  remaineth  constant  in  its  place  ;  30 
for  hard  necessity  keeps  it  in  the  bonds  of  the  limit  that  holds  it 
fast  on  every  side.  Wherefore  it  is  not  permitted  to  what  is  to 
be  infinite  ;  for  it  is  in  need  of  nothing  ;  while,  if  it  were  infinite, 
it  would  stand  in  need  of  everything.1 2  R.  P.  n8. 


1  For  the  difficulties  which  have  been  felt  about  MSXXo,  here,  see  Diels's 
note.  If  the  word  is  to  be  pressed,  his  interpretation  is  admissible  •  but 
it  seems  to  me  that  this  is  simply  an  instance  of  “  polar  expression.”  It 
is  true  that  it  is  only  the  case  of  there  being  less  of  what  is  in  one  place 
than  another  that  is  important  for  the  divisibility  of  the  One  ;  but  if 
there  is  less  in  one  place,  there  is  more  in  another  than  in  that  place. 
In  any  case,  the  reference  to  the  Pythagorean  "  air  ”  or  “  void”  which 
makes  reality  discontinuous  is  plain. 

Simplicius  certainly  read  ^  tbv  d'  hv  ravrds  iSeiro,  which  is  metrically 
‘mpossffile.  I  have  followed  Bergk  in  deleting  rf,  and  have  interpreted 
with  Zeller,  So  too  Diels. 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


176 

The  thing  that  can  be  thought  and  that  for  the  sake  of  which 
35  the  thought  exists  is  the  same  ; 1  for  you  cannot  find  thought 
without  something  that  is,  as  to  which  it  is  uttered.2  And  there 
is  not,  and  never  shall  be,  anything  besides  what  is,  since  fate 
has  chained  it  so  as  to  be  whole  and  immovable.  Wherefore  all 
these  things  are  but  names  which  mortals  have  given,  believing 
40  them  to  be  true — coming  into  being  and  passing  away,  being 
and  not  being,  change  of  place  and  alteration  of  bright  colour. 
R.  P.  119. 

Since,  then,  it  has  a  furthest  limit,  it  is  complete  on  every 
side,  like  the  mass  of  a  rounded  sphere,  equally  poised  from  the 
45  centre  in  every  direction  ;  for  it  cannot  be  greater  or  smaller  in 
one  place  than  in  another.  For  there  is  no  nothing  that  could 
keep  it  from  reaching  out  equally,  nor  can  aught  that  is  be  more 
here  and  less  there  than  what  is,  since  it  is  all  inviolable.  For 
the  point  from  which  it  is  equal  in  every  direction  tends  equally 
to  the  limits.  R.  P.  120. 

The  Way  of  Belief 

50  Here  shall  I  close  my  trustworthy  speech  and  thought  about 
the  truth.  Henceforward  learn  the  beliefs  of  mortals,  giving  ear 
to  the  deceptive  ordering  of  my  words. 

Mortals  have  made  up  their  minds  to  name  two  forms,  one 
of  which  they  should  not  name,  and  that  is  where  they  go  astray 
55  from  the  truth.  They  have  distinguished  them  as  opposite  in 
form,  and  have  assigned  to  them  marks  distinct  from  one  another. 
To  the  one  they  allot  the  fire  of  heaven,  gentle,  very  light,  in 
every  direction  the  same  as  itself,  but  not  the  same  as  the  other. 
The  other  is  just  the  opposite  to  it,  dark  night,  a  compact  and 
60  heavy  body.  Of  these  I  tell  thee  the  whole  arrangement  as  it 
seems  likely ;  for  so  no  thought  of  mortals  will  ever  outstrip 
thee.  R.  P.  121. 

(9) 

Now  that  all  things  have  been  named  light  and  night,  and 
the  names  which  belong  to  the  power  of  each  have  been  assigned 

1  For  the  construction  of  &tti  voelv,  see  above,  p,  173,  n.  2. 

2  As  Diels  rightly  points  out,  the  Ionic  ^arl^Lv  is  equivalent  to 
dvo/Mx^Lv.  The  meaning,  I  think,  is  this.  We  may  name  things  as  we 
choose,  but  there  can  be  no  thought  corresponding  to  a  name  that  is  not 
.the  name  of  something  real. 


PARMENIDES  OF  ELEA 


177 

to  these  things  and  to  those,  everything  is  full  at  once  of  light 
and  dark  night,  both  equal,  since  neither  has  aught  to  do  with 
the  other. 

(10,  n) 

And  thou  shalt  know  the  substance  of  the  sky,  and  all  the 
signs  in  the  sky,  and  the  resplendent  works  of  the  glowing  sun’s 
pure  torch,  and  whence  they  arose.  And  thou  shalt  learn 
likewise  of  the  wandering  deeds  of  the  round-faced  moon,  and  of 
her  substance.  Thou  shalt  know,  too,  the  heavens  that  surround  5 
us,  whence  they  arose,  and  how  Necessity  took  them  and  bound 
them  to  keep  the  limits  of  the  stars  .  .  .  how  the  earth,  and 
the  sun,  and  the  moon,  and  the  sky  that  is  common  to  all,  and 
the  Milky  Way,  and  the  outermost  Olympos,  and  the  burning 
might  of  the  stars  arose.  R.  P.  123,  124.  I( 

(12) 

The  narrower  bands  were  filled  with  unmixed  fire,  and  these 
next  them  with  night,  and  in  the  midst  of  these  rushes  their 
portion  of  fire.  In  the  midst  of  these  is  the  divinity  that  directs 
the  course  of  all  things ;  for  she  is  the  beginner  of  all  painful 
birth  and  all  begetting,  driving  the  female  to  the  embrace  of  the  5 
male,  and  the  male  to  that  of  the  female.  R.  P.  125. 

(13) 

First  of  all  the  gods  she  contrived  Eros.  R.  P.  125. 

(14) 

Shining  by  night  with  borrowed  light,1  wandering  round  the 
earth. 

(15) 

Always  looking  to  the  beams  of  the  sun. 

(16) 

For  just  as  thought  stands  at  any  time  to  the  mixture  of  its 
erring  organs,  so  does  it  come  to  men  ;  for  that  which  thinks 

1  Note  the  curious  echo  of  II.  v.  214.  Empedokles  has  it  too  (fr.  45). 

It  appears  to  be  a  joke,  made  in  the  spirit  of  Xenophanes,  when  it  was 
first  discovered  that  the  moon  shone  by  reflected  fight.  Anaxagoras  may 
have  introduced  this  view  to  the  Athenians  (§  135),  but  these  verses  prove 
it  was  not  originated  by  him. 


12 


“  It  is.' 


178  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 

is  the  same,  namely,  the  substance  of  the  limbs,  in  each  and 
every  man  ;  for  their  thought  is  that  of  which  there  is  more  in 
them.1  R.  P.  128. 

(i7). 

On  the  right  boys  ;  on  the  left  girls.2 


(19) 

Thus,  according  to  men’s  opinions,  did  things  come  into 
being,  and  thus  they  are  now.  In  time  they  will  grow  up  and 
pass  away.  To  each  of  these  things  men  have  assigned  a  fixed 
name.  R.  P.  129  b. 


f  86-  In  the  First  part  of  his  poem,  we  find  Parmenides 
chiefly  interested  to  prove  that  it  is ;  but  it  is  not  quite 
obvious  at  first  sight  what  it  is  precisely  that  is.  He  says 
simply,  What  is,  is.  There  can  be  no  real  doubt  that  this 
is  what  we  call  body.  It  is  certainly  regarded  as  spatially 
extended  ;  for  it  is  quite  seriously  spoken  of  as  a  sphere 
(fr.  8,  43).  Moreover,  Aristotle  tells  us  that  Parmenides 
believed  in  none  but  a  sensible  reality.3  Parmenides  does 
not  say  a  word  about  “Being”  anywhere,4  and  it  is  remark- 


Tlus  fragment  of  the  theory  of  knowledge  which  was  expounded  in 

with  wW  P  +  KP0^m  of  Parmenides  must  be  taken  in  connexion 
with  what  we  are  told  by  Theophrastos  in  the  “Fragment  on  Sensation  ” 

P;  499  ;  C!'  p-  I93)'  appears  from  this  that  he  said  the' character 
of  men  s  thought  depended  upon  the  preponderance  of  the  light  or  the 
dark  element  in  their  bodies.  They  are  wise  when  the  light  element 
predominates,  and  foolish  when  the  dark  gets  the  upper  hand. 

2  This  is  a  fragment  of  Parmenides’s  embryology.  Diels's  fr  18  is  a  re 
translation  of  the  Latin  hexameters  of  CaeliusXureSnus  quoted  R  P  "T 

n  F6  Cael0'a  r’  I-  298  b  2I’  U  (ol  ™Pl  MfW abv  re  ‘ Kal 

affteWV)**  rb  ^  &\\ o  irapa  ryv  tQv  ala0VrQp  oMav  inroXap.p^v 

taL  Fii  S  t0°  Eudem0S’  ln  the  first  book  of  bis  Physics  (at, 

imp  .  Phys.  p  133,  25),  said  of  Parmenides  :  rb  otv  K0„bv  ovk 

;  r  yap  i>:rr  :a:rCTa>  dxy  ™ ^  oere  L: 

S^0lT0&V  A  tT‘  iye;-  W  tovto  “^oL  JoW,"  ”1 

ra  roiavra;  rv  8b  ovpavV  (the  world)  ^56,  rdrre,  ^appdxrovaiu  ol  rocovrob 

Uyot.  The  Neoplatomsts,  of  course,  saw  in  the  One  the  A  . 

and  Simplicius  calls  the  sphere  a  “  myth  cal  Smen!  Se7 

“r*s  6"d“  E“hf  ^ 

Pi,/"  .886,  pp.  5,1  vS,  ,  and  Das  Problem  i„  Malerie,  pp.  50 
..  f?  ™der  "  Being,"  da,  SHn  or  fj„.  It  is 

bardly  could  occur  at  this  dale  W  *“  “  does  n0‘  »»d 


PARMENIDES  OF  ELEA 


179 

able  that  he  avoids  the  term  “  god,”  which  was  so  freely 
used  by  earlier  and  later  thinkers.  The  assertion  that  it  is 
amounts  just  to  this,  that  the  universe  is  a  plenum ;  and 
that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  empty  space,  either  inside 
or  outside  the  world.  From  this  it  follows  that  there  can 
be  no  such  thing  as  motion.  Instead  of  endowing  the 
One  with  an  impulse  to  change,  as  Herakleitos  had  done, 
and  thus  making  it  capable  of  explaining  the  world,  Par¬ 
menides  dismissed  change  as  an  illusion.  He  showed  once 
for  all  that  if  you  take  the  One  seriously  you  are  bound 
to  deny  everything  else.  All  previous  solutions  of  the 
question,  therefore,  had  missed  the  point.  Anaximenes, 
who  thought  to  save  the  unity  of  the  primary  substance 
by  his  theory  of  rarefaction  and  condensation,  did  not 
observe  that,  by  assuming  there  was  less  of  what  is  in 
one  place  than  another,  he  virtually  affirmed  the  existence 
of  what  is  not  (fr.  8,  45).  The  Pythagorean  explanation 
implied  that  empty  space  or  air  existed  outside  the  world, 
and  that  it  entered  into  it  to  separate  the  units  (§  53). 
It,  too,  assumes  the  existence  of  what  is  not.  Nor  is  the 
theory  of  Herakleitos  any  more  satisfactory ;  for  it  is  based 
on  the  contradiction  that  fire  both  is  and  is  not  (fr.  6). 

The  allusion  to  Herakleitos  in  the  verses  last  referred 
to  has  been  doubted,  though  upon  insufficient  grounds. 
Zeller  points  out  quite  rightly  that  Herakleitos  never  says 
Being  and  not-Being  are  the  same  (the  old  translation  of 
fr.  6,  8)  ;  and,  were  there  nothing  more  than  this,  the  refer¬ 
ence  might  well  seem  doubtful.  The  statement,  however, 
that,  according  to  the  view  in  question,  “  all  things  travel  in 
opposite  directions,”  can  hardly  be  understood  of  anything 
but  the  “  upward  and  downward  path  ”  of  Herakleitos 
(§  71).  And,  as  we  have  seen,  Parmenides  does  not  attribute 
the  view  that  Being  and  not-Being  are  the  same  to  the 
philosopher  whom  he  is  attacking  ;  he  only  says  that  it  is 
and  is  not  the  same  and  not  the  same.1  That  is  the  natural 


1  See  above,  fr.  6,  n.  2. 


The 
method 
of  Par¬ 
menides. 


180  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


meaning  of  the  words ;  and  it  furnishes  a  very  accurate 
description  of  the  theory  of  Herakleitos. 

87.  The  great  novelty  in  the  poem  of  Parmenides  is  the 
method  of  argument.  He  first  asks  what  is  the  common 
presupposition  of  all  the  views  he  has  to  deal  with,  and  he 
finds  that  this  is  the  existence  of  what  is  not.  The  next 
question  is  whether  this  can  be  thought,  and  the  answer  is 
that  it  cannot.  If  you  think  at  all,  you  must  think  of  some¬ 
thing.  Therefore  there  is  no  nothing^  Only  that  can  be 

which  can  be  thought  (fr.  5) ;  for  thought  exists  for  the  sake 
of  what  is  (fr.  8,  34). 

This  method  Parmenides  carries  out  with  the  utmost 
rigour.  He  will  not  have  us  pretend  that  we  think  what 
we  must  admit  to  be  unthinkable.  It  is  true  that  if  we 
resolve  to  allow  nothing  but  what  we  can  understand,  we 
come  into  direct  conflict  with  our  senses,  which  present  us 
with  a  world  of  change  and  decay]  So  much  the  worse 
for  the  senses,  says  Parmenides.  That  is  the  inevitable 
outcome  of  a  corporeal  monism,  and  this  bold  declaration 
of  it  ought  to  have  destroyed  that  theory  for  ever.  If 
Parmenides  had  lacked  courage  to  work  out  the  prevailing 
views  of  his  time  to  their  logical  conclusion,  and  to  accept 
that  conclusion,  however  paradoxical  it  might  appear, 
men  might  have  gone  on  in  the  endless  circle  of  opposi¬ 
tion,  rarefaction,  and  condensation,  one  and  many,  for 
ever.  It  was  the  thorough-going  dialectic  of  Parmenides 
that  made  progress  possible.  Philosophy  must  now  cease 
to  be  monistic  or  cease  to  be  corporealist.  It  could  not 
cease  to  be  corporealist ;  for  the  incorporeal  was  still  un¬ 
known.  It  therefore  ceased  to  be  monistic,  and  arrived 
ultimately  at  the  atomic  theory,  which,  so  far  as  we 

know,  is  the  last  word  of  the  view  that  the  world  is  body 
in  motion.1 


1  From  the  point  of  view  we  are  now  taking,  it  is  doubtful  if  even 
“  CaTrghtir  be  f lled,  Monism’  since  implies  the  real  existence 

m  °rmS  °f  M0nism  are  not  corPorealist,  since 

they  replace  body  by  energy  as  the  ultimate  reality. 


PARMENIDES  OF  ELEA  181 

88.|  Parmenides  goes  on  to  develop  all  the  consequences  The 
of  the  admission  that  it  is.  It  must  be  uncreated  and  inde-  results* 
structible.  It  cannot  have  arisen  out  of  nothing  ;  for  there 
is  no  such  thing  as  nothing.  Nor  can  it  have  arisen  from 
something  ;  for  there  is  no  room  for  anything  but  itself. 

What  is  cannot  have  beside  it  any  empty  space  in  which 
something  else  might  arise  ;  for  empty  space  is  nothing, 
nothing  cannot  be  thought,  and  therefore  cannot  exist. 

What  is  never  came  into  being,  nor  is  anything  going  to 
come  into  being  in  the  future.  “  Is  it  or  is  it  not  ?  ”  If  it 
is,  then  it  is  now,  all  at  once. 

That  this  is  a  denial  of  the  existence  of  empty  space  was 
well  known  to  Plato.  He  says  Parmenides  held  "  all  things 
were  one,  and  that  the  one  remains  at  rest  in  itself,  having 
no  place  in  which  to  move.”  1  Aristotle  is  no  less  clear. 

He  lays  down  that  Parmenides  was  driven  to  take  up 
the  position  that  the  One  was  immovable  just  because  no 
one  had  yet  imagined  there  was  any  reality  other  than 
the  sensible.2 

That  which  is,  is  ;  and  it  cannot  be  more  or  less.  There 
is,  therefore,  as  much  of  it  in  one  place  as  in  another,  and 
the  world  is  a  continuous,  indivisible  plenum.  From  this 
it  follows  at  once  that  it  must  be  immovable.  If  it  moved, 
it  must  move  into  an  empty  space,  and  there  is  no  empty 
space.  It  is  hemmed  in  by  what  is,  by  the  real,  on  every 
side.  For  the  same  reason,  it  must  be  finite,  and  can  have 
nothing  beyond  it.  It  is  complete  in  itself,  and  has  no 
need  to  stretch  out  indefinitely  into  an  empty  space  that 
does  not  exist.  Hence,  too,  it  is  spherical.  It  is  equally 
real  in  every  direction,  and  the  sphere  is  the  only  form  that 
meets  this  condition.  Any  other  would  be  in  one  direction 
more  than  in  another. 


Plato,  Theaet.  180  e  3,  tv  re  xavra  ttrrl  xal  tarr/Kev  01 'nb  ev  avrifi 
ovk  tx°v  x^pav  tv  v  Kivetrai.  This  is  explicitly  stated  by  Melissos  (fr.  7, 
P-  323)>  but  Plato  clearly  meant  to  ascribe  it  to  Parmenides  as  well. 

2  Anst.  De  caelo,  r,  1.  298  b  21,  quoted  above,  p.  178,  n.  3,  and  the 
other  passages  there  quoted. 


182 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Par¬ 

menides 

the 

father  of 
material¬ 
ism. 


The 

beliefs  of 
“  mortals.1 


89.  To  sum  up.  What  is,  is  a  finite,  spherical,  motion¬ 
less  corporeal  plenum,  and  there  is  nothing  beyond  it.  The 
appearances  of  multiplicity  and  motion,  empty  space  and 
time,  are  illusions.  We  see  from  this  that  the  primary 
substance  of  which  the  early  cosmologists  were  in  search 
has  now  become  a  sort  of  “  thing  in  itself.”  It  never  quite 
lost  this  character  again.  What  appears  later  as  the 
elements  of  Empedokles,  the  so-called  "  homoeomeries  ”  of 
Anaxagoras  and  the  atoms  ~of  Leukippos  and  Demokritos, 
is  just  the  Parmenidean  “  being.”  Parmenides  is  not,  as 
some  have  said,  the  “  father  of  idealism  ”  ;  on  the  contrary, 
all  materialism  depends  on  his  view  of  reality. 

90.  It  is  commonly  held  that,  in  the  Second  Part  of  his 
■>  poem,  Parmenides  offered  a  dualistic  theory  of  the  origin  of 
things  as  his  own  conjectural  explanation  of  the  sensible 
world,  or  that,  as  Gomperz  says,  “  What  he  offered  were  the 
Opinions  of  Mortals ;  and  this  description  did  not  merely 
cover  other  people’s  opinions.  It  included  his  own  as  well, 
as  far  as  they  were  not  confined  to  the  unassailable  ground 
of  an  apparent  philosophical  necessity.”  1  Now  it  is  true 
that  in  one  place  Aristotle  appears  to  countenance  a  view  of 
this  sort,  but  nevertheless  it  is  an  anachronism.2  Nor  is  it 
really  Aristotle’s  view.  He  was  well  aware  that  Parmenides 
did  not  admit  the  existence  of  “  not-being  ”  in  any  degree 
whatever  ;  but  it  was  a  natural  way  of  speaking  to  call  the 
cosmology  of  the  Second  Part  of  the  poem  that  of  Parmenides. 
His  hearers  would  understand  in  what  sense  this  was  meant. 
At  any  rate,  the  Peripatetic  tradition  was  that  Parmenides, 
in  the  Second  Part  of  the  poem,  meant  to  give  the  belief  of 
”  the  many.”  This  is  how  Theophrastos  put  the  matter, 

1  Greek  Thinkers,  vol.  i.  pp.  180  sqq. 

2  Mel.  A,  5.  986  b  31  (R.  P.  121  a).  Aristotle’s  way  of  putting  the 
matter  is  due  to  his  interpretation  of  fr.  8,  54,  which  he.  took  to  mean 
that  one  of  the  two  “  forms  ”  was  to  be  identified  with  rb  6v  and  the  other 
with  Tb  M  Cf.  De  gen.  corr.  A,  3.  318  b  6,  Cbairep  II ap^viSgs  X<^fl  Sbo, 
rb  by  Kai  rb  p.rj  by  chat  (pdaruiv.  This  last  sentence  shows  clearly  that 
when  Aristotle  says  Uap^ylSgs,  he  sometimes  means  what  we  should  call 
**  Parmenides." 


PARMENIDES  OF  ELEA 


183 

and  Alexander  seems  to  have  spoken  of  the  cosmology  as 
something  which  Parmenides  himself  regarded  as  wholly 
false.1  The  other  view  comes  from  the  Neoplatonists,  and 
especially  Simplicius,  who  regarded  the  Way  of  Truth  as  an 
account  of  the  intelligible  world,  and  the  Way  of  Opinion 
as  a  description  of  the  sensible.  It  need  hardly  be  said 
that  this  is  almost  as  great  an  anachronism  as  the  Kantian 
parallelism  suggested  by  Gomperz.2  Parmenides  himself 
tells  us  in  the  most  unequivocal  language  that  there  is  no 
truth  at  all  in  the  theory  which  he  expounds,  and  that  he 
gives  it  merely  as  the  belief  of  “  mortals.”  It  was  this  that 
led  Theophrastos  to  speak  of  it  as  the  opinion  of  “  the 
many.” 

His  explanation  however,  though  preferable  to  that  of 
Simplicius,  is  not  convincing  either.  “  The  many  ”  are  as 
far  as  possible  from  believing  in  an  elaborate  dualism  such 
as  Parmenides  expounded,  and  it  is  a  highly  artificial 
hypothesis  to  assume  that  he  wished  to  show  how  the  popular 
view  of  the  world  could  best  be  systematised.  “  The  many  ” 
would  hardly  be  convinced  of  their  error  by  having  their 
beliefs  presented  to  them  in  a  form  they  would  certainly 
fail  to  recognise  them  in.  This,  indeed,  seems  the  most 
incredible  interpretation  of  all.  It  still,  however,  finds 
adherents,  so  it  is  necessary  to  point  out  that  the  beliefs  in 
question  are  only  called  “  the  opinions  of  mortals  ”  for  the 
very  simple  reason  that  the  speaker  is  a  goddess.  Further, 
we  have  to  note  that  Parmenides  forbids  two  ways  of 
research,  and  we  have  seen  that  the  second  of  these,  which  is 
also  expressly  ascribed  to  “  mortals,”  must  be  the  system 
of  Herakleitos.  We  should  expect,  then,  to  find  that  the 
other  way  is  also  the  system  of  some  contemporary  school, 

1  Theophr.  Phys.  Op.  fr.  6  ( Dox .  p.  482  ;  R.  P.  121  a),  Kara  56£a.v  St  twv 
iroWG)v  els  to  yivetriv  aTroSovvai.  rut-  <j>aivop.ivo>v  duo  ttoi.Civ  ras  apyo-S.  For 
Alexander,  cf.  Simpl.  Phys.  p.  38,  24,  el  St  pevSeis  sri ivry  rods  \byovs 
oterai  iKelvous  (’A \t£civ5pos)  kt\. 

2  Simpl.  Phys.  p.  39,  10  (R.  P.  121  b).  Gomperz,  Greek  Thinkers, 
vol.  i.  p.  180. 


184 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


and  it  seems  hard  to  discover  any  of  sufficient  importance 
at  this  date  except  the  Pythagorean.  Now  it  is  admitted 
by  every  one  that  there  are  Pythagorean  ideas  in  the  Second 
Part  of  the  poem,  and  it  is  therefore  to  be  presumed,  in  the 
absence  of  evidence  to  the  contrary,  that  the  whole  of  its 
cosmology  comes  from  the  same  source.  It  does  not  appear 
that  Parmenides  said  any  more  about  Herakleitos  than  the 
words  to  which  we  have  just  referred,  in  which  he  forbids  the 
second  way  of  inquiry.  He  implies,  indeed,  that  there  are 
really  only  two  ways  that  can  be  thought  of,  and  that  the 
attempt  of  Herakleitos  to  combine  them  was  futile.1  In 
any  case,  the  Pythagoreans  were  far  more  serious  opponents 
at  that  date  in  Italy,  and  it  is  certainly  to  them  that  we 
should  expect  Parmenides  to  define  his  attitude. 

It  is  still  not  quite  clear,  however,  why  he  should  have 
thought  it  worth  while  to  put  into  hexameters  a  view  he  be¬ 
lieved  to  be  false.  Here  it  becomes  important  to  remember 
that  he  had  been  a  Pythagorean  himself,  and  that  the 
poem  is  a  renunciation  of  his  former  beliefs.  In  the  intro¬ 
ductory  verses,  he  tells  us  distinctly  that  he  has  passed  from 
darkness  into  the  fight.  In  such  cases  men  commonly  feel 
the  necessity  of  showing  where  their  old  views  were  wrong. 
The  goddess  tells  him  that  he  must  learn  of  those  beliefs 
also  “  how  one  ought  to  pass  right  through  all  things  and 
judge  the  things  that  seem  to  be.”  We  get  a  further  hint 
in  another  place.  He  is  to  learn  these  beliefs,  “  and  so  no 
opinion  of  mortals  will  ever  get  the  better  of  him  ”  (fr.  8,  61). 
If  we  remember  that  the  Pythagorean  system  at  this  time 
was  handed  down  by  oral  tradition  alone,  we  shall  see  what 
this  may  mean.  Parmenides  was  founding  a  dissident 
school,  and  it  was  necessary  for  him  to  instruct  his  disciples 
in  the  system  they  might  be  called  upon  to  oppose.  In 
any  case,  they  could  not  reject  it  intelligently  without 


-  1  Cf'-T?\ta,nd  6’  especially  the  WOrds  a’^P  Moi  novn u  Scftatis  da 

^  Way’  that  °f  Herakleit°s>  is  only  added  as  an  after- 
tnougftt  avrap  £7 reir  curb  rrjs  kt\ . 


PARMENIDES  OF  ELEA  185 

a  knowledge  of  it,  and  this  Parmenides  had  to  supply 
himself.1 

91.  The  view  that  the  Second  Part  of  the  poem  of 
Parmenides  was  a  sketch  of  contemporary  Pythagorean 
cosmology  is,  doubtless,  incapable  of  rigorous  demonstration, 
but  it  can  be  made  extremely  probable.  The  entire  history 
of  Pythagoreanism  up  to  the  end  of  the  fifth  century  b.c.  is 
certainly  conjectural ;  but,  if  we  find  in  Parmenides  ideas 
wholly  unconnected  with  his  own  view  of  the  world,  and  if 
we  find  precisely  the  same  ideas  in  later  Pythagoreanism, 
the  most  natural  inference  will  be  that  the  later  Pytha¬ 
goreans  derived  these  views  from  their  predecessors,  and 
that  they  formed  part  of  the  original  stock-in-trade  of  the 
society.  This  will  be  confirmed  if  we  find  that  they  are 
developments  of  certain  features  in  the  old  Ionian  cosmology. 
Pythagoras  came  from  Samos,  and  it  was  not,  so  far  as  we 
can  see,  in  his  cosmological  views  that  he  chiefly  displayed 
originality.  It  has  been  pointed  out  (§  53)  that  the  idea  of 
the  world  breathing  came  from  Anaximenes,  and  we  need  not 
be  surprised  to  find  traces  of  Anaximander  too.  Now,  if  we 
were  confined  to  what  Aristotle  tells  us  on  this  subject,  it 
would  be  hard  to  make  out  a  case  ;  but  his  statements 
require,  as  usual,  to  be  examined  with  care.  He  says,  first 
of  all,  that  the  two  elements  of  Parmenides  were  the  Warm 
and  the  Cold.2  In  this  he  is  so  far  justified  by  the  fragments 
that,  since  the  Fire  of  which  Parmenides  speaks  is,  of  course, 
warm,  the  other  “  form,”  which  has  all  the  opposite  qualities, 
must  of  necessity  be  cold.  Here,  then,  we  have  the  tradi¬ 
tional  “  opposites  ”  of  the  Milesians.  Aristotle’s  identifica- 

1  I  read  xpvv  Somp-wa’  elvcu  in  fr.  i,  32  with  Diels.  The  view  that 
the  opinions  contained  in  the  Second  Part  are  those  of  others, 
and  are  not  given  as  true  in  any  sense  whatsoever,  is  shared  by  Diels. 
The  objections  of  Wilamowitz  ( Hermes ,  xxxiv.  pp.  203  sqq.)  do  not 
appear  to  me  cogent.  If  we  interpret  him  rightly,  Parmenides  never 
says  that  “  this  hypothetical  explanation  is  .  .  .  better  than  that  of  any 
one  else."  What  he  does  say  is  that  it  is  untrue  altogether. 

2  Met.  A,  5.  986  b  34,  depfibv  «al  \pvy_pbv Phys.  A,  5.  188  a  20;  De  gen. 
corr.  A,  3.  318  b  6  ;  B,  3.  330  b  14. 


The  dual¬ 
ist  cos¬ 
mology. 


i86 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


tion  of  these  with  Fire  and  Earth  is,  however,  misleading, 
though  Theophrastos  followed  him  in  it.1  Simplicius,  who 
had  the  poem  before  him  (§  85),  after  mentioning  Fire  and 
Earth,  at  once  adds  “  or  rather  Light  and  Darkness  ”  ; 2 
and  this  is  suggestive.  Lastly,  Aristotle’s  identification 
of  the  dense  element  with  “  what  is  not,”  3  the  unreal  of  the 
First  Part  of  the  poem,  is  not  easy  to  reconcile  with  the  view 
that  it  is  earth.  On  the  other  hand,  if  we  suppose  that  the 
second  of  the  two  “  forms,”  the  one  which  should  not  have 
been  “  named,”  is  the  Pythagorean  Air  or  Void,  we.  get  a 
very  good  explanation  of  Aristotle’s  identification  of  it 
with  "  what  is  not.”  We  seem,'  then,  to  be  justified  in 
neglecting  the  identification  of  the  dense  element  with  earth 
for  the  present.  At  a  later  stage,  we  shall  be  able  to  see 
how  it  may  have  originated.4  The  further  statement  of 
Theophrastos,  that  the  Warm  was  the  efficient  cause  and 
the  Cold  the  material  or  passive,5  is  not,  of  course,  to  be 
regarded  as  historical. 

We  have  seen  that  Simplicius,  with  the  poem  of  Par¬ 
menides  before  him,  corrects  Aristotle  by  substituting  Light 
and  Darkness  for  Fire  and  Earth,  and  he  is  amply  borne 
out  by  the  fragments  he  quotes.  Parmenides  himself  calls 
one  form  Light,  Flame,  and  Fire,  and  the  other  Night, 
and  we  have  now  to  consider  whether  these  can  be  identi¬ 
fied  with  the  Pythagorean  Limit  and  Unlimited.  We  have 
seen  good  reason  to  believe  (§  58)  that  the  idea  of  the  world 
breathing  belonged  to  the  earliest  form  of  Pythagoreanism, 
3-iid  there  can  be  no  difficulty  in  identifying  this  '*  boundless 
breath  with  Darkness,  which  stands  very  well  for  the 

**'  a  2I’  Ta^Ta  ^  {deppbv  Kal  \pvypbv)  irpoerayopeiiei  ir vp  Kal 
ypv  ;  Met.  A,  5.  986  b  34,  dtov  nvp  Kal  y i)v  \iywv.  Cf.  Theophr  Phvs 
Op.  fr.  6  {Box.  p.  482  ;  R.  P.  121  a). 

*  Phys.  p.  25,  15,  ibs  nappevlStjs  iv  rots  Trpbs  bb^av  7 rvp  Kal  yjjr  0)  peSXKov 

o°  already  P1Ut  AdV ■  C°L  rlI4  b-  ri  bap-Trpbv  Kal  aKore^K. 

Met.  A,  5.  986  b  35,  tovtwv  be  Karel  p.h  rb  6v  rb  bcppbv  rdvree,  Bdrepov 
5i  Kara  to  prj  Sv.  See  above,  p.  182,  n.  2. 

4  See  below,  Chap.  VII.  §  147. 

•Theophr.  Phys.  Op  fr.  6  {Box.  p.  482  ;  R.  P.  I2i  a),  foUowed  by 
tne  doxographers. 


PARMENIDES  OF  ELEA 


187 

Unlimited.  “  Air  ”  or  mist  was  always  regarded  as  the 
dark  element.1  And  that  which  gives  definiteness  to  the 
vague  darkness  is  certainly  light  or  fire,  and  this  may 
account  for  the  prominence  given  to  that  element  by 
Hippasos.2  We  may  probably  conclude,  then,  that  the 
Pythagorean  distinction  between  the  Limit  and  the  Un¬ 
limited,  which  we  shall  have  to  consider  later  (Chap.  VII.), 
made  its  first  appearance  in  this  crude  form.  If,  on  the 
other  hand,  we  identify  darkness  with  the  Limit,  and  light 
with  the  Unlimited,  as  many  critics  do,  we  get  into  insuper¬ 
able  difficulties. 

92.  We  must  now  look  at  the  general  cosmical  view  The 
expounded  in  the  Second  Part  of  the  poem.  The  fragments 
are  scanty,  and  the  doxographical  tradition  hard  to  in¬ 
terpret  ;  but  enough  .remains  to  show  that  here,  too,  we  are 
on  Pythagorean  ground.  Aetios  says  : 

Parmenides  held  that  there  were  bands  crossing  one  another  3 
and  encircling  one  another,  formed  of  the  rare  and  the  dense 
element  respectively,  and  that  between  these  there  were  other 
mixed  bands  made  up  of  light  and  darkness.  That  which 
surrounds  them  all  was  solid  like  a  wall,  and  under  it  is  a  fiery 
band.  That  which  is  in  the  middle  of  all  the  bands  is  also  solid, 
and  surrounded  in  turn  by  a  fiery  band.  The  central  circle 
of  the  mixed  bands  is  the  cause  of  movement  and  becoming  to 
all  the  rest.  He  calls  it  “  the  goddess  who  directs  their  course/' 

"the  Holder  of  Lots,”  and  "Necessity.” — Aet.  ii.  7.  1  (R.  P.  126). 

93.  Now  it  is  quite  unjustifiable  to  regard  these  “  bands  ”  The 
as  spheres.  The  word  o-Te<pavcu  can  mean  "  rims  ”  or  aT(Ct>avaL- 

1  Note  the  identification  of  the  dense  element  with  “  air  ”  in  [Plut.] 

Strom,  fr.  5  ( Dox .  p.  581),  Xiyu  8t  ri] v  ypv  rod  tvkvou  Karappvivros  adpos 
yeyovivcu.  This  is  pure  Anaximenes.  For  the  identification  of  this 
“  air  "  with  "  mist  and  darkness,"  cf.  Chap.  I.  §  27,  and  Chap.  V.  §  107. 

It  is  to  be  observed  further  that  Plato  puts  this  last  identification  into 
the  mouth  of  a  Pythagorean  (Tim.  52  d). 

3  See  above,  p.  109. 

*  It  seems  most  likely  that  inaWyfKovi  here  means  "  crossing  one 
another,"  as  the  Milky  Way  crosses  the  Zodiac.  The  term  ewdWpXos  is 
opposed  to  irapdXXpXos. 


i88 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


“  brims  ”  or  anything  of  that  sort,1  but  it  seems  incredible 
that  it  should  be  used  of  spheres.  It  does  not  appear, 
either,  that  the  solid  circle  which  surrounds  all  the  crowns  is 
to  be  regarded  as  spherical.  The  expression  “  like  a  wall  ” 
would  be  highly  inappropriate  in  that  case.2  We  seem,  then, 
to  be  face  to  face  with  something  like  the  “  wheels  ”  of 
Anaximander,  and  it  is  highly  probable  that  Pythagoras 
adopted  the  theory  from  him.  Nor  is  evidence  lacking 
that  the  Pythagoreans  did  regard  the  heavenly  bodies  in 
this  way.  In  Plato’s  Myth  of  Er,  which  is  certainly  Pytha¬ 
gorean  in  its  general  character,  we  do  not  hear  of  spheres, 
but  of  the  lips  ”  of  concentric  whorls  fitted  into  one  another 
like  a  nest  of  boxes.3  In  the  Timaeus  there  are  no  spheres 
either,  but  bands  or  strips  crossing  each  other  at  an  angle.4 
Lastly,  in  the  Homeric  Hymn  to  Ates,  which  seems  to  have 
been  composed  under  Pythagorean  influence,  the  word 
used  for  the  orbit  of  the  planet  is  avrv £,  which  must  mean 
“  rim.”  5 


The  fact  is,  there  is  no  evidence  that  any  one  ever  adopted 
the  theory  of  celestial  spheres,  till  Aristotle  turned  the 
geometrical  construction  which  Eudoxos  had  set  up  as  a 
hypothesis  “  to  save  appearances  ”  {aw&v  ^atvofieva) 


*  As  Dlels  Points  out>  <rre<pdvV  in  Homer  is  used  of  a  golden  band  in 
the  hair  (2  597)  or  .the  brim  of  a  helmet  (H  12).  It  may  be  added  that  it 
was  used  technically  of  the  figure  contained  between  two  concentric  circles 
(Proclus,  tn  Eucl.  I.  p.  163,  12).  It  always  means  something  annular. 

j  ..  be  remembered  that  Td Xot  is  a  city-wall  or  fortification 

and  that  Euripides  uses  are^dvr,  for  a  city-wall  (Hec.  9io\  Heath’s 
remark  (p.  69)  that  “  certainly  Parmenides’  All  was  spherical  "  is  irrelevant 
We  have  nothing  to  do  with  his  own  views  here. 

3  ReP~  *•  616  d ;  5,  K*Bd*ep  ol  Mot  ol  d,  dXXijXout  dppirrovTtt  ;  e  I, 
KUKXovt  dvojdev  TO.  Xd\r]  (palvovrat  ( acpovSdXovt ). 

*  Tim  36  b  6,  TavT-rpv  otv  rpv  «r*mur«r  trdaav  StrXijv  Kard  prjKos  oxloat 

Mfinr  ^artpav  dXXr,Xa,t  olov  xd  (the  letter  X)\p0uBaZ’v 

KO.TtKap.lpCV  at  tv  KVKXip.  ' 

‘  Hymn  t0  Ares’  6  ^pavyta  KUKXov  txioouv 

aietpo,  tirrairdpoit  tvl  relpanv,  tv6a  oc  iruXoi 
{acpXeytes  rpirdr-qt  inrtp  Avrvyo t  attv  tXovcn. 

pLi  V»t0°h‘°iv“7T:e°tiaUy  Py,ha80r“"  say,  to  the 

etre  Kal  cvrd  kvkXuv  inrtp  dvrvyat  aldtpa  vaU it. 


PARMENIDES  OF  ELEA 


189 

into  real  things.1  At  this  date,  spheres  would  not  have 
served  to  explain  anything  that  could  not  be  explained 
more  simply  without  them. 

We  are  next  told  that  these  “  bands  ”  encircle  one 
another  or  are  folded  over  one  another,  and  that  they  are 
made  of  the  rare  and  the  dense  element.  We  also  learn 
that  between  them  are  “  mixed  bands  ”  made  up  of  light 
and  darkness.  Now  it  is  to  be  observed,  in  the  first  place, 
that  light  and  darkness  are  exactly  the  same  thing  as  the 
rare  and  the  dense,  and  it  looks  as  if  there  was  some  con¬ 
fusion  here.  It  may  be  doubted  whether  these  statements 
are  based  on  anything  else  than  fr.  12,  which  might  certainly 
be  interpreted  to  mean  that  between  the  bands  of  fire  there 
were  bands  of  night  with  a  portion  of  fire  in  them.  That 
may  be  right  ;  but  I  think.it  rather  more  natural  to  under¬ 
stand  the  passage  as  saying  that  the  narrower  circles  are 
surrounded  by  wider  circles  of  night,  and  that  each  has  its 
portion  of  fire  rushing  in  the  midst  of  it.  These  last  words 
would  then  be  a  simple  repetition  of  the  statement  that  the 
narrower  circles  are  filled  with  unmixed  fire,2  and  we  should 
have  a  fairly  exact  description  of  the  “wheels”  of  Anaxi¬ 
mander. 

94.  “  In  the  middle  of  those,”  says  Parmenides,  "  is  the  The 
goddess  who  steers  the  course  of  all  things.”  Aetios  goddess‘ 
explains  this  to  mean  in  the  middle  of  the  “  mixed  bands,” 
while  Simplicius  declares  that  it  means  in  the  middle  of  all 
the  bands,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  centre  of  the  world.3  It  is 
not  likely  that  either  of  them  had  anything  better  to  go 
upon  than  the  words  of  Parmenides  himself,  and  these  are 
ambiguous.  Simplicius,  as  is  clear  from  the  language  he 

1  On  the  concentric  spheres  of  Eudoxos,  see  Heath,  pp.  193  sqq. 

8  Such  a  repetition  ( na\ivSpop.La )  is  characteristic  of  all  Greek  style,  but 
the  repetition  at  the  end  of  the  period  generally  adds  a  new  touch  to  the 
statement  at  the  opening.  The  new  touch  is  here  given  in  the  word 
r erat.  I  do  not  press  this  interpretation,  but  it  seems  to  me  much  simpler 
than  that  of  Diels,  who  has  to  take  "night”  as  equivalent  to  "earth," 
since  he  identifies  it  with  the  arepebv. 

8  Simpl.  Phys.  p.  34,  14  (R.  P.  125  b). 


190 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


uses,  identified  this  goddess  with  the  Pythagorean  Hestia 
or  central  fire,  while  Theophrastos  could  not  do  that,  because 
he  knew  and  stated  that  Parmenides  described  the  earth  as 
round  and  in  the  centre  of  the  world.1  In  this  very  passage 
we  are  told  that  what  is  in  the  middle  of  all  the  bands  is 
solid.  The  data  furnished  by  Theophrastos,  in  fact,  exclude 
the  identification  of  the  goddess  with  the  central  fire  alto¬ 
gether.  We  cannot  say  that  what  is  in  the  middle  of  all 
the  bands  is  solid,  and  that  under  it  there  is  again  a  fiery 
band.2  Nor  does  it  seem  fitting  to  relegate  a  goddess  to  the 
middle  of  a  solid  spherical  earth. 

We  are  further  told  by  Aetios  that  this  goddess  was  called 
Ananke  and  the  “  Holder  of  Lots.”  3  We  know  already 
that  she  “  steers  the  course  of  all  things,”  that  is,  that  she 
regulates  the  motions  of  the  celestial  bands.  Simplicius 
adds,  unfortunately  without  quoting  the  actual  words,  that 
she  sends  souls  at  one  time  from  the  fight  to  the  unseen 
world,  at  another  from  the  unseen  world  to  the  fight.4  It 
would  be  difficult  to  describe  more  exactly  what  the  goddess 
does  in  the  Myth  of  Er,  and  so  here  once  more  we  seem  to 
be  on  Pythagorean  ground.  It  is  to  be  noticed  further  that 
in  fr.  10  we  read  how  Ananke  took  the  heavens  and  com- 

1  Diog.  ix.  21,  TrpSiTos  S’  auros  ttjv  yyjv  airirft'qve  orfraipoeiStj  ko.1  iv 
p.t<rip  Keurdcu.  Cf.  viii.  48  (of  Pythagoras),  dXXa  ppr  kclI  top  ovpavbp 
vpioTOv  6vop,a<rtu  rbopov  ko.1  tt)p  yrjp  oTpoyybbyp  (cf.  Plato,  Phaed.  97  d),  Us 
Si  Qe6<f>pacrTos,  UapperlSijr.  This  appears  to  justify  us  in  ascribing  the 
doctrine  of  a  spherical  earth  to  Pythagoras  (cf.  p.  in). 

2  I  do  not  discuss  the  interpretation  of  7 repi  5  ttAXip  irvpwSrp;  which 
Diels  gave  in  Parmenides  Lehrgedicht,  p.  104,  and  which  is  adopted  in 
R.  P.  162  a,  as  it  is  now  virtually  retracted.  In  the  later  editions  of  his 
V orsokrahker  (18  A  37)  he  reads  icai  to  peoalrarop  traauiv  (sc.  tup  oreiparQp) 
(Trepcbv,  <v<p’  <i5>  tt&'Klp  iropdiS-qs  (sc.  <TTt<pdvrj) .  That  is  a  flat  contradiction. 

*  R-  P-  126,  where  Fiillebom’s  ingenious  emendation  KXySodxov  for 
k\t)povxov  is  tacitly  adopted.  This  is  based  upon  the  view  that  Aetios  (or 
Theophrastos)  was  thinking  of  the  goddess  that  keeps  the  keys  in  the 
Proem  (fr.  1,  14).  I  now  think  that  the  K\rjpoi  of  the  Myth  of  Er  give 
the  true  explanation. 

4  Simpl.  Phys.  p.  39,  19,  ko.1  rds  t/vxAs  Trip.tr eiv  7 rori  pir  ir  too  ipcpavous 
els  rb  aetSis  ( i.e .  diSis),  rrori  Si  aviira\lv  <pri<nv.  We  should  probably 
connect  this  with  the  statement  of  Diog.  ix.  22  (R.  P.  127)  that  men  arose 
from  the  sun  (reading  i)Mou  with  the  MSS.  for  the  conjecture  i\i,os). 


PARMENIDES  OF  ELEA 


191 

pelled  them  to  hold  fast  the  fixed  courses  of  the  stars,  and 
that  in  fr.  12  we  are  told  that  she  is  the  beginner  of  all  pairing 
and  birth.  Lastly,  in  fr.  13  we  hear  that  she  created  Eros 
first  of  all  the  gods.  So  we  shall  find  that  in  Empedokles  it 
is  an  ancient  oracle  or  decree  of  Ananke  that  causes  the  gods 
to  fall  and  become  incarnate  in  a  cycle  of  births.1 

We  should  be  more  certain  of  the  place  this  goddess 
occupies  in  the  universe  if  we  could  be  sure  where  Ananke 
is  in  the  Myth  of  Er.  Without,  however,  raising  that 
vexed  question,  we  may  lay  down  with  some  confidence 
that,  according  to  Theophrastos,  she  occupied  a  position 
midway  between  the  earth  and  the  heavens.  Whether  we 
believe  in  the  mixed  bands  ”  or  not  makes  no  difference  in 
this  respect ;  for  the  statement  of  Aetios  that  she  was  in  the 
middle  of  the  mixed  bands  undoubtedly  implies  that  she 
was  between  earth  and  heaven.  Now  she  is  identified  with 
one  of  the  bands  in  a  somewhat  confused  passage  of  Cicero,2 
and  the  whole  theory  of  wheels  or  bands  was  probably 
suggested  by  the  Milky  Way.  It  seems  to  me,  therefore, 
that  we  must  think  of  the  Milky  Way  as  a  band  intermediate 
between  those  of  the  Sun  and  the  Moon,  and  this  agrees  very 
well  with  the  prominent  way  in  which  it  is  mentioned  in 
fr.  11.  It  is  better  not  to  be  too  positive  about  the  other 
details,  though  it  is  interesting  to  notice  that  according  to 
some  it  was  Pythagoras,  and  according  to  others  Parmenides, 
who  discovered  the  identity  of  the  evening  and  morning  star.3 

1  Empedokles,  fr.  115. 

*  Cicero,  De  nat.  d.  i.  11,  28  :  "Nam  Parmenides  quidem  commenticium 
quiddam  coronae  simile  efficit  (orerpdvriv  appellat),  continente  ardore  lucis 
orbem,  qui  cingat  caelum,  quern  appellat  deum."  We  may  connect  with 
this  the  statement  of  Aetios,  ii.  20,  8,  rbv  ijXiov  kal  ttjv  aeXrjvriv  iK  rod 
yaXa^lov  kvkXov  airoKpiSrjvai. 

Eiog.  ix.  23,  Kal  SoKei  (llapuev  iorjs)  irpCoros  ir  e<piopaKtva(  rbv  avrov 
elvai  "E<nrepov  Kal  Qwacpbpov,  Cos  <p7]m  iafiioplvos  tv  irtpirmp  ’Airopvripovev- 
pdrtov  ■  0 1  St  HvBayopav.  Cf.  viii.  14  (of  Pythagoras),  irpCorov  re  "Eo-rrepov 

Kal  $compbpov  rbv  avrbv  ehreiv,  Cos  (prim  HappevlSris.  So  Diels  now 
reads  with  all  the  MSS.  (the  vulgate  oi  SC  <paai  n appevlSr/v  is  due  to  Casau- 
bon).  It  is  not  necessary  to  suppose  that  Parmenides  made  this  state¬ 
ment  explicitly  in  his  poem  ;  there  may  have  been  an  unmistakable 
allusion,  as  in  Empedokles,  fr.  129.  In  that  case,  we  should  have  a 


Physio¬ 

logy. 


192  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 

Besides  all  this,  it  is  certain  that  Parmenides  went  on 
to  describe  how  the  other  gods  were  born  and  how  they  fell, 
an  idea  which  we  know  to  be  Orphic,  and  which  may  well 
have  been  Pythagorean.  We  shall  come  to  it  again  in 
Empedokles.  In  Plato’s  Symposium,  Agathon  couples 
Parmenides  with  Hesiod  as  a  narrator  of  ancient  deeds 
of  violence  committed  by  the  gods.1  If  Parmenides  was 
expounding  the  Pythagorean  theology,  this  is  just  what  we 
should  expect ;  but  it  seems  hopeless  to  explain  it  on  any 
of  the  other  theories  which  have  been  advanced  on  the 
purpose  of  the  Way  of  Belief.2  Such  things  belong  to 
theological  speculation,  and  not  to  the  beliefs  of  “the  many.” 
Still  less  can  we  think  it  probable  that  Parmenides  made  up 
these  stories  himself  to  show  what  the  popular  view  of  the 
world  really  implied  if  properly  formulated.  We  must  ask, 
I  think,  that  any  theory  shall  account  for  what  was  evidently 
no  inconsiderable  portion  of  the  poem. 

95.  In  describing  the  views  of  his  contemporaries, 
Parmenides  was  obliged,  as  we  see  from  the  fragments,  to 
say  a  good  deal  about  physiological  matters.  Like  every¬ 
thing  else,  man  was  composed  of  the  warm  and  the  cold, 
and  death  was  caused  by  the  removal  of  the  warm.  Some 
curious  views  with  regard  to  generation  were  also  stated. 
In  the  first  place,  males  came  from  the  right  side  and  females 
from  the  left.  Women  had  more  of  the  warm  and  men  of 
the  cold,  a  view  we  shall  find  Empedokles  contradicting.3 
It  is  the  proportion  of  the  warm  and  cold  in  men  that  deter- 

remarkable  confirmation  of  the  view  that  the  A6£a  of  Parmenides  was 
Pythagorean.  If,  as  Achilles  says,  the  poet  Ibykos  of  Rhegion  had 
anticipated  Parmenides  in  announcing  this  discovery,  that  is  to  be  ex¬ 
plained  by  the  fact  that  Rhegion  became  for  a  time,  as  we  shall  see,  the 
chief  seat  of  the  Pythagorean  school. 

Plato,  Symp.  195  c  1.  It  is  implied  that  these  traXaia  7 rpay/xara  were 
7ro\Xa  <al  fila.ia,  including  4 kt ofxal  and  Sttruoi.  The  Epicurean  criticism 
of  this  is  partially  preserved  in  Philodemos,  De  pieiate,  p.  68,  Gomperz  ; 
and  Cicero,  De  nat.  d.  i.  28  ( Dox .  p.  534  ;  R.  P.  126  b). 

2  For  these  theories,  see  §  90. 

8  For  all  this,  see  R.  P.  127  a,  with  Arist.  De  part.  an.  B,  2.  648  a  28  ; 
De  gen.  an.  A,  x.  765  b  19. 


PARMENIDES  OF  ELEA 


193 

mines  the  character  of  their  thought,  so  that  even  corpses, 
from  which  the  warm  has  been  removed,  retain  a  perception 
of  what  is  cold  and  dark.1  These  fragments  of  information 
do  not  tell  us  much  when  taken  by  themselves ;  but  they 
connect  themselves  in  an  interesting  way  with  the  historv 
of  medicine,  and  point  to  the  fact  that  one  of  its  leading 
schools  stood  in  close  relation  with  the  Pythagorean  Society. 

Even  before  the  days  of  Pythagoras,  we  know  that  Kroton 
was  famous  for  its  doctors.2  We  also  know  the  name  of 
a  very  distinguished  medical  writer  who  lived  at  Kroton 
in  the  days  between  Pythagoras  and  Parmenides,  and  the 
few  facts  we  are  told  about  him  enable  us  to  regard  the 
physiological  views  described  by  Parmenides  not  as  isolated 
curiosities,  but  as  landmarks  by  which  we  can  trace  the 
origin  and  growth  of  one  of  the  most  influential  of  medical 
theories,  that  which  explains  health  as  a  balance  of 
opposites. 

96.  Aristotle  tells  us  that  Alkmaion  of  Kroton  3  Was  a  Alkmaion 
young  man  in  the  old  age  of  Pythagoras.  He  does  not  °f  Kroton 
actually  say,  as  later  writers  do,  that  he  was  a  Pythagorean, 
though  he  points  out  that  he  seems  either  to  have  derived 
his  theory  of  opposites  from  the  Pythagoreans  or  they  theirs 
from  him.4  In  any  case,  he  was  intimately  connected  with 
the  society,  as  is  proved  by  one  of  the  scanty  fragments  of 
his  book.  It  began  as  follows  :  “  Alkmaion  of  Kroton,  son 
of  Peirithous,  spoke  these  words  to  Brotinos  and  Leon  and 
Bathyllos.  As  to  things  invisible  and  things  mortal,  the 
gods  have  certainty  ;  but,  so  far  as  men  may  infer  ...”  5 

1  Theophr.  De  sens.  3,  4  (R.  P.  129).  *  See  p.  89,  n.  2. 

3  On  Alkmaion,  see  especially  Wachtler,  De  Alcmaeone  Crotoniala 
(Leipzig,  1896). 

4  Arist.  Met.  A,  5.  986  a  27  (R.  P.  66).  In  a  30  Diels  reads,  with 
great  probability,  iyivero  -rqv  i)\iKlav  <k^os>  eirl  yipovri  Uudayipp.  Cf.  Iambi. 

V.  Pyth.  104,  where  Alkmaion  is  mentioned  among  the  avyxpovhravrts  Kal 
padpreucrapTCi  rip  llvdayopp.  TrptafUrr)  vioi. 

5  'AXicnalwv  KpoToiuLpr-q^  rdSe  fKe^e  Ileipidov  vlds  B porlvtp  Kal  Movtl  Kal  Baff v\\ip  • 
irepl  twv  &<j>avtiDV,  irepl  tS>v  dvqrwv,  <ratp'f) veiav  p.ev  Oeol  #x0J,r<i  Si  avdpwwois 
TeKpuxtpecrdai  Kal  tA  (fr.  i,  Diels,  V or s.  14  B  1).  The  fact  that  this  is  not 
written  in  conventional  Doric  is  a  strong  proof  of  its  genuineness. 

13 


194 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


The  quotation  unfortunately  ends  in  this  abrupt  way, 
but  we  learn  two  things  from  it.  In  the  first  place, 
Alkmaion  possessed  that  reserve  which  marks  all  the 
best  Greek  medical  writers ;  and  in  the  second  place, 

he  dedicated  his  work  to  the  heads  of  the  Pythagorean 
Society.1 

Alkmaion’s  importance  really  lies  in  the  fact  that  he  is 
the  founder  of  empirical  psychology.2  He  regarded  the 
brain  as  the  common  sensorium,  a  view  which  Hippokrates 
and  Plato  adopted  from  him,  though  Empedokles,  Aristotle, 
and  the  Stoics  reverted  to  the  more  primitive  view  that  thp 
heart  is  the  central  organ  of  sense.  There  is  no  reason  to 
doubt  that  he  made  this  discovery  by  anatomical  means. 
We  have  authority  for  saying  that  he  practised  dissection, 
and,  though  the  nerves  were  not  yet  recognised  as  such, 
it  was  known  that  there  were  certain  “  passages  ”  (vopoi) 
which  might  be  prevented  from  communicating  sensations 
to  the  brain  by  lesions.3  He  also  distinguished  between 
sensation  and  understanding,  though  we  have  no  means  of 
knowing  where  he  drew  the  line  between  them.  His  theories 
of  the  special  senses  are  of  great  interest.  We  find  in  him 
already,  what  is  characteristic  of  Greek  theories  of  vision 
as  a  whole,  the  attempt  to  combine  the  view  of  vision  as 
a  radiation  proceeding  from  the  eye  with  that  which  attri¬ 
butes  it  to  an  image  reflected  in  the  eye.  He  knew  the 
importance  of  air  for  the  sense  of  hearing,  though  he 
called  it  the  void,  a  thoroughly  Pythagorean  touch.  With 
regard  to  the  other  senses,  our  information  is  more 


Br°Vn0S  (°r  Brontmos)  is  variously  described  as  the  son-in-law  or 
r aJr'ln-la7T°f  Py^agoras.  Leon  is  one  of  the  Metapontines  in  the 
catalogue  of  Iamblichos  (Diels,  Vors.  45  a),  and  Bathyllos  is  presumably 
the  Poseidomate  Bathylaos  also  mentioned  there.  ^ 

toJtrfpT?^8  beari?g  °n  the  early  history  of  this  subject  is  brought 
gether  and  discussed  in  Prof.  Beare’s  Greek  Theories  of  Elementary 

Cognition,  to  which  I  must  refer  the  reader  for  all  details  V 

di JJhe0Phfr'An'  ^  26  (Bear6’  P-  2'>2’  n ■  *)•  authority  for  the 

such  matters  i  T  Chalddlus>  but  he  g^s  his  information  on 

such  matters  from  far  older  sources.  The  iripoi  and  the  inference  from 
lesions  are  vouched  for  by  Theophrastos.  *rom 


PARMENIDES  OF  ELEA 


195 

scanty,  but  sufficient  to  show  that  he  treated  the  subject 
systematically.1 

His  astronomy  seems  very  crude  for  one  who  stood  in 
close  relations  with  the  Pythagoreans.  We  are  told  that  he 
adopted  Anaximenes’  theory  of  the  sun  and  Herakleitos’s 
explanation  of  eclipses.2  If,  however,  we  were  right  in 
holding  that  the  Second  Part  of  the  poem  of  Parmenides 
represents  the  view  of  Pythagoras,  we  see  that  he  had  not 
gone  very  far  beyond  the  Milesians  in  such  matters.  His 
theory  of  the  heavenly  bodies  was  still  “  meteorological.” 
It  is  all  the  more  remarkable  that  Alkmaion  is  credited  with 
the  view  that  the  planets  have  an  orbital  motion  in  the 
opposite  direction  to  the  diurnal  revolution  of  the  heavens. 
This  view,  which  he  may  have  learnt  from  Pythagoras, 
would  naturally  be  suggested  by  the  difficulties  we  noted 
in  the  system  of  Anaximander.3  It  doubtless  stood  in  close 
connexion  with  his  saying  that  soul  was  immortal  because 
it  resembled  immortal  things,  and  was  always  in  motion  like 
the  heavenly  bodies.4  He  seems,  in  fact,  to  be  the  author 
of  the  curious  view  Plato  put  into  the  mouth  of  the  Pytha¬ 
gorean  Timaios,  that  the  soul  has  circles  in  it  revolving  just 
as  the  heavens  and  the  planets  do.  This  too  seems  to  be 
the  explanation  of  his  further  statement  that  man  dies 
because  he  cannot  join  the  beginning  to  the  end.5  The 
orbits  of  the  heavenly  bodies  always  come  full  circle,  but 
the  circles  in  the  human  head  may  fail  to  complete  them¬ 
selves. 

Alkmaion’s  theory  of  health  as  “  isonomy  ”  is  at  once 
that  which  most  clearly  connects  him  with  earlier  inquirers 

1  The  details  will  be  found  in  Beare,  pp.  11  sqq.  (vision),  pp.  93  sqq. 
(hearing),  pp.  131  sqq.  (smell),  pp.  180  sqq.  (touch),  pp.  160  sqq.  (taste). 

2  Aet.  ii.  22,  4,  7 rXartiv  elvac  rbv  ijXiov  ;  29,  3,  Kara  ttjv  too  oKacpoeiSovs 
arpocp^v  Kal  rd s  irepucXlcreis  (bKXeiireiv  tt)v  aeX'rivpv). 

3  Aet.  ii.  16,  2,  (tCjv  p.adr)p.a.TiKwv  rives)  rods  TrXavr/Tas  rois  anXavanv 
and  8vcr/j.uv  eir’  dvaroXas  dvrifitpeadai.  rovrtp  8b  crvvop.oXoyei  Kal  ’A XKpaUov. 
For  the  difficulties  in  Anaximander’s  system  see  p.  69  sq. 

4  Arist.  De  an.  A,  2.  405  a  30  (R.  P.  66  c). 

6  Arist.  Probl.  17,  3.  916  a  33,  robs  dvOpunrous  <pT)aiv  ’AXKp-aluv  8id  to Oto 
dicbXXvadai,  8n  ov  Suvavraijriv  dpxn»  TiprbXei  irpocrd^ai. 


196 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


like  Anaximander,  and  also  that  which  had  the  greatest 
influence  on  the  subsequent  development  of  philosophy. 
He  observed,  to  begin  with,  that  “  most  things  human  were 
two,”  and  by  this  he  meant  that  man  was  made  up  of  the 
hot  and  the  cold,  the  moist  and  the  dry,  and  the  rest  of  the 
opposites.1  Disease  was  just  the  “  monarchy  ”  of  any  one 
of  these — the  same  thing  that  Anaximander  had  called 
”  injustice  ” — while  health  was  the  establishment  in  the 
body  of  a  free  government  with  equal  laws.2  This  was  the 
leading  doctrine  of  the  Sicilian  school  of  medicine,  and  we 
shall  have  to  consider  in  the  sequel  its  influence  on  the 
development  of  Pythagoreanism.  Taken  along  with  the 
theory  of  “  pores,”  it  is  of  the  greatest  importance  for  later 
science. 

1  Arist.  Met.  A,  5.  986  a  27  (R.  P.  66). 

*  Aet.  v.  30,  X,  ’AXKfmiuv  Trj s  ptv  vyidas  dvai  avveKTLKrjv  tt)v  ltrovop.lav 
TUV  SvydfifUM,  by  pod,  £vpo0,  ^vXpou,  deppou,  iriKpov,  y\vKt  05,  Kal  rCiv  Xotwdv, 
rV  S’  iv  avrols  p.ovapXLa.v  vbaov  won jtik^v  <pdopowoi6v  ydp  tuartpov  povapXlav. 


CHAPTER  V 


EMPEDOKLES  OF  AKRAGAS 


97.  The  belief  that  all  things  are  one  was  common  to  the  Pluralism, 
early  Ionians  ;  but  now  Parmenides  has  shown  that,  if  this 
one  thing  really  is,  we  must  give  up  the  idea  that  it  can  take 
different  forms.  The  senses,  which  present  to  us  a  world 
of  change  and  multiplicity,  are  deceitful.  There  seemed  to 
be  no  escape  from  his  arguments,  and  so  we  find  that  from 
this  time  onwards  all  the  thinkers  in  whose  hands  philosophy 
made  progress  abandoned  the  monistic  hypothesis.  Those 
who  still  held  by  it  adopted  a  critical  attitude,  and  confined 
themselves  to  a  defence  of  the  theory  of  Parmenides  against 
the  new  views.  Others  taught  the  doctrine  of  Herakleitos 
in  an  exaggerated  form  ;  some  continued  to  expound  the 
systems  of  the  early  Milesians  ;  but  the  leading  men  are  all 
pluralists.  The  corporealist  hypothesis  had  proved  unable 
to  bear  the  weight  of  a  monistic  structure. 

98.  Empedokles  was  a  citizen  of  Akragas  in  Sicily.  He  Date  of 
was  the  only  native  citizen  of  a  Dorian  state  who  plays  an 
important  part  in  the  history  of  philosophy.1  His  father’s 
name,  according  to  the  best  accounts,  was  Meton.2  His 
grandfather,  also  called  Empedokles,  had  won  a  victory  in 
the  horse-race  at  Olympia  in  01.  LXXI.  (496-95  b.c.),3  and 

1  See,  however,  Introd.  §  II  (p.  3). 

2  Aet.  i.  3,  20  (R.  P.  164),  Apollodoros  ap.  Diog.  viii.  52  (R.  P.  162). 

The  details  of  the  life  of  Empedokles  are  discussed,  with  a  careful  criticism 
of  the  sources,  by  Bidez,  La  Biographie  d’Empedocle  (Gand,  1894). 

3  For  this  we  have  the  authority  of  Apollodoros  (Diog.  viii.  51,  52  ; 

R.  P.  162),  who  follows  the  Olympic  Victors  of  Eratosthenes,  who  followed 
Aristotle.  Herakleides,  in  his  Ilepl  vicruv  (see  below,  p.  200,  n.  5),  spoke  of 

197 


198 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Empe- 
dokles 
as  a 

politician. 


Apollodoros  fixed  the  floruit  of  Empedokles  himself  in  01. 
LXXXIV.  i  (444-43  b.c.).  That  is  the  date  of  the  foundation 
of  Thourioi ;  and  it  appears  from  the  quotation  in  Diogenes 
that  the  fifth  -  century  biographer,  Glaukos  of  Rhegion,1 
said  Empedokles  visited  the  new  city  shortly  after  its 
foundation.  But  we  are  not  bound  to  believe  that  he  was 
just  forty  years  old  at  the  time.  That  is  the  usual  assump¬ 
tion  of  Apollodoros  ;  but  there  are  reasons  for  thinking  that 
his  date  is  considerably  too  late.2  It  is  more  likely  that 
Empedokles  did  not  go  to  Thourioi  till  after  his  banishment 
from  Akragas,  and  he  may  well  have  been  more  than  forty 
years  old  when  that  happened.  All,  therefore,  we  can  be  said 
to  know  is,  that  his  grandfather  was  still  alive  in  496  b.c.  ; 
that  he  himself  was  active  at  Akragas  after  472,  the  date  of 
Theron  s  death  ;  and  that  he  died  later  than  444. 

99.  Empedokles  certainly  played  an  important  part  in 
the  political  events  which  followed  the  death  of  Theron. 
The  Sicilian  historian  Timaios  seems  to  have  treated  these 
fully,  and  tells  some  stories  which  are  obviously  genuine 
traditions  picked  up  about  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  after- 

the  elder  Empedokles  as  a  "  breeder  of  horses  ”  (R.  P.  162  a) ;  and  Timaios 
grandson^  “  ^  Fifteenth  Book-  Satyros  confused  him  with  his 

1..  Glaukos  wrote  Hep!  t<2 v  dpxalwv  iroirp-Qv  Kal  fiovcmcQv,  and  is  said  to 
have  been  contemporary  with  Demokritos  (Diog.  ix.  38).  Apollodoros  adds 
(  .  P.  162)  that,  according  to  Aristotle  and  Herakleides,  Empedokles  died 

HoleJ8ea°r  Z  7'  >  "  iS  t°  bC  °bSerVed’  h0WeVer'  that  the  WOTds  *"  «' 

H paK\elSVs  are  Sturz  s  conjecture,  the  MSS.  having  ?rt  5’  'Hpd/cWo*  and 
Diogenes  certainly  said  (ix.  3)  that  Herakleitos  lived  sixty  years  ok  tie 
other  hand,  if  the  statement  of  Aristotle  comes  from  the  lJPl  ™  J^it  is 
ot  obvious  wl ly  he  should  mention  Herakleitos  at  aU ;  and  Herakleides 

nzmeT*  u  S°UrCeS  f0t  thC  bl°graPhy  of  Empedokles  The 

names  are  often  confused.  y  xae 

2  fee  D!®1s;  “  Empedokles  und  Gorgias,”  2  (Berl.  Sitzb.,  1884)  Theo- 

phrastos  said  {Dox.  p.  477,  Iy)  that  Empedokles  was  born  "  not  long  after 

Anaxagoras  ”  *.*.  not  long  after  5oo  b.c.  (see  below,  §  120).  As  he  was 

li  makfni  p  than.  farmemdes-  this  is  a  fresh  ground  for  following  Plato 

(see  aboie  SsTT  SOm,"fifJeen  years  °Mer  than  Apollodoros  does 
1  .  .  ’  ^  4^;  In  8eneral  it  should  be  noted  that  the  epoch  of  Thourioi 

has  misled  Apollodoros  in  many  cases.  Almost  every  one  who  had  any 

S‘°aSbor»t74  BTchOUri0i  <e  e'  Her0d°,0!-  Pr°*ag0raS)  “  “id  *»  W 


EMPEDOKLES  OF  AKRAGAS 


199 


wards.  Like  all  popular  traditions,  however,  they  are  a 
little  confused.  The  picturesque  incidents  are  remembered, 
but  the  essential  parts  of  the  story  are  dropped.  Still,  we 
may  be  thankful  that  the  “  collector  of  old  wives’  tales,”  1  as 
his  critics  called  him,  has  enabled  us  to  measure  the  historical 
importance  of  Empedokles  for  ourselves  by  showing  us  how 
he  was  pictured  by  the  great-grandchildren  of  his  contem¬ 
poraries.2  All  the  tales  are  intended  to  show  the  strength 
of  his  democratic  convictions,  and  we  are  told,  in  particular, 
that  he  broke  up  the  assembly  of  the  Thousand — perhaps 
some  oligarchical  association  or  club.3  It  may  have  been  for 
this  that  he  was  offered  the  kingship,  which  Aristotle  tells  us 
he  refused.4  At  any  rate,  we  see  that  Empedokles  was  the 
great  democratic  leader  at  Akragas  in  those  days,  though  we 
have  no  clear  knowledge  of  what  he  did. 

100.  But  there  is  another  side  to  his  public  character  Empe- 
which  Timaios  found  it  hard  to  reconcile  with  his  political  as  a'eS 
views.  He  claimed  to  be  a  god,  and  to  receive  the  homage  ^hs“us 
of  his  fellow -citizens  in  that  capacity.  The  truth  is, 
Empedokles  was  not  a  mere  statesman  ;  he  had  a  good  deal 
of  the  "  medicine-man  ”  about  him.  According  to  Satyros,5 

1  He  is  called  ypao<rv\\tKTpia  in  Souidas,  s.v. 

3  For  instance  Timaios  ( ap .  Diog.  viii.  64)  said  that  once  he  was 
invited  to  sup  with  one  of  the  magistrates.  Supper  was  well  advanced, 
but  no  wine  was  brought  in.  The  rest  of  the  company  said  nothing, 
but  Empedokles  was  indignant,  and  insisted  on  its  being  served.  The 
host,  however,  said  he  was  waiting  for  the  Sergeant  of  the  Council.  When 
that  official  arrived,  he  was  appointed  ruler  of  the  feast.  The  host,  of 
course,  appointed  him.  Thereupon  he  began  to  give  signs  of  an  incipient 
tyranny.  He  ordered  the  company  either  to  drink  or  have  the  wine 
poured  over  their  heads.  Empedokles  said  nothing,  but  next  day  he 
brought  both  of  them  before  the  court  and  had  them  put  to  death — 
both  the  man  who  asked  him  to  supper  and  the  ruler  of  the  feast  I  The 
story  reminds  us  of  an  accusation  of  incivisme  under  the  Terror. 

3  Diog.  viii.  66,  Sarepov  S’  6  'EpireSoicXrjs  ko.1  t6  jCiv  xChlwv  ttOpourpa 
KariXme  avvecrrijjs  eVi  tr-t)  rpta.  The  word  dd  pour  pa  hardly  suggests  a 
legal  council,  and  o-wicmiadai  suggests  a  conspiracy. 

4  Diog.  viii.  63.  Aristotle  probably  mentioned  this  in  his  Sophist. 

Cf.  Diog.  viii.  57. 

6  Diog.  viii.  59  (R.  P.  162).  Satyros  probably  followed  Alkidamas. 

Diels  suggests  (Emp.  u.  Gorg.  p.  358)  that  the  pvatKbs  of  Alkidamas  was 
a  dialogue  in  which  Gorgias  was  the  chief  speaker. 


200 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Rhetoric 

and 

medicine. 


Gorgias  affirmed  that  he  had  been  present  when  his 
master  was  performing  sorceries.  We  can  see  what  this 
means  from  the  fragments  of  the  Purifications.  Empe- 
doldes  was  a  preacher  of  the  new  religion  which  sought 
to  secure  release  from  the  “  wheel  of  birth  ”  by  purity 
and  abstinence.  Orphicism  seems  to  have  been  strong 
at  Akragas  in  the  days  of  Theron,  and  there  are  even 
some  verbal  coincidences  between  the  poems  of  Empedokles 
and  the  Orphicising  Odes  which  Pindar  addressed  to  that 
prince.1  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt 
the  statement  of  Ammonios  that  fr.  134  refers  to  Apollo  ;  2 
and,  if  that  is  so,  it  points  to  his  having  been  an  adherent 
of  the  Ionic  form  of  the  mystic  doctrine,  as  we  have  seen 
(§  39)  Pythagoras  was.  Further,  Timaios  already  knew 
the  story  that  Empedokles  had  been  expelled  from  the 
Pythagorean  Order  for  “  stealing  discourses,”  3  and  it  is 
probable  on  the  whole  that  fr.  129  refers  to  Pythagoras.4 
It  seems  most  likely,  then,  that  Empedokles  preached  a 
form  of  Pythagoreanism  which  was  not  considered  orthodox 
by  the  heads  of  the  Society.  The  actual  marvels  related 

of  him  seem  to  be  mere  developments  of  hints  in  his 
poems.5 

101.  Aristotle  said  that  Empedokles  was  the  inventor  of 
Rhetoric  ; 6  and  Galen  made  him  the  founder  of  the  Italian 
school  of  Medicine,  which  he  puts  on  a  level  with  those  of 


1  See  Bidez,  p.  115,  n.  i. 

2  See  below,  note  in  loc. 

Diog.  viii.  54  (R.  p.  162).  4  See  below,  note  in  loc. 

,  6  TrrS  told’  f°r  lnstance  (aP-  Diog.  viii.  60),  how  he  weakened  the 

force  of  the  etesian  winds  by  hanging  bags  of  asses’  skins  on  the  trees 
to  catch  them.  In  fr.  in  he  says  that  knowledge  of  science  as  taught 
by  him  will  enable  his  disciples  to  control  the  winds.  We  are  also  told 
how  he  brought  back  to  life  a  woman  who  had  been  breathless  and 
pulseless  for  thirty  days.  In  fr.  in  he  tells  Pausanias  that  his  teaching 
will  enable  him  to  bring  the  dead  back  from  Hades.  The  story  of  the 
4ww  was  given  at  length  in  the  Tlepi  v6<ru>v  of  Herakleides  of  Pontos 
and  Diogenes  says  that  it  was  related  to  Pausanias  by  Empedokles.  That 
gives  us  a  hint  of  the  way  in  which  these  stories  were  worked  up  Cf 
the  very  similar  anecdotes  about  Herakleitos,  p.  131  «  4 
6  Diog.  viii.  57  (R.  p.  ^2  g). 


EMPEDOKLES  OF  AKRAGAS 


201 


Kos  and  Knidos.1  Both  these  statements  must  be  considered 
in  connexion  with  his  political  and  scientific  activity.  It  is 
probable  that  Gorgias  was  his  disciple,  and  also  that  the 
speeches,  of  which  he  must  have  made  many,  were  marked 
by  that  euphuism  which  Gorgias  introduced  to  Athens  at  a 
later  date,  and  which  gave  rise  to  the  idea  of  an  artistic 
prose.2  His  influence  on  the  development  of  medicine 
was,  however,  far  more  important,  as  it  affected  not  only 
medicine  itself,  but,  through  it,  the  whole  tendency  of 
scientific  thinking.  It  has  been  said  that  Empedokles 
had  no  successors,3  and  the  remark  is  true  if  we  confine 
ourselves  strictly  to  philosophy  ;  but  the  medical  school  he 
founded  was  still  living  in  the  days  of  Plato,  and  had  con¬ 
siderable  influence  on  him,  and  still  more  on  Aristotle.4  Its 
fundamental  doctrine  was  the  identification  of  the  four 
elements  with  the  hot  and  the  cold,  the  moist  and  the  dry. 
It  also  held  that  we  breathe  through  all  the  pores  of  the 
body,  and  that  the  act  of  respiration  is  closely  connected 
with  the  motion  of  the  blood.  The  heart,  not  the  brain, 
was  regarded  as  the  organ  of  consciousness.5 6  A  more 

1  Galen,  Meth.  Med.  i.  i,  rfp^ov  S’  aureus  (the  schools  of  Kos  and  Knidos) 

.  .  .  Kal  ol  4k  rrjs  IraXias  iarpol,  'hiAiorleuv  re  Kal  ’Ep.ireSoK\iji  Kal  Ilavaavlas 
Kal  ol  tovtojv  eraipoi.  Philistion  was  the  contemporary  and  friend  of  Plato ; 
Pausanias  is  the  disciple  to  whom  Empedokles  addressed  his  poem. 

2  See  Diels,  "  Empedokles  und  Gorgias "  ( Berl .  Sitzb.,  1884,  pp. 
343  sqq.).  The  oldest  authority  for  saying  that  Gorgias  was  a  disciple 
of  Empedokles  is  Satyros  ap.  Diog.  viii.  58  (R.  P.  162)  ;  but  he  seems  to 
have  derived  his  information  from  Alkidamas,  who  was  the  disciple  of 
Gorgias  himself.  In  Plato’s  Meno  (76  c  4-8)  the  Empedoklean  theory 
of  effluvia  and  pores  is  ascribed  to  Gorgias. 

8  Diels  (Berl.  Sitzb.,  1884,  p.  343). 

4  See  M.  Wellmann,  Fragmentsammlung  der  griechischen  Arlzte,  vol. 
i.  (Berlin,  1901).  According  to  Wellmann,  both  Plato  (in  the  Timaeus ) 

and  Diokles  of  Karystos  depend  upon  Philistion.  It  is  impossible  to 
understand  the  history  of  philosophy  from  this  point  onwards  without 
keeping  the  history  of  medicine  constantly  in  view. 

6  For  the  four  elements,  cf.  Anon.  Lond.  xx.  25  (Menon’s  Iatrika), 
QiXlittIwv  6’  olerai  4k  S'  ISeCiv  avvearavai  rip.S.s,  tout’  (otiu  4k  S'  gtolxcIoiv  • 
irupbs,  aipos,  OSaTos,  7 ijs.  ebtai  S4  Kal  4k6.<ttov  Suvdp-eii,  tov  p.4t>  vvpbs  tS 
6epp.bv,  toO  84  &4pos  tS  xf/vxpbv,  tov  S4  iiSaTos  tS  uypov,  rrjs  84  74s  tS  i-ripbv. 
For  the  theory  of  respiration,  see  Wellmann,  pp.  82  sqq.  ;  and  for  the 
heart  as  the  seat  of  consciousness,  ib.  pp.  15  sqq. 


202 


Relation 
to  pre¬ 
decessors. 


Death. 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 

external  characteristic  of  the  medicine  taught  by  the  fol¬ 
lowers  of  Empedokles  is  that  they  still  clung  to  ideas  of 
a  magical  nature.  A  protest  against  this  by  a  member  of 
the  Koan  school  has  been  preserved.  He  refers  to  them  as 

“  ma&icians  and  purifiers  and  charlatans  and  quacks,  who 
profess  to  be  very  religious.”  1 

102.  In  the  biography  of  Empedokles,  we  hear  nothing 
of  his  theory  of  nature.  The  only  hints  we  get  are  some 
statements  about  his  teachers.  Alkidamas,  who  had  good 
opportunities  of  knowing,  made  him  a  fellow-student  of 
Zeno  under  Parmenides.  Theophrastos  too  made  him  a 
follower  and  imitator  of  Parmenides.  But  the  further 
statement  that  he  had  "  heard  ”  Pythagoras  cannot  be 
right.  No  doubt  Alkidamas  said  “  Pythagoreans.”  2 

Some  writers  hold  that  certain  parts  of  the  system  of 
Empedokles,  in  particular  the  theory  of  pores  and  effluvia 
(§  1 18),  were  due  to  the  influence  of  Leukippos.3  We  know, 
however,  that  Alkmaion  (§  96)  spoke  of  “  pores  ”  in  con¬ 
nexion  with  sensation,  and  it  was  more  probably  from  him 
that  Empedokles  got  the  theory.  Moreover,  this  is  more 
in  accordance  with  the  history  of  certain  other  physiological 
views  which  are  common  to  Alkmaion  and  the  later  Ionian 
philosophers.  We  can  generally  see  that  those  reached 
Ionia  through  the  medical  school  which  Empedokles  founded.4 

103.  We  are  told  that  Empedokles  leapt  into  the  crater 
of  Etna  that  he  might  be  deemed  a  god.  This  appears  to 
be  a  malicious  version  5  of  a  tale  set  on  foot  by  his  adherents 

,x  ;,HipP^  n,e^  vbaw-  c  r-  re  xal  KaOdprai  xal  iyiprat  xal 

AXafW  The  whoie  passage  should  be  read.  Cf.  Wellmann  p  L  * 

3  Dl°g.  vrn.  54-56  (R.  p.  162).  F  y 

Tf  3  Verhandl-  d.  35  Philologenversamml.  pp.  104  sqq.,  Zeller  p  767 

It  would  be  fatal  to  the  main  thesis  of  the  next  few  chapes  If  it  could  be 
that?  t  Empedokles  was  influenced  by  Leukippos.P  I  hope  to  show 
that  Deukippos  was  influenced  by  the  later  Pythagorean  doctrine  (Chap 

.  £  ’7  a?  m  tum  affected  by  Empedokles  (Chap.  VII.  \j) 
For  iripoi  in  Alkmaion.  cf.  Arist.  De  gen.  an.  B,  6.  744  a  8  •  Theophr 

De  sens.  26;  and  for  the  way  in  which  his  embryological  and  other  vfews 
were  transmitted  through  Empedokles  to  the  Ionian  physicists  cf 
redrich,  Hippokratische  Untersuchungen,  pp.  126  sqq. 

6  R.  P.  162  h.  The  story  is  always  told  with  a  hostile  purpose. 


EMPEDOKLES  OF  AKRAGAS 


203 


that  he  had  been  snatched  up  to  heaven  in  the  night.1 
Both  .stories  would  easily  get  accepted  ;  for  there  was  no 
local  tradition.  Empedokles  did  not  die  in  Sicily,  but  in 
the  Peloponnese,  or,  perhaps,  at  Thourioi.  It  is  not  at  all 
unlikely  that  he  visited  Athens.2  Plato  represents  Sokrates 
as  familiar  with  his  views  in  early  life,  and  the  elder  Kritias 
adopted  one  of  his  characteristic  theories.3 

104.  Empedokles  was  the  second  philosopher  to  expound  Writings, 
his  system  in  verse,  if  we  leave  the  satirist  Xenophanes  out 

of  account.  He  was  also  the  last  among  the  Greeks  ;  for 
the  forged  Pythagorean  poems  may  be  neglected.  Lucretius 
imitates  Empedokles  in  this,  just  as  Empedokles  imitated 
Parmenides.  Of  course,  the  poetical  imagery  creates  a 
difficulty  for  the  interpreter  ;  but  it  cannot  be  said  that  it  is 
harder  to  extract  the  philosophical  kernel  from  the  verses 
of  Empedokles  than  from  the  prose  of  Herakleitos. 

105.  We  have  more  abundant  remains  of  Empedokles  The 
than  of  any  other  early  Greek  philosopher.  If  we  may  remains’ 
trust  our  manuscripts  of  Diogenes  and  of  Souidas,  the 
librarians  of  Alexandria  estimated  the  Poem  on  Nature  and 

the  Purifications  together  as  5000  verses,  of  which  about 

1  R.  P.  ib.  This  was  the  story  told  by  Herakleides  of  Pontos,  at  the 
end  of  his  romance  about  the  &wvovs. 

2  Timaios  refuted  the  common  stories  at  some  length  (Diog.  viii. 

71  sqq.  ;  R.  P.  ib.).  He  was  quite  positive  that  Empedokles  never  returned 
to  Sicily  after  he  went  to  Olympia  to  have  his  poem  recited  to  the 
Hellenes.  The  plan  for  the  colonisation  of  Thourioi  would,  of  course,  be 
discussed  at  Olympia,  and  we  know  that  Greeks  from  the  Peloponnese 
and  elsewhere  joined  it.  He  may  very  well  have  gone  to  Athens  in 
connexion  with  this. 

3  See  my  edition  of  the  Phaedo,  96  b  4  n.,  and,  for  Kritias,  Arist. 

De  anima,  405  b  6.  This  is  the  Kritias  who  appears  in  Plato’s  Timaeus, 
and  he  is  certainly  not  the  Kritias  who  was  one  of  the  Thirty,  but  his 
grandfather.  The  Kritias  of  the  Timaeus  is  a  very  old  man,  who  re¬ 
members  the  events  of  his  boyhood  quite  well,  but  forgets  what  happened 
the  other  day  {Tim.  26  b).  He  also  tells  us  that  the  poems  of  Solon  were 
a  novelty  when  he  was  a  boy  {ib.  21  b).  It  is  hard  to  understand  how 
he  was  ever  supposed  to  be  the  oligarch,  though  Diels,  Wilamowitz,  and 
E.  Meyer  seem  to  have  felt  no  difficulty  in  the  identification.  It  is  clear 
too  that  it  must  have  been  the  grandfather  who  exchanged  poetical  com¬ 
pliments  with  Anakreon  (Diels,  Vors .3  ii.  p.  81  B  1).  Kritias  of  the  Thirty 
did  not  live  to  be  an  old  man. 


204 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


2000  belonged  to  the  former  work.1  Diels  gives  about 
350  verses  and  parts  of  verses  from  the  cosmological  poem, 
or  not  a  fifth  of  the  whole.  It  is  important  to  remember 
that,  even  in  this  favourable  instance,  so  much  has  been 
lost.  The  other  poems  ascribed  to  Empedokles  by  the 
Alexandrian  scholars  were  probably  not  his.2 

I  give  the  remains  as  they  are  arranged  by  Diels  : 


(1) 


And  do  thou  give  ear,  Pausanias,  son  of  Anchitos  the  wise  ! 


(2) 

For  straitened  are  the  powers  that  are  spread  over  their 
bodily  parts,  and  many  are  the  woes  that  burst  in  on  them  and 
blunt  the  edge  of  their  careful  thoughts  !  They  behold  but  a 
brief  span  of  a  life  that  is  no  life,3  and,  doomed  to  swift  death, 
are  borne  up  and  fly  off  like  smoke.  Each  is  convinced  of  that 
5  alone  which  he  had  chanced  upon  as  he  is  hurried  every  way, 
and  idly  boasts  he  has  found  the  whole.  So  hardly  can  these 
things  be  seen  by  the  eyes  or  heard  by  the  ears  of  men,  so  hardly 
grasped  by  their  mind  !  Howbeit,  thou,  since  thou  hast  found 
thy  way  hither,  shalt  learn  no  more  than  mortal  mind  hath 
power.  R.  P.  163. 

(3) 

...  to  keep  within  thy  dumb  heart. 


1  Diog.  viii.  77  (R.  P.  162)  ;  Souidas  s.».  ’E^eSo^s-  sal  lypa^e  5c’ 

"T,  U(Pl *  P&d*  /?',  Kal  larcv  ?tV  As  Sc<rXlXca.  It 

ar  y  seems  likely,  however,  that  the  KaO  appal  extended  to  3000  verses, 
so  le  s  proposes  to  read  irdvra  rpcaxlXca  for  rrevraKiaxlXca  in  Diogenes. 
See  Diels,  Uber  die  Gedichte  des  Empedokles  "  (Berl.  Sit  zb.,  1808  pp 
396  sqq.).  ' 

2  Hieronymos  of  Rhodes  declared  (Diog.  viii.  58)  that  he  had  met  with 

orty-three  tragedies  by  Empedokles  ;  but  see  Stein,  pp.  5  sqq.  The  poem 

on  the  Persian  Wars,  which  he  also  refers  to  (Diog.  viii.  57),  seems  to 
have  arisen  from  a  corruption  in  the  text  of  Arist.  Probl.  929  b  16,  where 
Bekker  reads  h  rocs  IR/xmocs.  The  same  passage,  however,  is  said  to 
occur  rocs  <t>mcKoh,  in  Meteor.  A,  4.  382  a  1,  though  there  too  E  has 

llepaiKOis. 

n  !  J?6  fSS;  °f  Sextus  have  PLov-  Diels  reads  ^  iSlov.  I  still 
prefer  Scahger  s  jwt p  dpiov.  Cf.  fr.  15,  Tb  Sp  pioror  KaXiovac. 


EMPEDOKLES  OF  AKRAGAS 


205 


(4) 

But,  O  ye  gods,  turn  aside  from  my  tongue  the  madness  of 
those  men.  Hallow  my  Ups  and  make  a  pure  stream  flow  from 
them !  And  thee,  much-wooed,  white-armed  Virgin  Muse,  do 
I  beseech  that  I  may  hear  what  is  lawful  for  the  children  of  a 
day  !  Speed  me  on  my  way  from  the  abode  of  Holiness  and  drive 
my  willing  car  !  Thee  shall  no  garlands  of  glory  and  honour  at 
the  hands  of  mortals  constrain  to  lift  them  from  the  ground,  on 
condition  of  speaking  in  thy  pride  beyond  that  which  is  lawful 
ana  right,  and  so  to  gain  a  seat  upon  the  heights  of  wisdom. 

Go  to  now,  consider  with  all  thy  powers  in  what  way  each 
thing  is  clear.  Hold  not  thy  sight  in  greater  credit  as  compared 
with  thy  hearing,  nor  value  thy  resounding  ear  above  the  clear 
instructions  of  thy  tongue ; 1  and  do  not  withhold  thy  confidence 
in  any  of  thy  other  bodily  parts  by  which  there  is  an  opening  for 
understanding,  but  consider  everything  in  the  way  it  is  clear. 
R.  P.  163. 

(5) 

But  it  is  all  too  much  the  way  of  low  minds  to  disbelieve 
their  betters.  Do  thou  learn  as  the  sure  testimonies  of  my  Muse 
bid  thee,  when  my  words  have  been  divided  2  in  thy  heart. 

(6) 

Hear  first  the  four  roots  of  all  things  :  shining  Zeus,  life¬ 
bringing  Hera,  Aidoneus  and  Nestis  whose  tear-drops  are  a 
well-spring  to  mortals.  R.  P.  164.3 

(7) 

.  .  .  uncreated. 

(8) 

And  I  shall  tell  thee  another  thing.  There  is  no  substance  4  of 

1  The  sense  of  taste,  not  speech. 

2  Clement’s  reading  SiarfjiqOevros  may  perhaps  stand  if  we  take  X07010 
as  "  discourse,”  "  argument  "  (cf.  diaipeiv).  Diels  conjectures  hma<jqdivTo% 
and  renders  "  when  their  speech  has  penetrated  the  sieve  of  thy  mind.” 

3  The  four  “  elements  ”  are  introduced  under  mythological  names,  for 
which  see  below,  p.  229,  n.  2. 

4  Plutarch  (Adv.  Col.  1112  a)  says  that  <pvan  here  means  "birth,”  as  is 
shown  by  its  opposition  to  death,  and  all  interpreters  (including  myself) 
have  hitherto  followed  him.  On  the  other  hand,  the  fragment  clearly 
deals  with  dvqrd,  and  Empedokles  cannot  have  said  that  there  was  no 
death  of  mortal  things.  The  0vqT&  are  just  perishable  combinations  of 


206 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


any  of  all  the  things  that  perish,  nor  any  cessation  for  them  of 
baneful  death.  They  are  only  a  mingling  and  interchange  of 
what  has  been  mingled.  Substance  is  but  a  name  given  to  these 
things  by  men.  R.  P.  165. 

(9) 

But  they  (hold  ?)  that  when  Light  and  Air  (chance  ?)  to  have 
been  mingled  in  the  fashion  of  a  man,  or  in  the  fashion  of  the 
race  of  wild  beasts  or  of  plants  or  birds,  that  that  is  to  be  born, 
and  when  these  things  have  been  separated  once  more,  they  call 
it  (wrongly  ?)  woeful  death.  I  follow  the  custom  and  call  it 
so  myself.* 1 

(10) 

Avenging  death. 

the  four  elements  (cf.  fr.  35,  11),  and  the  point  is  that  they  are  constantly 
coming  into  being  and  passing  away.  It  is,  therefore,  impossible,  as 
pointed  out  by  Prof.  Lovejoy  ( Philosophical  Review,  xviii.  371  sqq.),  to  take 
da.v6.T01 0  Te\evT-f)  as  equivalent  to  ddvaros  here,  and  it  may  equally  well  mean 
“end  of  death.”  Now  Aristotle,  in  a  passage  where  he  is  carefully  dis¬ 
tinguishing  the  various  senses  of  <pftens  (Met.  A,  4.  1015  a  1),  quotes  this  very 
verse  as  an  illustration  of  the  meaning  ?/  t&v  Svtoiv  oft  a  la  (see  further  in 
the  Appendix).  I  understand  the  words  4irl  toXuS'  as  equivalent  to  twl  rots 
0vr)ToU,  and  I  take  the  meaning  of  the  fragment  to  be  that  temporary 
compounds  or  combinations  like  flesh,  bone,  etc.,  have  no  ts  of  their 
own.  Only  the  four  “  immortal  ”  elements  have  a  <f,Ui s  which  does  not 
pass  away.  This  interpretation  is  confirmed  by  the  way  Diogenes  of 
Apollonia  speaks  in  denying  the  ultimate  reality  of  the  "elements.”  He 
says  (fr.  2)  el  rofrruv  Ti  Ijv  'irepov  rod  irftpov,  trepov  6v  ry  ISlp.  q> fttret,  i.e.  he  says 
the  elements  are  Ovyrd. 

1  I  understand  this  fragment  to  deal  with  the  "  elements,"  of  which 
<P and  aldVP  (Fife  and  Air)  are  taken  as  examples.  These  are  not 
subject  to  birth  and  death,  like  the  dvyrd  of  fr.  8,  and  the  application  of 
the  terms  to  them  is  as  much  a  matter  of  convention  as  the  application 
of  the  term  to  the  perishable  combinations  which  are  subject  to 
birth  and  death.  The  text  is  corrupt  in  Plutarch,  and  has  two  or  three 
lacunae,  but  the  usual  reconstructions  depart  too  far  from  the  tradition 

I  suggest  the  following,  which  has  at  least  the  merit  of  not  requiring  the 
alteration  of  a  single  letter  : 


ol  S’. 


Sre  pkv  Kara.  QCrra.  piyiv  <pC>t  a  Wipe  <ki5P(tv>, 


f/  Kara  dypCiv  a yportpwv  ytvos  1)  Kara  dapvwv 
i)k  /car’  okovQv,  t6t€  pev  rS  v<fp.ov<ri>  yevitrOat  • 
evre  S  6iroKpiv6G>cH  rdS  aft,  5 ucr Saiuova  ttot/liov 
!7  8ip,i%  <oi0>  KaXiovtn,  v6p.(p  S’  i irltpypu  Kal  airris. 

I  understand  r68e  in  the  fourth  verse  as  referring  to  the  “  elements  " 
(e.g.  Fire  and  Air),  which  cannot  properly  be  said  to  be  born  or  to  die 
as  their  combinations  do.  I  take  it  that  Fire  and  Air  are  specially 
mentioned  because  the  life  of  animate  creatures  depends  on  them  The 
earth  and  water  would  never  of  themselves  produce  a  living  being. 


EMPEDOKLES  OF  AKRAGAS 


207 


(ir,  12) 

Fools  !— for  they  have  no  far-reaching  thoughts— who  deem 
that  what  before  was  not  comes  into  being,  or  that  aught  can 
perish  and  be  utterly  destroyed.  For  it  cannot  be  that  aught 
can  arise  from  what  in  no  way  is,  and  it  is  impossible  and  unheard 
of  that  what  is  should  perish  ;  for  it  will  always  be,  wherever  5 
one  may  keep  putting  it.  R.  P.  165  a. 

(13) 

And  in  the  All  there  is  naught  empty  and  naught  too  full. 

(14) 

In  the  All  there  is  naught  empty.  Whence,  then,  could 
aught  come  to  increase  it  ? 

(15) 

A  man  who  is  wise  in  such  matters  would  never  surmise  in 
his  heart  that  as  long  as  mortals  live  what  they  call  their  life,  so 
long  they  are,  and  suffer  good  and  ill  ■  while  before  they  were 
formed  and  after  they  have  been  dissolved  they  are  just  nothing 
at  all.  R.  P.  165  a. 

(16) 

For  even  as  they  (Strife  and  Love)  were  aforetime,  so  too 
they  shall  be ;  nor  ever,  methinks,  will  boundless  time  be 
emptied  of  that  pair.  R.  P.  166  c. 

(1 7) 

I  shall  tell  thee  a  twofold  tale.  At  one  time  it  grew  to  be 
one  only  out  of  many ;  at  another,  it  divided  up  to  be  many 
instead  of  one.  There  is  a  double  becoming  of  perishable  things 
and  a  double  passing  away.  The  coming  together  of  all  things 
brings  one  generation  into  being  and  destroys  it ;  the  other  grows  5 
up  and  is  scattered  as  things  become  divided.  And  these  things 
never  cease  continually  changing  places,  at  one  time  all  uniting 
in  one  through  Love,  at  another  each  borne  in  different  directions 
by  the  repulsion  of  Strife.  Thus,  as  far  as  it  is  their  nature  to 
grow  into  one  out  of  many,  and  to  become  many  once  more  I0 
when  the  one  is  parted  asunder,  so  far  they  come  into  being  and 
their  life  abides  not.  But,  inasmuch  as  they  never  cease  changing 


208 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


their  places  continually,  so  far  they  are  ever  immovable  as  they 
go  round  the  circle  of  existence. 

But  come,  hearken  to  my  words,  for  it  is  learning  that 
i5  increaseth  wisdom.  As  I  said  before,  when  I  declared  the  heads 
of  my  discourse,  I  shall  tell  thee  a  twofold  tale.  At  one  time  it 
grew  together  to  be  one  only  out  of  many,  at  another  it  parted 
asunder  so  as  to  be  many  instead  of  one  ; — Fire  and  Water  and 
Earth  and  the  mighty  height  of  Air ;  dread  Strife,  too,  apart 
20  from  these,  of  equal  weight  to  each,  and  Love  in  their  midst, 
equal  in  length  and  breadth.  Her  do  thou  contemplate  with  thy 
mind,  nor  sit  with  dazed  eyes.  It  is  she  that  is  known  as  being 
implanted  in  the  frame  of  mortals.  It  is  she  that  makes  them 
have  thoughts  of  love  and  work  the  works  of  peace.  They  call 
25  her  by  the  names  of  Joy  and  Aphrodite.  Her  has  no  mortal  yet 
marked  moving  round  among  them,1  but  do  thou  attend  to  the 
undeceitful  ordering  of  my  discourse. 

For  all  these  are  equal  and  alike  in  age,  yet  each  has  a  different 
prerogative  and  its  own  peculiar  nature,  but  they  gain  the  upper 
30  hand  in  turn  when  the  time  comes  round.  And  nothing  comes 
into  being  besides  these,  nor  do  they  pass  away  ;  for,  if  they  had 
been  passing  away  continually,  they  would  not  be  now,  and  what 
could  increase  this  All  and  whence  could  it  come  ?  How,  too, 
could  it  perish,  since  no  place  is  empty  of  these  things  ?  There 
35  are  these  alone ;  but,  running  through  one  another,  they  become 
now  this,  now  that,2  and  like  things  evermore.  R.  P.  166. 

(18) 

Love. 

(19) 

Clinging  Love. 

(20) 

This  (the  contest  of  Love  and  Strife)  is  manifest  in  the  mass 
of  mortal  limbs.  At  one  time  all  the  limbs  that  are  the  body’s 
portion  are  brought  together  by  Love  in  blooming  life’s  high 
5  season ;  at  another,  severed  by  cruel  Strife,  they  wander  each 
alone  by  the  breakers  of  life’s  sea.  It  is  the  same  with  plants 

1  Reading  /xerA  rolcnv.  I  still  think,  however,  that  Knatz’s  palaeo- 

graphically  admirable  conjecture  tfeoiw  (i.e.  among  the  elements) 
deserves  consideration.  a  Keeping  4X\ore  with  Diels 


EMPEDOKLES  OF  AKRAGAS 


209 

and  the  fish  that  make  their  homes  in  the  waters,  with  the  beasts 
that  have  their  lairs  on  the  hills  and  the  seabirds  that  sail  on 
wings.  R.  P.  173  d. 

(21) 

Come  now,  look  at  the  things  that  bear  witness  to  my  earlier 
discourse,  if  so  be  that  there  was  any  shortcoming  as  to  their 
form  in  the  earlier  fist.  Behold  the  sun,  everywhere  bright  and 
warm,  and  all  the  immortal  things  that  are  bathed  in  heat  and 
bright  radiance.1  Behold  the  rain,  everywhere  dark  and  cold  ;  5 
and  from  the  earth  issue  forth  things  close-pressed  and  solid. 
When  they  are  in  strife  all  these  are  different  in  form  and 
separated  ;  but  they  come  together  in  love,  and  are  desired  by 
one  another. 

For  out  of  these  have  sprung  all  things  that  were  and  are 
and  shall  be — trees  and  men  and  women,  beasts  and  birds  and  10 
the  fishes  that  dwell  in  the  waters,  yea,  and  the  gods  that  five 
long  fives  and  are  exalted  in  honour.  R.  P.  166  i. 

For  there  are  these  alone  ;  but,  running  through  one  another, 
they  take  different  shapes — so  much  does  mixture  change  them. 

R.  P.  166  g. 


(22) 

For  all  of  these — sun,  earth,  sky,  and  sea — are  at  one  with 
all  their  parts  that  are  cast  far  and  wide  from  them  in  mortal 
things.  And  even  so  all  things  that  are  more  adapted  for 
mixture  are  like  to  one  another  and  united  in  love  by  Aphrodite.  5 
Those  things,  again,  that  differ  most  in  origin,  mixture  and  the 
forms  imprinted  on  each,  are  most  hostile,  being  altogether 
unaccustomed  to  unite  and  very  sorry  by  the  bidding  of  Strife, 
since  it  hath  wrought  their  birth. 

(23) 

Just  as  when  painters  are  elaborating  temple-offerings,  men 
whom  wisdom  hath  well  taught  their  art, — they,  when  they 
have  taken  pigments  of  many  colours  with  their  hands,  mix 
them  in  due  proportion,  more  of  some  and  less  of  others,  and 

1  Reading  dfx^pora  S’  Sea  tSei  with  Diels.  For  the  word  tSos,  cf.  frs. 
62,  5  ;  73,  2.  The  reference  is  to  the  moon,  etc.,  which  are  made  of 
solidified  Air,  and  receive  their  fight  from  the  fiery  hemisphere.  See 
below,  §  1 13. 


*4 


210 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


5  from  them  produce  shapes  like  unto  all  things,  making  trees  and 
men  and  women,  beasts  and  birds  and  fishes  that  dwell  in  the 
waters,  yea,  and  gods,  that  live  long  lives,  and  are  exalted  in 
honour, — so  let  not  the  error  prevail  over  thy  mind,1  that  there 
is  any  other  source  of  all  the  perishable  creatures  that  appear  in 
io  countless  numbers.  Know  this  for  sure,  for  thou  hast  heard  the 
tale  from  a  goddess.2 

(24) 

Stepping  from  summit  to  summit,  not  to  travel  only  one 
path  of  words  to  the  end.  .  .  . 

(25) 

What  is  right  may  well  be  said  even  twice. 

(26) 

For  they  prevail  in  turn  as  the  circle  comes  round,  and  pass 
into  one  another,  and  grow  great  in  their  appointed  turn.  R  P 
166  c. 

There  are  these  alone ;  but,  running  through  one  another 
they  become  men  and  the  tribes  of  beasts.  At  one  time  they 
5  are  all  brought  together  into  one  order  by  Love ;  at  another, 
they  are  carried  each  in  different  directions  by  the  repulsion  of 
Strife,  till  they  grow  once  more  into  one  and  are  wholly  subdued. 
Thus  in  so  far  as  they  are  wont  to  grow  into  one  out  of  many, 
io  and  again  divided  become  more  than  one,  so  far  they  come 
into  being  and  their  life  is  not  lasting;  but  in  so  far  as 
they  never  cease  changing  continually,  so  far  are  they  ever¬ 
more,  immovable  in  the  circle. 


(27) 

There  (m  the  sphere)  are  distinguished  neither  the  swift  limbs 
of  the  sun,  no,  nor  the  shaggy  earth  in  its  might,  nor  the  sea 
—so  fast  was  the  god  bound  in  the  close  covering  of  Harmony’ 
spherical  and  round,  rejoicing  in  his  circular  solitude.3  R.  P.  167 

1  Reading  with  Blass  (Jahrb.f.  kl.  Phil.,  1883,  p.  19)  and  Diels : 

oihu  prj  a’  aw  art]  <ppeva  kcuputw  kt\. 

Cf.  Hesychios:  kowW  This  is  practically  what  the  MSS  of 

S^phcms  gwe  and  Hesych103  has  many  Empedoklean  glosses. 

The  goddess  is,  of  course,  the  Muse.  Cf.  fr.  5 

3  The  word  fio,iv,  if  it  is  right,  cannot  mean  "Vest/'  but  onlv  snlitnrm 
There  is  no  reason  for  altering  rrePmL,  though  Simplicius  has  repeat. 


EMPEDOKLES  OF  AKRAGAS 


211 


(2 7  «) 

There  is  no  discord  and  no  unseemly  strife  in  his  limbs. 

(28) 

But  he  was  equal  on  every  side  and  quite  without  end, 
spherical  and  round,  rejoicing  in  his  circular  solitude. 

(29) 

Two  branches  do  not  spring  from  his  back,  he  has  no  feet,  no 
swift  knees,  no  fruitful  parts  ;  but  he  was  spherical  and  equal 
on  every  side. 

(30,  31) 

But  when  Strife  was  grown  great  in  the  limbs  of  the  god  and 
sprang  forth  to  claim  his  prerogatives,  in  the  fulness  of  the 
alternate  time  set  for  them  by  the  mighty  oath,  .  .  .  for  all 
the  limbs  of  the  god  in  turn  quaked.  R.  P.  167. 

(32' 

The  joint  binds  two  things. 

(33) 

Even  as  when  fig  juice  rivets  and  binds  white  milk.  .  .  . 

(34) 

Cementing 1  meal  with  water.  .  .  . 

(35,  36) 

But  now  I  shall  retrace  my  steps  over  the  paths  of  song  that 
I  have  travelled  before,  drawing  from  my  saying  a  new  saying. 
When  Strife  was  fallen  to  the  lowest  depth  of  the  vortex,  and  Love 
had  reached  to  the  centre  of  the  whirl,  in  it  do  all  things  come 
together  so  as  to  be  one  only  ;  not  all  at  once,  but  coming  together 
at  their  will  each  from  different  quarters  ;  and,  as  they  mingled, 
strife  began  to  pass  out  to  the  furthest  limit.  Yet  many 
things  remained  unmixed,  alternating  with  the  things  that  were 

1  The  masculine  KoXXijo-as  shows  that  the  subject  cannot  have  been 
4>i\6ttis  ;  and  Karsten  was  doubtless  right  in  believing  that  Empedokles 
introduced  the  simile  of  a  baker  here.  It  is  in  his  manner  to  take  illus¬ 
trations  from  human  arts. 


212  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 

being  mixed,  namely,  all  that  Strife  not  fallen  yet  retained  ;  for 
io  it  had  not  yet  altogether  retired  perfectly  from  them  to  the 
outermost  boundaries  of  the  circle.  Some  of  it  still  remained 
within,  and  some  had  passed  out  from  the  limbs  of  the  All.  But 
in  proportion  as  it  kept  rushing  out,  a  soft,  immortal  stream  of 
blameless  Love  kept  running  in,  and  straightway  those  things 
became  mortal  which  had  been  immortal  before,  those  things 
15  were  mixed  that  had  before  been  unmixed,  each  changing  its 
path.  And,  as  they  mingled,  countless  tribes  of  mortal  creatures 
were  scattered  abroad  endowed  with  all  manner  of  forms,  a 
wonder  to  behold.1  R.  P.  169. 


(37) 

Earth  increases  its  own  mass,  and  Air  swells  the  bulk  of  Air. 

(38) 

Come,  I  shall  now  tell  thee  first  of  all  the  beginning  of  the 
sun,2  and  the  sources  from  which  have  sprung  all  the  things  we 
now  behold,  the  earth  and  the  billowy  sea,  the  damp  vapour 
and  the  Titan  air  that  binds  his  circle  fast  round  all  things 
R.  P.  170  a.  ‘ 

(39) 

If  the  depths  of  the  earth  and  the  vast  air  were  infinite  a 
foohsh  saying  which  has  been  vainly  dropped  from  the  lips’of 
many  mortals,  though  they  have  seen  but  a  little  of  the  All  3 
R.  P.  103  b. 

(40) 

The  sharp-darting  sun  and  the  gentle  moon. 


(4i) 

But  (the  sunlight)  is  gathered  together  and  circles  round  the 
mighty  heavens. 

'  Wei:S/ejclearly  from  this  fragment  how the  d*Wa  ( the~  dementi 

“d  th*  —  <“» 

.  The  MSS.  of  Clement  have  jjAiov  dpxyy,  and  the  rear! in  a  ■  \  t  .  t 

:qLT^keshi!t  D,ek  reads  ^ 


EMPEDOKLES  OF  AKRAGAS 


213 


(42) 

And  she  cuts  off  his  rays  as  he  goes  above  her,  and  casts  a 
shadow  on  as  much  of  the  earth  as  is  the  breadth  of  the  pale-faced 
moon.1 

(43) 

Even  so  the  sunbeam,  having  struck  the  broad  and  mighty 
circle  of  the  moon,  returns  at  once,  running  so  as  to  reach  the 
sky. 

(44) 

It  flashes  back  to  Olympos  with  untroubled  countenance. 
R.  P.  170  c. 

(45.  46) 

There  circles  round  the  earth  a  round  borrowed  light,  as  the 
nave  of  the  wheel  circles  round  the  furthest  (goal).2 

(47) 

For  she  gazes  at  the  sacred  circle  of  the  lordly  sun  opposite. 

(48) 

It  is  the  earth  that  makes  night  by  coming  before  the  lights. 

(49) 

...  of  solitary,  blind-eyed  night. 

(50) 

And  Iris  bringeth  wind  or  mighty  rain  from  the  sea. 

(51) 

(Fire)  swiftly  rushing  upwards  .  .  . 

(52) 

And  many  fires  burn  beneath  the  earth.  R.  P.  171  a. 

(53) ' 

For  so  it  (the  air)  chanced  to  be  running  at  that  time,  though 
often  otherwise.  R.  P.  171  a. 


1  I  translate  Diels's  conjecture  6.ir«niyaaev  .  .  .  #<rr’  5 1>  !y. 

2  See  p.  177,  n.  1. 


214 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


(54) 


But  the  air  sank  down  upon  the  earth  with  its  long  roots. 
R.  P.  171  a. 

(55) 

Sea  the  sweat  of  the  earth.  R.  P.  170  b. 

(56) 


Salt  was  solidified  by  the  impact  of  the  sun’s  beams. 


(57) 

On  it  (the  earth)  many  heads  sprung  up  without  necks  and 
arms  wandered  bare  and  bereft  of  shoulders.  Eyes  strayed  up 
and  down  in  want  of  foreheads.  R.  P.  173  a. 

(58) 

Solitary  limbs  wandered  seeking  for  union. 

(59) 

But,  as  divinity  was  mingled  still  further  with  divinity,  these 
things  joined  together  as  each  might  chance,  and  many  other 
things  besides  them  continually  arose. 

(60) 

Shambling  creatures  with  countless  hands. 

(61) 

Many  creatures  with  faces  and  breasts  looking  in  different 
directions  were  born  ;  some,  offspring  of  oxen  with  faces  of  men, 
while  others,  again,  arose  as  offspring  of  men  with  the  heads  of 
oxen,  and  creatures  in  whom  the  nature  of  women  and  men  was 
mingled,  furnished  with  sterile 1  parts.  R.  P.  173  b. 

(62) 

Come  now,  hear  how  the  Fire  as  it  was  separated  caused  the 
night-bom  shoots  of  men  and  tearful  women  to  arise ;  for  my 
tale  is  not  off  the  point  nor  uninformed.  Whole-natured  forms 
first  arose  from  the  earth,  having  a  portion  both  of  water  and 


1  Reading  arelpois  with  Diels. 


EMPEDOKLES  OF  AKRAGAS 


215 

fire.1  These  did  the  fire,  desirous  of  reaching  its  like,  send  up,  5 
showing  as  yet  neither  the  charming  form  of  the  limbs,  nor  yet 
the  voice  and  parts  that  are  proper  to  men.  R.  P.  173  c. 

(63) 

.  .  .  But  the  substance  of  (the  child’s)  limbs  is  divided 
between  them,  part  of  it  in  men’s  (and  part  in  women's  body). 

(64) 

And  upon  him  came  desire  reminding  him  through  sight. 

(65) 

.  .  .  And  it  was  poured  out  in  the  purified  parts ;  and  when 
it  met  with  cold  women  arose  from  it. 

(66) 

The  divided  meadows  of  Aphrodite. 

(67) 

For  in  its  warmer  part  the  womb  brings  forth  males,  and 
that  is  why  men  are  dark  and  more  manly  and  shaggy. 

(68) 

On  the  tenth  day  of  the  eighth  month  it  turns  to  a  white 
putrefaction.2 

(69) 

Double  bearing.3 

(70) 

Sheepskin.4 

(71) 

But  if  thy  assurance  of  these  things  was  in  any  way  deficient 
as  to  how,  out  of  Water  and  Earth  and  Air  and  Fire  mingled 

1  Retaining  eldeos  (i.e.  t Seos ),  which  is  read  in  the  MSS.  of  Simplicius. 

Cf.  above,  p.  209,  n.  1. 

2  That  Empedokles  regarded  milk  as  putrefied  blood  is  stated  by- 
Aristotle  ( De  gen.  an.  A,  8.  777  a  7).  The  word  iriov  means  pus.  There 
may  be  a  pun  on  irvis,  “  beestings,”  but  that  has  its  vowel  long. 

3  Said  of  women  in  reference  to  births  in  the  seventh  and  ninth 
months. 

*  Of  the  membrane  round  the  foetus. 


2l6 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


together,  arose  the  forms  and  colours  of  all  those  mortal  things 
that  have  been  fitted  together  by  Aphrodite,  and  so  are  now 
come  into  being.  .  .  . 

(72) 

How  tall  trees  and  the  fishes  in  the  sea  .  .  . 

(73) 

And  even  as  at  that  time  Kypris,  preparing  warmth,1  after 
she  had  moistened  the  Earth  in  water,  gave  it  to  swift  fire  to 
harden  it.  .  .  .  R.  P.  171. 


(74) 

Leading  the  songless  tribe  of  fertile  fish. 

(75) 

All  of  those  which  are  dense  within  and  rare  without,  having 
received  a  flaccidity  of  this  kind  at  the  hands  of  Kypris. 


(76) 

This  thou  mayest  see  in  the  heavy-backed  shell-fish  that 
dwell  in  the  sea,  in  sea-snails  and  the  stony-skinned  turtles.  In 
them  thou  mayest  see  that  the  earthy  part  dwells  on  the  upper¬ 
most  surface  of  the  skin. 

(77-78) 

It  is  moisture  2  that  makes  evergreen  trees  flourish  with 
abundance  of  fruit  the  whole  year  round. 

(79) 

And  so  first  of  all  tall  olive  trees  bear  eggs. 

(80) 

Wherefore  pomegranates  are  late-born  and  apples  succulent. 

(81) 

Wine  is  the  water  from  the  bark,  putrefied  in  the  wood. 

1  Reading  f Sea  -rronruijova-a  with  Diels. 

2  This  seems  clearly  to  be  the  meaning  of  -ftp  here.  Cf.  fr  100  v  13 

and  p.  228,  n.  2.  ’ 


EMPEDOKLES  OF  AKRAGAS 


21 7 


(82) 

Hair  and  leaves,  and  thick  feathers  of  birds,  and  the  scales 
that  grow  on  mighty  limbs,  are  the  same  thing. 


(83) 

,,  t,he  ha*r  °*  hedgehogs  is  sharp-pointed  and  bristles  on 
their  backs. 


(84) 

And  even  as  when  a  man  thinking  to  sally  forth  through  a 
stormy  night,  gets  him  ready  a  lantern,  a  flame  of  blazing  fire, 
fastening  to  it  horn  plates  to  keep  out  all  manner  of  winds,  and 
they  scatter  the  blast  of  the  winds  that  blow,  but  the  light  leaping 
out  through  them,  shines  across  the  threshold  with  unfailing  5 
beams,  as  much  of  it  as  is  finer ; 1  even  so  did  she  (Love)  then 
entrap  the  elemental  fire,  the  round  pupil,  confined  within 
membranes  and  delicate  tissues,  which  are  pierced  through  and 
through  with  wondrous  passages.  They  keep  out  the  deep 
water  that  surrounds  the  pupil,  but  they  let  through  the  fire,  as  10 
much  of  it  as  is  finer.  R.  P.  177  b. 

(85) 

But  the  gentle  flame  (of  the  eye)  has  but  a  scanty  portion 
of  earth. 


(86) 

Out  of  these  divine  Aphrodite  fashioned  unwearying  eyes. 


(87) 

Aphrodite  fitting  these  together  with  rivets  of  love. 


(88) 


One  vision  is  produced  by  both  the  eyes. 


(89) 

Know  that  effluences  flow  from  all  things  that  have  come  into 
being.  R.  P.  166  h. 

See  Beare,  p.  16,  ti.  1,  where  Plato,  Tim.  45  4  (roO  Trvpbs  buov  t6  pbv 

Ka.eiv  ovk  Zaxev>  W  it apixtw  r/pepov),  is  aptly  quoted. 


218 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


(90) 

So  sweet  lays  hold  of  sweet,  and  bitter  rushes  to  bitter ; 
acid  comes  to  acid,  and  warm  couples  with  warm. 


(9i) 

Water  fits  better  into  wine,  but  it  will  not  (mingle)  with  oil. 
R.  P.  166  h. 

_  .  „  (92) 

Copper  mixed  with  tin. 


(93) 

The  bloom  of  scarlet  dye  mingles  with  the  grey  linen.1 


(94) 

And  the  black  colour  at  the  bottom  of  a  river  arises  from  the 
shadow.  The  same  is  seen  in  hollow  caves. 


(95) 

Since  they  (the  eyes)  first  grew  together  in  the  hands  of 
Kypris. 

(96) 

The  kindly  earth  received  in  its  broad  funnels  two  parts  of 
gleaming  Nestis  out  of  the  eight,  and  four  of  Hephaistos.  So 
arose  white  bones  divinely  fitted  together  by  the  cement  of 
proportion.  R.  P.  175. 


(97) 

The  spine  (was  broken). 

(98) 

And  the  earth,  anchoring  in  the  perfect  harbours  of  Aphrodite, 
meets  with  these  in  nearly  equal  proportions,  with  Hephaistos 
and  Water  and  gleaming  Air— either  a  little  more  of  it,  or  less 


1  On  this  fragment  see  Clara  E.  Millerd,  On  the  Interpretation  of 
Empedocles,  p.  38,  n.  3.  J 


EMPEDOKLES  OF  AKRAGAS  219 

of  them  and  more  of  it.  From  these  did  blood  arise  and  the 
manifold  forms  of  flesh.  R.  P.  175  c. 

(99) 

The  bell  .  .  .  the  fleshy  sprout  (of  the  ear).1 

(100) 

Thus  2  do  all  things  draw  breath  and  breathe  it  out  again. 
All  have  bloodless  tubes  of  flesh  extended  over  the  surface  of 
their  bodies  ;  and  at  the  mouths  of  these  the  outermost  surface 
of  the  skin  is  perforated  all  over  with  pores  closely  packed 
together,  so  as  to  keep  in  the  blood  while  a  free  passage  is  cut 
for  the  air  to  pass  through.  Then,  when  the  thin  blood  recedes 
from  these,  the  bubbling  air  rushes  in  with  an  impetuous  surge ; 
and  when  the  blood  runs  back  it  is  breathed  out  again.  Just  as 
when  a  girl,  playing  with  a  water-clock  of  shining  brass,  puts  the 
orifice  of  the  pipe  upon  her  comely  hand,  and  dips  the  water- 
clock  into  the  yielding  mass  of  silvery  water — the  stream  does  not 
then  flow  into  the  vessel,  but  the  bulk  of  the  air  3  inside,  pressing 
upon  the  close-packed  perforations,  keeps  it  out  till  she  uncovers 
the  compressed  stream  ;  but  then  air  escapes  and  an  equal 
volume  of  water  runs  in, — just  in  the  same  way,  when  water 
occupies  the  depths  of  the  brazen  vessel  and  the  opening  and 
passage  is  stopped  up  by  the  human  hand,  the  air  outside,  striving 
to  get  in,  holds  the  water  back  at  the  gates  of  the  ill-sounding 
neck,  pressing  upon  its  surface,  till  she  lets  go  with  her  hand. 
Then,  on  the  contrary,  just  in  the  opposite  way  to  what  happened 
before,  the  wind  rushes  in  and  an  equal  volume  of  water  runs  out 

1  On  fr.  99,  see  Beare,  p.  96,  n.  1. 

2  This  passage  is  quoted  by  Aristotle  ( De  respir,  473  b  9),  who  makes 
the  curious  mistake  of  taking  pivuv  for  the  genitive  of  pis  instead  of  piv6 $. 
The  locus  classlcus  on  the  klepsydra  is  Probl.  914  b  9  sqq.  (where  read 
aiiXoO  for  &\\ov,  b  12).  It  was  a  metal  vessel  with  a  narrow  neck  (av\6s) 
at  the  top  and  with  a  sort  of  strainer  (r/8p.6s)  pierced  with  holes  {rpruxara, 
Tpvn-fipxiTo.)  at  the  bottom.  The  passage  in  the  Problems  just  referred  to 
attributes  this  theory  of  the  phenomenon  to  Anaxagoras,  and  we  shall 
see  that  he  also  made  use  of  the  experiment  (§  131). 

3  The  MSS.  of  Aristotle  have  atpos  here,  though  the  air  is  called  aWr/p 
in  four  other  verses  of  the  fragment  (vv.  5,  7,  18,  24).  It  is  easier  to 
suppose  that  Aristotle  made  a  slip  in  this  one  verse  than  that  Empedokles 
should  use  a-qp  in  a  sense  he  elsewhere  avoids  (p.  228,  n.  2),  and  this 
suspicion  is  confirmed  by  the  form  aipos  instead  of  typos.  I  think, 
therefore,  that  Stein  was  right  in  reading  aKUpos. 


5 

10 

15 

20 


220 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


to  make  room.1  Even  so,  when  the  thin  blood  that  surges 
through  the  limbs  rushes  backwards  to  the  interior,  straightway 
25  the  stream  of  air  comes  in  with  a  rushing  swell ;  but  when  the 
blood  runs  back  the  air  breathes  out  again  in  equal  quantity. 


(101) 

(The  dog)  with  its  nostrils  tracking  out  the  fragments  of  the 
beast’s  limbs,  and  the  breath  from  their  feet  that  they  leave  in 
the  soft  grass.2 * * * * * 8 

(102) 

Thus  all  things  have  their  share  of  breath  and  smell. 

(103,  104) 

Thus  have  all  things  thought  by  fortune’s  will.  .  .  .  And 
inasmuch  as  the  rarest  things  came  together  in  their  fall. 

(105) 

(The  heart),  dwelling  in  the  sea  of  blood  that  runs  in  opposite 
directions,  where  chiefly  is  what  men  call  thought ;  for  the 
blood  round  the  heart  is  the  thought  of  men.  R.  P.  178  a. 

(106) 

For  the  wisdom  of  men  grows  according  to  what  is  before 
them.  R.  P.  177. 

(107) 

For  out  of  these  are  all  things  formed  and  fitted  together, 
and  by  these  do  men  think  and  feel  pleasure  and  pain.  R.  P.  178. 


1  This  seems  to  be  the  experiment  described  in  Probl.  914  b  26,  tbv 

•ydp  ris  avrfjs  (ttjs  K\e\J/bSpas)  abrrjp  rpv  KoiSiav  tpurX-fyras  ilSaros,  eiriXafibp 

t6p  ai\6v,  Karaa-rpi^xi  etrl  tSp  av\6v,  ov  tpipeTui  rb  vSuip  Sib.  tov  ai’XoO  twi 

trr6fj.a.  bvoix&tpros  St  tov  (ttS/uutos,  ouk  evObs  ticpet  Kara  rbv  av\bv,  dXXd 
fUKportpip  barepov,  il>s  ot )k  bv  M  Tip  aripaTi  tov  av\ov,  ctXX’  v<TT(pov  St  a  tovtov 

tpepbptvov  avoixdhTos.  The  epithet  is  best  explained  as  a  reference 

to  the  tpvypbs  or  “belching”  referred  to  at  915  a  7.  Any  one  can 

produce  this  effect  with  a  water-bottle.  If  it  were  not  for  this  epithet, 
it  would  be  tempting  to  read  ■qdp.olo  for  iodpoio,  and  that  is  actually  the 
reading  of  a  few  MSS. 

8  On  fr.  101,  see  Beare,  p.  135,  n.  2. 


EMPEDOKLES  OF  AKRAGAS 


221 


(i°8) 

And  just  so  far  as  they  grow  to  be  different,  so  far  do  different 
thoughts  ever  present  themselves  to  their  minds  (in  dreams)  1 
R.  P.  177  a.  ' 

(109) 

For  it  is  with  earth  that  we  see  Earth,  and  Water  with  water  ; 
by  air  we  see  bright  Air,  by  fire  destroying  Fire.  By  love  do  we 
see  Love,  and  Hate  by  grievous  hate.  R.  P.  176. 

(no) 

For  if,  supported  on  thy  steadfast  mind,  thou  wilt  contem¬ 
plate  these  things  with  good  intent  and  faultless  care,  then  shalt 
thou  have  all  these  things  in  abundance  throughout  thy  life, 
and  thou  shalt  gain  many  others  from  them.  For  these  things 
grow  of  themselves  into  thy  heart,  where  is  each  man’s  true  5 
nature.  But  if  thou  strivest  after  things  of  another  kind,  as  it 
is  the  way  with  men  that  ten  thousand  sorry  matters  blunt  their 
careful  thoughts,  soon  will  these  things  desert  thee  when  the 
time  comes  round  ;  for  they  long  to  return  once  more  to  their 
own  kind  ;  for  know  that  all  things  have  wisdom  and  a  share  of  10 
thought. 

(hi) 

And  thou  shalt  learn  all  the  drugs  that  are  a  defence  against 
ills  and  old  age ;  since  for  thee  alone  will  I  accomplish  ah  this 
Thou  shalt  arrest  the  violence  of  the  weariless  winds  that  arise 
to  sweep  the  earth  and  waste  the  fields  ;  and  again,  when  thou 
so  desirest,  thou  shalt  bring  back  their  blasts  in  return.  Thou  5 
shalt  cause  for  men  a  seasonable  drought  after  the  dark  rains, 
and  again  thou  shalt  change  the  summer  drought  for  streams 
that  feed  the  trees  as  they  pour  down  from  the  sky.  Thou  shalt 
bring  back  from  Hades  the  life  of  a  dead  man. 

PURIFICATIONS 

(112) 

Friends,  that  inhabit  the  great  town  looking  down  on  the 
yellow  rock  of  Akragas,  up  by  the  citadel,  busy  in  goodly  works, 
harbours  of  honour  for  the  stranger,  men  unskilled  in  meanness, ' 


1  That  this  refers  to  dreams,  we  learn  from  Simpl.  De 


an.  p.  202,  30. 


222 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


all  hail.  I  go  about  among  you  an  immortal  god,  no  mortal 
5  now,  honoured  among  all  as  is  meet,  crowned  with  fillets  and 
flowery  garlands.  Straightway,  whenever  I  enter  with  these  in 
my  train,  both  men  and  women,  into  the  flourishing  towns,  is 
reverence  done  me ;  they  go  after  me  in  countless  throngs, 
io  asking  of  me  what  is  the  way  to  gain  ;  some  desiring  oracles, 
while  some,  who  for  many  a  weary  day  have  been  pierced  by  the 
grievous  pangs  of  all  manner  of  sickness,  beg  to  hear  from  me 
the  word  of  healing.  R.  P.  162  f. 

(113) 

But  why  do  I  harp  on  these  things,  as  if  it  were  any  great 
matter  that  I  should  surpass  mortal,  perishable  men  ? 

(1 14) 

Friends,  I  know  indeed  that  truth  is  in  the  words  I  shall 
utter,  but  it  is  hard  for  men,  and  jealous  are  they  of  the  assault 
of  belief  on  their  souls. 

(115) 

There  is  an  oracle  of  Necessity,  an  ancient  ordinance  of  the 
gods,1  eternal  and  sealed  fast  by  broad  oaths,  that  whenever  one 
of  the  daemons,  whose  portion  is  length  of  days,  has  sinfully 
polluted  his  hands  with  blood,2  or  followed  strife  and  forsworn 
5  himself,  he  must  wander  thrice  ten  thousand  seasons  from  the 
abodes  of  the  blessed,  being  born  throughout  the  time  in  all 
manners  of  mortal  forms,  changing  one  toilsome  path  of  life  for 
another.  For  the  mighty  Air  drives  him  into  the  Sea,  and  the 
10  Sea  spews  him  forth  on  the  dry  Earth  ;  Earth  tosses  him  into 
the  beams  of  the  blazing  Sun,  and  he  flings  him  back  to  the  eddies 
of  Air.  One  takes  him  from  the  other,  and  all  reject  him.  One 
of  these  I  now  am,  an  exile  and  a  wanderer  from  the  gods,  for 
that  I  put  my  trust  in  insensate  strife.  R.  P.  181. 

(116) 

Charis  loathes  intolerable  Necessity. 

1  Necessity  is  an  Orphic  personage,  and  Gorgias,  the  disciple  of 
Empedokles,  says  dewit  fjou\eup.a<nit  /cal  avayiajs  xf/r]<f>La-fia<nv  (Hel.  6). 

*  I  retain  <f>6vip  in  v.  3  (so  too  Diels).  The  first  word  of  v.  4  has  been 
lost.  Diels  suggests  Xehcei-,  which  may  well  be  right,  and  takes  ap-apr^aas 
as  equivalent  to  opapr-ffua s.  I  have  translated  accordingly. 


EMPEDOKLES  OF  AKRAGAS 


223 


(117) 

For  I  have  been  ere  now  a  boy  and  a  girl,  a  bush  and  a  bird 
and  a  dumb  fish  in  the  sea.  R.  P.  182. 

(118) 

I  wept  and  I  wailed  when  I  saw  the  unfamiliar  land.  R  P 
182. 

(119) 

From  what  honour,  from  what  a  height  of  bliss  have  I  fallen 
to  go  about  among  mortals  here  on  earth. 

(120) 

We  have  come  under  this  roofed-in  cave.1 

(121) 

*  •  •  the  joyless  land,  where  are  Death  and  Wrath  and  troops 
of  Dooms  besides ;  and  parching  Plagues  and  Rottennesses  and 
bloods  roam  in  darkness  over  the  meadow  of  Ate. 

(122,  123) 

There  were 2  Chthonie  and  far-sighted  Heliope,  bloodv 
Discord  and  gentle -visaged  Harmony,  KalHsto  and  Aischre 
Speed  and  Tarrying,  lovely  Truth  and  dark-haired  Uncertainty’ 
Birth  and  Decay,  Sleep  and  Waking,  Movement  and  Immobility’ 
crowned  Majesty  and  Meanness,  Silence  and  Voice.  R.  p.  182  a.’  5 

(124) 

Alas,  O  wretched  race  of  mortals,  sore  unblessed ;  such  are 
the  strifes  and  groanings  from  which  ye  have  been  bom  ! 


(125) 

From  living  creatures  he  made  them  dead,  changing  their 
forms. 


1  According  to  Porphyry  (De  antro  Nymph.  8),  these  words  were 

spoken  by  the  "  powers  "  who  conduct  the  soul  into  the  world  > 

Svvd.fj.eis).  The  “  cave  "  is  not  originally  Platonic  but  Orphic. 

2  This  passage  is  closely  modelled  on  the  Catalogue  of  Nymphs  in  Iliad 
xviii.  39  sqq.  Chthonie  is  found  already  in  Pherekydes  (Diog.  i.  119) 


224 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


(126) 

(The  goddess)  clothing  them  with  a  strange  garment  of 
flesh.1 


(127) 

Among  beasts  they 2  become  Hons  that  make  their  lair  on  the 
hills  and  their  couch  on  the  ground  ;  and  laurels  among  trees 
with  goodly  fohage.  R.  P.  181  b. 


(128) 

Nor  had  they  3  any  Ares  for  a  god  nor  Kydoimos,  no  nor 
King  Zeus  nor  Kronos  nor  Poseidon,  but  Kypris  the  Queen. 
.  .  .  Her  did  they  propitiate  with  holy  gifts,  with  painted 
figures4  and  perfumes  of  cunning  fragrancy,  with  offerings  of 
5  pure  myrrh  and  sweet-smefling  frankincense,  casting  on  the 
ground  Hbations  of  brown  honey.  And  the  altar  did  not 
reek  with  pure  bull's  blood,  but  this  was  held  in  the  greatest 
abomination  among  men,  to  eat  the  goodly  limbs  after  tearing 
out  the  Ufe.  R.  P.  184. 


(129) 

And  there  was  among  them  a  man  of  rare  knowledge,  most 
skilled  in  all  manner  of  wise  works,  a  man  who  had  won  the 
utmost  wealth  of  wisdom  ;  for  whensoever  he  strained  with  all 
his  mind,  he  easily  saw  everything  of  all  the  things  that  are,  in 
5  ten,  yea,  twenty  Hfetimes  of  men.5 


1  I  have  retained  iWiyvivri,  though  it  is  a  little  hard  to  interpret. 
On  the  history  of  the  Orphic  chiton  in  gnostic  imagery  see  Bemays, 
Theophr.  Schr.  n.  9.  It  was  identified  with  the  coat  of  skins  made  by 
God  for  Adam.  Cf.  also  Shakespeare's  “  muddy  vesture  of  decay.” 

2  This  is  the  best  /xeTotKycns  (Ael.  Nat.  an.  xii.  7). 

3  The  dwellers  in  the  Golden  Age. 

4  The  MSS-  of  Porphyry  have  ypam-oU  re  froun.  The  emendation 
of  Bernays  (adopted  in  R.  P.)  does  not  convince  me.  I  venture  to 
suggest  paKTois,  on  the  strength  of  the  story  related  by  Favorinus 
[ap.  Diog.  viii.  53)  as  to  the  bloodless  sacrifice  offered  by  Empedokles 
at  Olympia. 

‘  These  lines  were  already  referred  to  Pythagoras  by  Timaios  (Diog 
vm.  54);  As  we  are  told  (Diog.  ib.)  that  some  referred  the  verses  to 
Parmenides,  it  is  clear  that  no  name  was  given. 


EMPEDOKLES  OF  AKRAGAS 


225 


(130) 

For  all  things  were  tame  and  gentle  to  man,  both  beasts  and 
birds,  and  friendly  feelings  were  kindled  everywhere.  R.  P.  184  a. 

(131) 

If  ever,  as  regards  the  things  of  a  day,  immortal  Muse,  thou 
didst  deign  to  take  thought  for  my  endeavour,  then  stand  by 
me  once  more  as  I  pray  to  thee,  O  Kalliopeia,  as  I  utter  a  pure 
discourse  concerning  the  blessed  gods.  R.  P.  179. 

(132) 

Blessed  is  the  man  who  has  gained  the  riches  of  divine 
wisdom  ;  wretched  he  who  has  a  dim  opinion  of  the  gods  in  his 
heart.  R.  P.  179. 

(133) 

It  is  not  possible  for  us  to  set  God  before  our  eyes,  or  to 
lay  hold  of  him  with  our  hands,  which  is  the  broadest  way  of 
persuasion  that  leads  into  the  heart  of  man. 

(134) 

For  he  is  not  furnished  with  a  human  head  on  his  body,  two 
branches  do  not  sprout  from  his  shoulders,  he  has  no  feet,  no 
swift  knees,  nor  hairy  parts  ;  but  he  is  only  a  sacred  and  unutter¬ 
able  mind  flashing  through  the  whole  world  with  rapid  thoughts. 
R.  P.  180. 

(135) 

(This  is  not  lawful  for  some  and  unlawful  for  others  ;)  but  the 
law  for  all  extends  everywhere,  through  the  wide-ruling  air  and 
the  infinite  fight  of  heaven.  R.  P.  183. 

(136) 

Will  ye  not  cease  from  this  ill-sounding  slaughter  ?  See  ye 
not  that  ye  are  devouring  one  another  in  the  thoughtlessness  of 
your  hearts  ?  R.  P.  184  b. 

(137) 

And  the  father  lifts  up  his  own  son  in  a  changed  form  and 
slays  him  with  a  prayer.  Infatuated  fool !  And  they  run  up  to 
the  sacrifices,  begging  mercy,  while  he,  deaf  to  their  cries, 
slaughters  them  in  his  halls  and  gets  ready  the  evil  feast.  In 

15 


226 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


5  like  manner  does  the  son  seize  his  father,  and  children  their 
mother,  tear  out  their  life  and  eat  the  kindred  flesh.  R.  P.  184  b. 

(138) 

Draining  their  life  with  bronze.1 

(139) 

Ah,  woe  is  me  that  the  pitiless  day  of  death  did  not  destroy 
me  ere  ever  I  wrought  evil  deeds  of  devouring  with  my  lips  ! 
R.  P.  184  b. 

(140) 

Abstain  wholly  from  laurel  leaves. 

(141) 

Wretches,  utter  wretches,  keep  your  hands  from  beans  ! 

(142) 

Him  will  the  roofed  palace  of  aigis-bearing  Zeus  never  rejoice, 
nor  yet  the  house  of  .  .  . 

(143) 

Wash  your  hands,  cutting  the  water  from  the  five  springs  in 
the  unyielding  bronze  R.  P.  184  c. 

(144) 

Fast  from  wickedness  !  R.  P.  184  c. 

(145) 

Therefore  are  ye  distraught  by  grievous  wickednesses,  and 
will  not  unburden  your  souls  of  wretched  sorrows. 

(146,  147) 

But,  at  the  last,  they  appear  among  mortal  men  as  prophets, 
song-writers,  physicians,  and  princes  ;  and  thence  they  rise  up 
as  gods  exalted  in  honour,  sharing  the  hearth  of  the  other  gods 
and  the  same  table,  free  from  human  woes,  safe  from  destinv 
5  and  incapable  of  hurt.  R.  P.  181  c. 


(148) 

•  •  .  Earth  that  envelops  the  man. 

1  9n  frs‘  138  and  x43  see  Vahlen  on  Arist.  Poet.  21. 
Diels  in  Hermes,  xv.  p.  173. 


T457  b  13,  and 


EMPEDOKLES  OF  AKRAGAS 


227 

106.  At  the  very  outset  of  his  poem,  Empedokles  speaks  Em- 
angrily  of  those  who  professed  to  have  found  the  whole  ^Par- 
(fr.  2)  ;  he  even  calls  this  "  madness  ”  (fr.  4).  No  doubt  menides- 
he  is  thinking  of  Parmenides.  His  own  position  is  not, 
however,  sceptical.  He  only  deprecates  the  attempt  to 
construct  a  theory  of  the  universe  off-hand  instead  of  trying 
to  understand  each  thing  we  come  across  “  in  the  way  in 
which  it  is  clear  ”  (fr.  4).  And  this  means  that  we  must 
not,  like  Parmenides,  reject  the  assistance  of  the  senses. 

We  soon  discover,  however,  that  Empedokles  too  sets  up  a 
system  which  is  to  explain  everything,  though  that  system 
is  no  longer  a  monistic  one. 

It  is  often  said  that  this  system  was  an  attempt  to 
mediate  between  Parmenides  and  Herakleitos.  It  is  not 
easy,  however,  to  find  any  trace  of  Herakleitean  doctrine  in 
it,  and  it  would  be  truer  to  say  that  it  aimed  at  mediating 
between  Eleaticism  and  the  senses.  Empedokles  repeats, 
almost  in  the  same  words,  the  Eleatic  argument  for  the  sole 
reality  and  indestructibility  of  “  what  is  ”  (frs.  11-15)  ; 
and  his  idea  of  the  “  Sphere  ”  seems  to  be  derived  from  the 
Parmenidean  description  of  reality.1  Parmenides  had  held 
that  what  underlies  the  illusory  world  of  the  senses  was  a 
corporeal,  spherical,  continuous,  eternal,  and  immovable 
plenum,  and  it  is  from  this  Empedokles  starts.  Given  the 
sphere  of  Parmenides,  he  seems  to  have  said,  how  are  we 
to  get  from  it  to  the  world  we  know  ?  How  are  we  to 
introduce  motion  into  the  immovable  plenum  ?  Now  Par¬ 
menides  need  not  have  denied  the  possibility  of  motion 
within  the  Sphere,  though  he  was  bound  to  deny  all  motion 
of  the  Sphere  itself  ;  but  such  an  admission  would  not  have 
served  to  explain  anything.  If  any  part  of  the  Sphere  were 
to  move,  the  room  of  the  displaced  body  must  at  once  be 
taken  by  other  body,  for  there  is  no  empty  space.  This, 
however,  would  be  of  precisely  the  same  kind  as  the  body 
it  had  displaced  ;  for  all  “  that  is  ”  is  one.  The  result  of 

1  Cf.  Emp.  frs.  27,  28,  with  Parm.  fr.  8. 


The  “four 
roots.” 


228 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


the  motion  would  be  precisely  the  same  as  that  of  rest ; 
it  could  account  for  no  change.  But  is  this  assumption  of 
perfect  homogeneity  in  the  Sphere  really  necessary  ?  Evi¬ 
dently  not ;  it  is  simply  the  old  unreasoned  feeling  that 
existence  must  be  one.  Nevertheless,  we  cannot  regard  the 
numberless  forms  of  being  the  senses  present  us  with  as 
ultimate  realities.  Tney  have  no  <f>t '/a^  of  their  own,  and 
are  always  passing  away  (fr.  8),  so  the  only  solution  is  to 
assume  a  limited  number  of  ultimate  forms  of  reality.  We 
may  then  apply  all  that  Parmenides  says  of  What  is  to  each 
one  of  these,  and  the  transitory  forms  of  existence  we  know 
may  be  explained  by  their  mingling  and  separation.  The 
conception  of  elements  ”  (aroi^ela),  to  use  a  later  term,1 
was  found,  and  the  required  formula  follows  at  once.  So 
far  as  concerns  particular  things,  it  is  true,  as  our  senses  tell 
us,  that  they  come  into  being  and  pass  away ;  but,  if  we 
have  regard  to  the  ultimate  elements  of  which  they  are 
composed,  we  shall  say  with  Parmenides  that  “  what  is  ”  is 
uncreated  and  indestructible  (fr.  17).  The  elements  are 
immortal,  just  as  the  single  </>u< rt?  of  the  Milesians  was 
“  ageless  and  deathless." 

107.  The  “  four  roots  ”  of  all  things  (fr.  6)  which  Empe- 
dokles  assumed— Fire,  Air,  Earth,  and  Water— seem  to 
have  been  arrived  at  by  making  each  of  the  traditional 
opposites  "-hot  and  cold,  wet  and  dry— into  a  thine 
which  is  real  in  the  full  Parmenidean  sense  of  the  word.  It 
is  to  be  noticed,  however,  that  he  does  not  call  Air 
but  al04p*  and  this  must  be  because  he  wished  to  avoid 


said  fa*  Simi!Stp7  °f  t6rm  <rr01*“0"  see  Weis,  Elementum.  Eudemos 
said  Simpl.  Phys.  p.  7,  13  that  Plato  was  the  first  to  use  it  hut  b t 

S:ba“y  g°‘  '*  fTO"  «“  ^hagoreaus.  The  orig,  J‘t.1  £ 


Simplicius'  Piutl’rrh5  ?„“1S  J’rX"”  l*°’  wilh  Sextus  and 

wasmore  hJ^b^XSiuS  “  “  »b™»*  this 

,ne'.  38-  ’'•T.hS  fenoTau  enifmeratirTof 
ference  ,s  clearly  moisture.  0„  fr.  ,3,  ^p.  .V3  hZ 


EMPEDOKLES  OF  AKRAGAS  229 

confusion  with  what  had  hitherto  been  meant  by  the  former 
word.  He  had,  in  fact,  made  the  discovery  that  atmospheric 
air  is  a  distinct  corporeal  substance,  and  is  not  to  be  identified 
with  empty  space  on  the  one  hand  or  rarefied  mist  on  the 
other.  Water  is  not  liquid  air,  but  something  quite  dif¬ 
ferent.1  This  truth  Empedokles  demonstrated  by  means 
of  the  klepsydra,  and  we  still  possess  the  verses  in  which  he 
applied  his  discovery  to  the  explanation  of  respiration  and 
the  motion  of  the  blood  (fr.  100).  Aristotle  laughs  at  those 
who  try  to  show  there  is  no  empty  space  by  shutting  up 
air  in  water-clocks  and  torturing  wineskins.  They  only 
prove,  he  says,  that  air  is  a  thing.2  That,  however,  is 
exactly  what  Empedokles  intended  to  prove,  and  it  was 
one  of  the  most  important  discoveries  in  the  history  of 
science.  It  will  be  convenient  for  us  to  translate  the 
aid vp  of  Empedokles  by  “  air  ”  ;  but  we  must  be  careful 
in  that  case  not  to  render  the  word  ar/p  in  the  same  way. 
Anaxagoras  seems  to  have  been  the  first  to  use  it  of  atmo¬ 
spheric  air. 

Empedokles  also  called  the  “  four  roots  ”  by  the  names 
of  certain  divinities — “  shining  Zeus,  life-bringing  Hera, 
Aidoneus,  and  Nestis  ”  (fr.  6) — though  there  is  some  doubt 
as  to  how  these  names  are  to  be  apportioned  among  the 
elements.  Nestis  is  said  to  have  been  a  Sicilian  water- 
goddess,  and  the  description  of  her  shows  that  she  stands 
for  Water  ;  but  there  is  a  conflict  of  opinion  as  to  the  other 
three.  This,  however,  need  not  detain  us.3  We  are 

are  the  only  passages  in  which  Empedokles  seems  to  speak  of  a-qp  in  the 
sense  of  atmospheric  air.  1  Cf.  Chap.  I.  §  27. 

2  Arist.  Phys.  A,  6,  213  a  22  (R.  P.  159).  Aristotle  only  mentions 
Anaxagoras  by  name  in  this  passage  ;  but  he  speaks  in  the  plural,  and  we 
know  from  fr.  100  that  the  klepsydra  experiment  was  used  by  Empedokles. 

3  In  antiquity  the  Homeric  Allegorists  made  Hera  Earth  and  Aidoneus 
Air,  a  view  which  has  found  its  way  into  Aetios  from  Poseidonios.  It 
arose  as  follows.  The  Homeric-  Allegorists  were  not  interested  in  the 
science  of  Empedokles,  and  did  not  see  that  his  al0r/p  was  quite  a  different 
thing  from  Homer’s  a^p.  Now  this  is  the  dark  element,  and  night  is  a 
form  of  it,  so  it  would  naturally  be  identified  with  Aidoneus.  Again, 
Empedokles  calls  Hera  (peptafiios,  and  that  is  an  epithet  of  Earth  in 


230 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


already  prepared  to  find  that  Empedokles  called  the  elements 
gods  ,  for  all  the  early  thinkers  had  spoken  in  this  way  of 
whatever  they  regarded  as  the  primary  substance.  We 
must  only  remember  that  the  word  is  not  used  in  its  religious 
sense.  Empedokles  did  not  pray  or  sacrifice  to  the  elements. 

Empedokles  regarded  the  “roots  of  all  things”  as 
eternal.  Nothing  can  come  from  nothing  or  pass  away 
into  nothing  (fr.  12)  ;  what  is  is,  and  there  is  no  room  for 
coming  into  being  and  passing  away  (fr.  8).  Further, 
Aristotle  tells  us,  he  taught  that  they  were  unchangeable.1 
This  Empedokles  expressed  by  saying  that  "they  are 
always  alike.  Again,  the  four  elements  are  all  “  equal,” 
a  statement  which  seemed  strange  to  Aristotle,2  but  was 
quite  intelligible  in  the  days  of  Empedokles.  Above  all, 
the  four  elements  are  ultimate.  All  other  bodies  might  be 
divided  till  you  came  to  the  elements  ;  but  Empedokles 
could  give  no  further  account  of  these  without  saying  (as 
he  did  not)  that  there  is  an  element  of  which  Fire  and  the 
rest  are  in  turn  composed.3 


Hesiod  and  the  Homeric  Hymns.  Another  view  identified  Hera  with  Air 
which  is  the  theory  of  Plato’s  Cratylus,  and  Aidoneus  with  Earth  The 
Homenc  AUegonsts  further  identified  Zeus  with  Fire,  a  view  to  which  they 
were  douhtiess  ied  by  the  use  of  the  word  a  I*,.  Now  certainly 

Emnedot?  m  Anaxag°ras-  as  we  sha11  see,  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  in 
pedokles  it  meant  Air.  It  seems  likely,  then,  that  Knatz  is  right 
(  mpedoclea  m  Schedae  Philologicae  Hermanno  Uvnero  oblatae  1891 
S'  Sql'\  m  ng  that  the  brfght  Air  of  Empedokles  was  Zeus  '  This 
it"  ?  Stand  fOT  Fire  ^  a*d  nothing  could  have  been  more 
natural  for  a  Sicilian  poet,  with  the  volcanoes  and  hot  springs  of  his 

“•i™  >“  “»d'  «“»  this  identification.  He  refers  to  tte  fiS 

to  ceree '’.ith  "toe  2*  Eirth  “m*lf  «<  5a).  If  that  is  so,  we  shall  have 
to  agree  with  the  Homenc  AUegonsts  that  Hera  is  Earth  •  and  surelv 

< peptapios  h pa  can  be  none  other  than  "  Mother  Earth  ”  The  eoithet 
seems  only  to  be  used  of  earth  and  corn.  epithet 

3  De  I6”'  °°rr ’  B’  329  b  *■  3  Ibid.  B  6  ma.  16 

or;ridt”"lr‘“ 

^  ^  eleme^'allrt1 

it  (Tim  8 48  b  8)  ”ft0t  6’  and„a  f°rliori  to  his  successors.  As  Plato  put 
4  Tb  8J\  th7  were  not  even  syllables,"  let  alone  "letters  " 

Elementum,  p.^)!"  W  7  AnSt°tle  Calls  them  crro^da  (Diels, 


231 


EMPEDOKLES  OF  AKRAGAS 

The  four  roots  ”  are  given  as  an  exhaustive  enumera¬ 
tion  of  the  elements  (fr.  23  sub  fin.)  ;  for  they  account  for 
all  the  qualities  presented  by  the  world  to  the  senses.  When 
we  find,  as  we  do,  that  the  school  of  medicine  which  regarded 
Empedokles  as  its  founder  identified  the  four  elements  with 
the  opposites,  the  hot  and  the  cold,  the  moist  and  the 
dry,  which  formed  the  theoretical  foundation  of  its  system,1 
we  see  at  once  how  the  theory  is  related  to  previous  views 
of  reality.  We  must  remember  that  the  conception  of 
quality  had  not  yet  been  formed.  Anaximander  had  no 
doubt  regarded  his  “  opposites  "  as  things  ;  though,  before 
the  time  of  Parmenides,  no  one  had  fully  realised  how  much 
was  implied  in  saying  that  anything  is  a  thing.  That  is 
the  stage  we  have  now  reached.  There  is  still  no  conception 
of  quality,  but  there  is  a  clear  apprehension  of  what  is 
involved  in  saying  a  thing  is. 

Aristotle  twice 2  makes  the  statement  that,  though 
Empedokles  assumes  four  elements,  he  treats  them  as  two, 
opposing  Fire  to  all  the  rest.  This,  he  says,  we  can  see 
for  ourselves  from  his  poem.  So  far  as  the  general  theory 
goes,  it  is  impossible  to  see  anything  of  the  sort ;  but,  when 
we  come  to  the  origin  of  the  world  (§  112),  we  shall  find  that 
Fire  plays  a  leading  part,  and  this  may  be  what  Aristotle 
meant.  It  is  also  true  that  in  the  biology  (§§  114-116)  Fire 
fulfils  a  unique  function,  while  the  other  three  act  more  or 
less  in  the  same  way.  But  we  must  remember  that  it  has 
no  pre-eminence  over  the  rest  :  all  are  equal. 

108.  The  Eleatic  criticism  had  made  it  necessary  to  strife  and 
explain  motion.3  Empedokles  starts,  we  have  seen,  from  Love* 
an  original  state  of  the  “  four  roots,”  which  only  differs  from 
the  Sphere  of  Parmenides  in  so  far  as  it  is  a  mixture,  not  a 
homogeneous  and  continuous  mass.  It  is  this  that  makes 
change  and  motion  possible  ;  but,  were  there  nothing  outside 
the  Sphere  which  could  enter  in,  like  the  Pythagorean  “  Air,” 

1  Philistion  put  the  matter  in  this  way.  See  p.  201 ,  n.  5. 

2  Arist.  Met.  A,  4.  985  a  31  ;  De  gen.  corr.  B,  3.  330  b  19  (R.  P.  164  e). 

2  Cf.  Introd.  §  VIII. 


232  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 

to  separate  the  elements,  nothing  could  ever  arise  from  it. 
Empedokles  accordingly  assumed  the  existence  of  such  a 
substance,  and  he  gave  it  the  name  of  Strife.  But  the 
effect  of  this  would  be  to  separate  all  the  elements  in  the 
Sphere  completely,  and  then  nothing  more  could  possibly 
happen  ;  something  else  was  needed  to  bring  the  elements 
together  again.  This  Empedokles  found  in  Love',  which  he 
regarded  as  the  same  impulse  to  union  that  is  implanted  in 
human  bodies  (fr.  17,  22  sqq.).  He  looks  at  it,  in  fact,  from 
a  physiological  point  of  view,  as  was  natural  for  the  founder 
of  a  medical  school.  No  mortal  had  yet  marked,  he  says, 
that  the  very  same  Love  men  know  in  their  bodies  had  a 
place  among  the  elements. 

The  Love  and  Strife  of  Empedokles  are  no  incorporeal 
forces.  They  are  active,  indeed,  but  they  are  still  corporeal. 
At  the  time,  this  was  inevitable  ;  nothing  incorporeal  had 
yet  been  dreamt  of,  Naturally,  Aristotle  is  puzzled  by 
this  characteristic  of  what  he  regarded  as  efficient  causes. 

The  Love  of  Empedokles,  he  says,1  “  is  both  an  efficient 
cause,  for  it  brings  things  together,  and  a  material  cause, 
for  it  is  a  part  of  the  mixture.  ’  And  Theophrastos  expressed 
the  same  idea  by  saying  2  that  Empedokles  sometimes  gave 
an  efficient  power  to  Love  and  Strife,  and  sometimes  put 
them  on  a  level  with  the  other  four.  The  fragments  leave 
no  room  for  doubt  that  they  were  thought  of  as  spatial  and 
corporeal.  All  the  six  are  called  “  equal.”  Love  is  said  to 
be  “  equal  in  length  and  breadth  ”  to  the  others,  and  Strife 
is  described  as  equal  to  each  of  them  in  weight  (fr.  17). 

The  function  of  Love  is  to  produce  union  ;  that  of  Strife, 
to  break  it  up  again.  Aristotle,  however,  rightly  points 
out  that  in  another  sense  it  is  Love  that  divides  and  Strife 
that  unites.  When  the  Sphere  is  broken  up  by  Strife,  the 
result  is  that  all  the  Fire,  for  instance,  which  was  contained 
in  it  comes  together  and  becomes  one  ;  and  again,  when  the 

1  Arist.  Met.  A,  io.  1075  b  3. 

2  Theophr.  Phys.  Op.  fr.  3  [Dox.  p.  477;  R.  p.  i66  b). 


EMPEDOKLES  OF  AKRAGAS  233 

elements  are  brought  together  once  more  by  Love,  the  mass 
of  each  is  divided.  In  another  place,  he  says  that,  while 
Strife  is  assumed  as  the  cause  of  destruction,  and  does,  in 
fact,  destroy  the  Sphere,  it  really  gives  birth  to  everything 
else  in  so  doing.1  It  follows  that  we  must  carefully  distin¬ 
guish  between  the  Love  of  Empedokles  and  that  “  attraction 
of  like  for  like  ”  to  which  he  also  attributed  an  important 
part  in  the  formation  of  the  world.  The  latter  is  not  an 
element  distinct  from  the  others  ;  it  depends  on  the  proper 
nature  of  each  element,  and  is  only  able  to  take  effect  when 
Strife  divides  the  Sphere.  Love,  on  the  contrary,  produces 
an  attraction  of  unlikes. 

109.  But,  when  Strife  has  separated  the  elements,  what  Mixture 
determines  the  direction  of  their  motion  ?  Empedokles  separation, 
seems  to  have  given  no  further  explanation  than  that  each 
was  “  running  ”  in  a  certain  direction  (fr.  53).  Plato 
severely  condemns  this  in  the  Laws,2  on  the  ground  that  no 
room  is  thus  left  for  design.  Aristotle  also  blames  him  for 
giving  no  account  of  the  Chance  to  which  he  ascribed  so 
much  importance.  Nor  is  the  Necessity,  of  which  he  also 
spoke,  further  explained.3  Strife  enters  into  the  Sphere  at 
a  certain  time  in  virtue  of  Necessity,  or  "  the  mighty  oath  ” 

(fr-  3°)  but  we  are  told  no  more  about  that. 

The  expression  used  by  Empedokles  to  describe  the 
movement  of  the  elements  is  that  they  “  run  through  each 
other  (fr.  17,  34).  Aristotle  tells  us  4  that  he  explained 
mixture  in  general  by  “  the  symmetry  of  pores.”  And 
this  is  the  true  explanation  of  the  “  attraction  of  like  for 
like.”  The  “  pores  ”  of  like  bodies  are,  of  course,  much  the 
same  size,  and  these  bodies  can  therefore  mingle  easily. 

On  the  other  hand,  a  finer  body  will  “  run  through  ”  a  coarse 
one  without  becoming  mixed,  and  a  coarse  body  will  not  be 

1  Met.  A,  4.  985  a  21  ;  r,  4.  1000  a  24  ;  b  9  (R.  P.  166  i). 

2  Plato,  Laws,  x.  889  b.  The  reference  is  not  to  Empedokles  ex¬ 
clusively,  but  the  language  shows  that  Plato  is  thinking  mainly  of  him. 

3  Arist.  De  gen.  corr.  B,  6.  334  a  1  ;  Phys.  0,  1.  252  a  5  (R.  P.  166  k). 

4  Arist.  De  gen.  corr.  A,  8.  324  b  34  (R.  P.  166  h). 


The  four 
periods. 


Our  world 
the  work 
of  Strife. 


234  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 

able  to  enter  the  pores  of  a  finer  one  at  all.  As  Aristotle  says, 
this  really  implies  something  like  the  atomic  theory  ;  but 
there  is  no  evidence  that  Empedokles  himself  was  conscious 
of  that.  Another  question  raised  by  Aristotle  is  even  more 
instructive.  Are  the  pores,  he  asks,  empty  or  full  ?  If 
empty,  what  becomes  of  the  denial  of  the  void  ?  If  full, 
why  need  we  assume  pores  at  all  ?  1  These  questions 
Empedokles  would  have  found  it  hard  to  answer. 

no.  It  will  be  clear  from  what  has  been  said  that  we  must 
distinguish  four  periods  in  the  cycle.  First  we  have  the 
Sphere,  in  which  all  the  elements  are  mixed  together  by 
Love.  Secondly,  there  is  the  period  when  Love  is  passing 
out  and  Strife  coming  in,  when,  therefore,  the  elements  are 
partially  separated  and  partially  combined.  Thirdly  comes 
the  complete  separation  of  the  elements,  when  Love  is 
outside  the  world,  and  Strife  has  given  free  play  to  the 
attraction  of  like  for  like.  Lastly,  we  have  the  period  when 
Love  is  bringing  the  elements  together  again,  and  Strife  is 
passing  out.  This  brings  us  back  to  the  Sphere,  and  the 
cycle  begins  afresh.  Now  a  world  such  as  ours  can  exist 
only  in  the  second  and  fourth  of  these  periods.  It  seems  to 
be  generally  supposed  that  we  are  in  the  fourth  period  ; 2 
I  hope  to  show  that  we  are  in  the  second,  that  when  Strife 
is  gaining  the  upper  hand. 

hi.  That  a  world  of  perishable  things  (0t >Vrd)  arises  both 
in  the  second  and  fourth  period  is  distinctly  stated  by 
Empedokles  (fr.  17),  and  it  is  inconceivable  that  he  had  not 
made  up  his  mind  which  of  these  worlds  is  ours.  Aristotle 
is  clearly  of  opinion  that  in  our  world  Strife  is  increasing. 
In  one  place,  he  says  that  Empedokles  "  holds  that  the 
world  is  in  a  similar  condition  now  in  the  period  of  Strife 


1  Arist.  De  gen.  corr.  A,  8.  326  b  6. 

2  This  is  the  view  of  Zeller  (pp.  785  sqq.),  but  he  admits  that  the 
externa1  tesUmony  especially  that  of  Aristotle,  is  wholly  in  favour  of  the 

ther.  His  difficulty  is  with  the  fragments,  and  if  it  can  be  shown  that 
these  can  be  interpreted  in  accordance  with  Aristotle’s  statements  the 
question  is  settled.  ^  tne 


EMPEDOKLES  OF  AKRAGAS  235 

as  formerly  in  that  of  Love.”  1  In  another,  he  tells  us  that 
Empedokles  omits  the  generation  of  things  in  the  period  of 
Love,  just  because  it  is  unnatural  to  represent  this  world, 
in  which  the  elements  are  separate,  as  arising  from  things 
in  a  state  of  separation.2  This  remark  can  only  mean  that 
Empedokles  assumed  the  increase  of  Strife,  or,  in  other 
words,  that  he  represented  the  course  of  evolution  as  the 
disintegration  of  the  Sphere,  not  as  the  coming  together  of 
things  from  a  state  of  separation.3  That  is  what  we  should 
expect,  if  we  are  right  in  supposing  that  the  problem  he  set 
himself  to  solve  was  the  origin  of  this  world  from  the  Sphere 
of  Parmenides,  and  it  is  also  in  harmony  with  the  tendency 
of  such  speculations  to  represent  the  world  as  getting  worse 
rather  than  better.  We  have  only  to  consider,  then,  whether 
the  details  of  the  system  bear  out  this  general  view. 

112.  To  begin  with  the  Sphere,  in  which  the  “  four  roots  Formation 
of  all  things  ”  are  mixed  together,  we  note  that  it  is  called  a  ^f0^by 
god  in  the  fragments  just  as  the  elements  are,  and  that  Aris-  Strife- 
totle  more  than  once  refers  to  it  in  the  same  way.4  We 

Arist.  De  gen.  covr.  B,  6.  334  a  rbv  k6ct/jlov  opioiois  %xelv  <Pvaly  iirl 
re  tov  vcIkovs  vvv  Kal  irpbrepov  tirl  rfjs  rpiXlao.  Miss  Millerd  ( Interpretation  of 
Empedocles,  p.  45)  adds  Theophrastos,  De  sensu  §  20,  avpi^alvei  SI  Kal  M  rr,s 
$i\las  6\cos  p,r)  tluai  atcrdrjcnv  1)  ffnov  Sia  to  avyKplveodai  rbre  Kal  p.p  bwoppeiv. 

Here  ini  rijs  and  r6re  imply  the  antithesis  iirl  tov  Nelxow  and  vvv. 

Arist.  De  caelo,  T,  2.  301  a  14,  iK  SieariSyrwv  Sb  Kal  Kivovpdvuv  ovk 
eCXoyoy  iroieiv  tt)  v  yiveaiv,  Sib  Kal  'KpnreSoKXrjs  TrapaXtlirei  ttjv  lirl  TTjs 
<pi\6T7]Tos  *  ov  yap  hv  TjSSvaTO  (TVGTTjaai  top  obpavbv  ok  Ktyoipio poi’iov  po v 
KaTatTKevdfav,  aiy Kpiaiv  SI  iroiuv  Sib.  ttjv  <PlX6t7]to.  •  ^ k  Siclk 0 k pipovwp  y bp 
<rvvb<TTTjK€v  6  k6<t/j.os  twv  oToixdwv  (“  our  world  consists  of  the  elements 
m  a  state  Of  separation  "),  war  ay  ay  k  a  top  yevlaBai  it;  ovbs  Kal  crvyKeKpiptlyov. 

3  It  need  not  mean  that  Empedokles  said  nothing  about  the  world  of 
Love  at  all ;  for  he  obviously  says  something  of  both  worlds  in  fr.  17.  It 
is  enough  to  suppose  that,  having  described  both  in  general  terms,  he 
went  on  to  treat  the  world  of  Strife  in  detail. 

4  Arist.  De  gen.  corr.  B,  6.  333  b  21  (R.  P.  168  e)  ;  Met.  B,  4.  1000  a  28 
(R.  P.  166  i).  Cf.  Simpl.  Phys.  p.  1124,  1  (R.  P.  167  b).  In  other  places 
Aristotle  speaks  of  it  as  "  the  One.”  Cf.  De  gen.  corr.  A,  1.  315  a  7  (R.  P. 

168  e)  ;  Met.  B,  4.  1000  a  29  (R.  P.  166  i)  ;  A,  4.  985  a  28  (R.  P.  ib.). 

This  involves  a  slight  Aristotelian  “  development.”  It  is  not  the  same 
thing  to  say,  as  Empedokles  does,  that  all  things  come  together  "  into 
one,”  and  to  say  that  they  come  together  "  into  the  One.”  The  latter 
expression  suggests  that  they  lose  their  identity  in  the  Sphere,  and  thus 
become  something  like  Aristotle’s  "  matter.”  As  has  been  pointed  out 


236  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 

must  remember  that  Love  itself  is  a  part  of  this  mixture,1 
while  Strife  surrounds  or  encompasses  it  on  every  side 
just  as  the  Boundless  encompasses  the  world  in  earlier 
systems.  Strife,  however,  is  not  boundless,  but  equal  in 
bulk  to  each  of  the  four  roots  and  to  Love. 

At  the  appointed  time,  Strife  begins  to  enter  into  the 
Sphere  and  Love  to  go  out  of  it  (frs.  30,  31).  The  fragments 
by  themselves  throw  little  light  on  this  ;  but  Aetios  and  the 
Plutarchean  Stromateis  have  between  them  preserved  a  very 
fair  tradition  of  what  Theophrastos  said  on  the  point. 

Empedokles  held  that  Air  was  first  separated  out  and  secondly 
Fire.  Next  came  Earth,  from  which,  highly  compressed  as  it 
was  by  the  impetus  of  its  revolution,  Water  gushed  forth.  From 
the  water  Mist  was  produced  by  evaporation.  The  heavens  were 
formed  out  of  the  Air  and  the  sun  out  of  the  Fire,  while  terrestrial 
things  were  condensed  from  the  other  elements.  Aet.  ii.  6.  3 
{Dox.  p.  334  ;  R.  P.  170). 

Empedokles  held  that  the  Air  when  separated  off  from  the 
original  mixture  of  the  elements  was  spread  round  in  a  circle. 
After  the  Air,  Fire  running  outwards,  and  not  finding  any  other 
place,  ran  up  under  the  solid  that  surrounded  the  Air.2  There 
were  two  hemispheres,  revolving  round  the  earth,  the  one  alto¬ 
gether  composed  of  fire,  the  other  of  a  mixture  of  air  and  a  little 
fire.  The  latter  he  supposed  to  be  the  Night.  The  origin  of 
their  motion  he  derived  from  the  fact  of  fire  preponderating  in 
one  hemisphere  owing  to  its  accumulation  there.  Ps.-Plut. 
Strom,  fr.  10  {Dox.  p.  582  ;  R.  P.  170  a). 


(p.  230,  n.  3),  it  is  hard  for  Aristotle  to  grasp  the  conception  of  irreducible 
elements  ;  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  in  the  Sphere,  as  in  their 
separation,  the  elements  remain  "  what  they  are  "  for  Empedokles  As 
Aristotle  also  knows  quite  well,  the  Sphere  is  a  mixture.  Compare  the 
difficulties  about  the  “  One  "  of  Anaximander  discussed  in  Chap.  1.  §  15. 

1  This  accounts  for  Aristotle’s  statement,  which  he  makes  once  posi¬ 
tively  (Met.  B,  1.  996  a  7)  and  once  very  doubtfully  (Met.  B,  4,  ioox  a  12) 
that  Love  was  the  substratum  of  the  One  in  just  the  same  sense  as  the 
Fire  of  Herakleitos,  the  Air  of  Anaximenes,  or  the  Water  of  Thales.  He 
thinks  that  all  the  elements  become  merged  in  Love,  and  so  lose  their 
identity.  In  this  case,  it  is  in  Love  he  recognises  his  own  "  matter.” 

2  For  the  phrase  roD  it epl  rbv  6.1  pa.  wdyov  cf.  Ilepl  Siatrys,  i.  10  1 
Tp*\  t6v  xepUxmrra  irdyov.  Et.  M.  s.v.  faUt  .  .  .  rbv  Wdrw  irdy  J  Kal 
7r epUxovra  t6v  irdvra  &£pa. 


EMPEDOKLES  OF  AKRAGAS  237 

The  first  of  the  elements  to  be  separated  out  by  Strife 
then,  was  Air,  which  took  the  outermost  position  surround¬ 
ing  the  world  (cf.  fr.  38).  We  must  not,  however,  take  the 
statement  that  it  surrounded  the  world  “  in  a  circle  ”  too 
strictly.  It  appears  that  Empedokles  regarded  the  heavens 
as  shaped  like  an  egg.1  Here,  probably,  we  have  a  trace  of 
Orphic  ideas.  At  any  rate,  the  outer  circle  of  the  Air  became 
solidified  or  frozen,  and  we  thus  get  a  crystalline  vault  as 
the  boundary  of  the  world.  We  note  that  it  was  Fire  which 
solidified  the  Air  and  turned  it  to  ice.  Fire  in  general  had 
a  solidifying  power.2 

In  its  upward  rush  Fire  displaced  a  portion  of  the  Air 
in  the  upper  half  of  the  concave  sphere  formed  by  the 
frozen  sky.  This  air  then  sunk  downwards,  carrying  with 
it  a  small  portion  of  the  fire.  In  this  way,  two  hemispheres 
were  produced  :  one,  consisting  entirely  of  fire,  the  diurnal 
hemisphere  ;  the  other,  the  nocturnal,  consisting  of  air  with 
a  little  fire. 

The  accumulation  of  Fire  in  the  upper  hemisphere 
disturbs  the  equilibrium  of  the  heavens  and  causes  them  to 
revolve  ;  and  this  revolution  not  only  produces  the  alterna¬ 
tion  of  day  and  night,  but  by  its  rapidity  keeps  the  heavens 
and  the  earth  in  their  places.  This  was  illustrated,  Aristotle 
tells  us,  by  the  simile  of  a  cup  of  water  whirled  round  at  the 
end  of  a  string.3  This  experimental  illustration  is  much  in 
the  manner  of  Empedokles.  It  has  nothing  to  do  with 
“  centrifugal  force,”  but  is  intended  to  show  that  rapid 
motion  may  counteract  a  tendency  to  fall. 

113.  It  wifi  be  observed  that  day  and  night  have  been  The  sun, 
explained  without  reference  to  the  sun.  Dav  is  the  lieht  moon’ 

J  o  stars,  and 

1  Aet.  ii.  31,  4  ( Dox .  p.  363).  3  Aet.  ii.  11,  2  (R.  P.  170  c). 

3  Arist.  De  caelo,  B,  1.  284  a  24  ;  13.  295  a  16  (R.  P.  170  b).  Plato, 

Phaed.  gg  b  6,  Sib  6  p&  rts  Sivyv  nepiTideis  rrj  yfj  M  rod  obpavov  ptvei'v 
Si,  iroiei  Tpv  yrp>.  The  experiment  with  rb  h  roc,  kv&Oois  OSup  which 
k6k\V  tov  Kvddov  <pepop.bvov  toWAki i  kAtw  tov  xciAkoO  yivbpevov  6p.us  ov 
(ptperai  kAtu,  reminds  us  of  that  with  the  klepsydra,  in  fr.  100. 

The  point  is  that  the  <popa  of  the  Slvr,  overcomes  the  oUda  poiri,  by  its 
velocity. 


238 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


of  the  fiery  diurnal  hemisphere,  while  night  is  the  shadow 
thrown  by  the  earth  when  the  fiery  hemisphere  is  on  the 
other  side  of  it  (fr.  48).  What,  then,  is  the  sun  ?  The 
Plutarchean  Stromateis  1  again  give  us  the  answer  :  “  The 
sun  is  not  fire  in  substance,  but  a  reflexion  of  fire  like 
that  which  comes  from  water.”  Plutarch  himself  makes 
one  of  his  personages  say  :  “  You  laugh  at  Empedokles  for 
saying  that  the  sun  is  a  product  of  the  earth,  arising  from 
the  reflexion  of  the  fight  of  heaven,  and  once  more  ‘  flashes 
back  to  Olympos  with  untroubled  countenance.’  ”  2  Aetios 
says  : 3  “  Empedokles  held  that  there  were  two  suns  :  one, 
the  archetype,  the  fire  in  one  hemisphere  of  the  world,  filling 
the  whole  hemisphere  always  stationed  opposite  its  own 
reflexion  ;  the  other,  the  visible  sun,  its  reflexion  in  the 
other  hemisphere,  that  which  is  filled  with  air  mingled  with 
fire,  produced  by  the  reflexion  of  the  earth,  which  is  round, 
on  the  crystalline  sun,  and  carried  round  by  the  motion  of 
the  fiery  hemisphere.  Or,  to  sum  it  up  shortly,  the  sun  is 
a  reflexion  of  the  terrestrial  fire.” 

These  passages,  and  especially  the  last,  are  by  no  means 
clear.4  The  reflexion  we  call  the  sun  cannot  be  in  the 
hemisphere  opposite  the  fiery  one  ;  for  that  is  the  nocturnal 
hemisphere.  We  must  say  rather  that  the  fight  of  the  fiery 
hemisphere  is  reflected  by  the  earth  on  to  the  fiery  hemisphere 
itself  in  one  concentrated  flash.  It  follows  that  the  appear¬ 
ance  which  we  call  the  sun  is  the  same  size  as  the  earth. 
We  may  perhaps  explain  the  origin  of  this  view  as  follows. 

1  [Plut.]  Strom,  fr.  io  (Dox.  p.  582,  n  ;  R.  P.  170  c). 

2  Plut.  De  Pyth.  or.  400  b  (R.  P.  170  c).  I  keep  the  MS.  reading 
Trepl  yqv  with  Diels. 

3  Aet.  ii.  20,  13  (Dox.  p.  350),  ’E/ureSoicXiys  860  T)\lovs-  rbv  ptv 

apx^Tvrro v,  irvp  &v  tv  rip  ertpip  T)p.tcr<pa.ipl<p  rov  Koapov,  TrexX-ppioKbs  t8  i]pi<r<paipiov, 
aid  tear  dvriKpb  rrj  dvravyelq.  tavrov  rerayptvov  rbv  8t  rpaivbpevov,  dvra&yeiav 
tv  r<p  trtpip  Tjp.icr<paipi(p  rip  roO  dtpos  rou  deppopiyoOs  TeTr\Vpcoptv<p,  dirb  KvicXorepous 
rfjs  yys  kut  dvdKXaaiv  yryvoptvyv  eh  rbv  ijXiov  rbv  KpwTaXXoeiSi),  avpwepieX- 
KoptvVv  dt  rrj  Kiv/jaei  tou  irvplvov.  tis  8t  PpaXto,s  dpyaOai  <TuvTep6vra,  dvravyuav 
dv at  roO  Trepl  tt)v  yfjv  irvpbi  rbv  t}\iov. 

1  I  strongly  suspect  that  the  confusion  is  due  to  a  somewhat  captious 
criticism  by  Theophrastos  (see  below,  p.  298,  n.  1).  It  would  be  like  him 
to  point  out  that  the  theory  implied  “  two  suns." 


239 


EMPEDOKLES  OF  AKRAGAS 

It  had  just  been  discovered  that  the  moon  shone  by  reflected 
hght,  and  there  is  always  a  tendency  to  give  any  novel 
theory  a  wider  application  than  it  really  admits  of.  In  the 
early  part  of  the  fifth  century  B.C.,  men  saw  reflected  light 

everywhere;  some  of  the  Pythagoreans  held  a  similar 
view  (§  150). 

It  was  probably  in  this  connexion  that  Empedokles 
announced  that  hght  takes  some  time  to  travel,  though  its 
speed  is  so  great  as  to  escape  our  perception.1 

“  The  moon  was  composed  of  air  cut  off  by  the  fire  •  it 
was  frozen  just  like  hail,  and  had  its  hght  from  the  sun.” 
It  is,  in  other  words,  a  disc  of  frozen  air,  of  the  same  sub¬ 
stance  as  the  sohd  sky  which  surrounds  the  heavens. 
Diogenes  says  that  Empedokles  taught  it  was  smaller  than 
the  sun,  and  Aetios  tells  us  it  was  only  half  as  distant  from 
the  earth.2 

Empedokles  did  not  explain  the  fixed  stars  by  reflected 
hght,  nor  even  the  planets.  They  were  made  out  of  the 
fire  which  the  air  carried  with  it  when  forced  beneath  the 
earth  by  the  upward  rush  of  fire  at  the  first  separation. 
The  fixed  stars  were  attached  to  the  frozen  air  ;  the  planets 
moved  freely.3 

Empedokles  was  acquainted  (fr.  42)  with  the  true  theory 
of  solar  echpses,  which,  along  with  that  of  the  moon’s  hght, 
was  the  great  discovery  of  this  period.  He  also  knew 
(Ic.  48)  that  night  is  the  conical  shadow  of  the  earth,  and  not 
a  sort  of  exhalation. 

Wind  was  explained  from  the  opposite  motions  of  the 
fiery  and  airy  hemispheres.  Rain  was  caused  by  the  com¬ 
pression  of  the  Air,  which  forced  any  water  there  might  be 
in  it  out  of  its  pores  in  the  form  of  drops.  Lightning  was 
fire  forced  out  from  the  clouds  in  much  the  same  way.4 

1  Arist.  De  sensu,  6.  446  a  28  ;  De  an.  B,  7.  418  b  20. 

2  [Plut.]  Strom,  fr.  10  (Dox.  p.  582,  12  ;  R.  P.  170  c)  ;  Diog.  viii.  77  • 

Aet.  ii.  31,  1  (cf.  Dox.  p.  63).  2  Aet.  iL  I3>  2  and  „  (Dox  pp  ^  ^ 

*  Aet-  m-  3.  7  ;  Arist.  Meteor.  B,  9.  369  b  12,  with  Alexander's  com¬ 
mentary. 


240 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Organic 

combina¬ 

tions. 


The  earth  was  at  first  mixed  with  water,  but  the  in¬ 
creasing  compression  caused  by  the  velocity  of  its  revolu¬ 
tion  made  the  water  gush  forth,  so  that  the  sea  is  “  the 
sweat  of  the  earth,”  a  phrase  to  which  Aristotle  objects 
as  a  mere  poetical  metaphor.  The  saltness  of  the  sea  was 
explained  by  this  analogy.1  It  is  taken  for  granted  that  the 
earth  shares  in  the  rotation  of  the  vortex  (Slvtj). 

i  14.  Empedokles  went  on  to  show  how  the  four  elements, 
mingled  in  different  proportions,  gave  rise  to  perishable 
things,  such  as  bones,  flesh,  and  the  like.  These,  of  course, 
are  the  work  of  Love  ;  but  this  in  no  way  contradicts  the 
view  taken  above  as  to  the  period  to  which  this  world 
belongs.  Love  is  by  no  means  banished  from  the  world 
yet,  though  one  day  it  will  be.  At  present,  it  is  still  able  to 
form  combinations  of  elements  ;  but,  just  because  Strife  is 
ever  increasing,  they  are  all  perishable.  The  important 
part  played  by  proportion  (Xoyo?)  here  is  no  doubt  due  to 
Pythagorean  influence. 

The  possibility  of  organic  combinations  depends  on  the 
fact  that  there  is  still  water  in  the  earth,  and  even  fire 
(fr.  52).  The  warm  springs  of  Sicily  were  a  proof  of  this, 
not  to  speak  of  Etna.  These  springs  Empedokles  appears 
to  have  explained  by  one  of  his  characteristic  images, 
drawn  this  time  from  the  heating  of  warm  baths.2  His 
similes  are  nearly  all  drawn  from  human  inventions  and 
manufactures. 


Plants. 


115.  Plants  and  animals  were  formed  from  the  four 
elements  under  the  influence  of  Love  and  Strife.  The 
fragments  which  deal  with  trees  and  plants  are  77-81 ;  and 
these,  taken  along  with  certain  Aristotelian  statements  and 
the  doxographical  tradition,  enable  us  to  make  out  pretty 

1  Arist.  Meteor.  B,  3.  357  a  24  ;  Aet.  iii.  16,  3  (R.  P.  b)  Cf  the 

clear  reference  in  Arist.  Meteor.  B,  1.  353  b  11. 

2  Seneca,  Q.  Nat.  iii.  24,  "  facere  solemus  dracones  et  miliaria  et 

complures  formas  m  quibus  aere  tenui  fistulas  struimus  per  declive  circum- 
datas,  ut  saepe  eundem  ignem  ambiens  aqua  per  tantum  fluat  sDatii 
quantum  efficiendo  calori  sat  est.  frigida  itaque  intrat  effluP  calida 
idem  sub  terra  Empedocles  existimat  fieri.”  E' 


EMPEDOKLES  OF  AKRAGAS 


241 

fully  what  the  theory  was.  The  text  of  Aetios  is  very 
corrupt  here  ;  but  it  may,  perhaps,  be  rendered  as  follows  : 

Empedokles  says  trees  were  the  first  living  creatures  to  grow 
up  out  of  the  earth,  before  the  sun  was  spread  out,  and  before 
day  and  night  were  distinguished  ;  from  the  symmetry  of  their 
mixture,  they  contain  the  proportion  of  male  and  female  ;  they 
grow,  rising  up  owing  to  the  heat  which  is  in  the  earth,  so  that 
they  are  parts  of  the  earth  just  as  embryos  are  parts  of  the  uterus; 
fruits  are  excretions  of  the  water  and  fire  in  plants,  and  those 
which  have  a  deficiency  of  moisture  shed  their  leaves  when  that 
is  evaporated  by  the  summer  heat,  while  those  which  have  more 
moisture  remain  evergreen,  as  in  the  case  of  the  laurel,  the  olive, 
and  the  palm  ;  the  differences  in  taste  are  due  to  variations  in 
the  particles  contained  in  the  earth  and  to  the  plants  drawing 
different  particles  from  it,  as  in  the  case  of  vines  ;  for  it  is  not 
the  difference  of  the  vines  that  makes  wine  good,  but  that  of  the 
soil  which  nourishes  them.  Aet.  v.  26,  4  (R.  P.  172). 

Aristotle  finds  fault  with  Empedokles  for  explaining 
the  double  growth  of  plants,  upwards  and  downwards,  by 
the  opposite  natural  motions  of  the  earth  and  fire  contained 
in  them.1  For  “  natural  motions  ”  we  must,  of  course, 
substitute  the  attraction  of  like  for  like  (§  109).  Theo- 
phrastos  says  much  the  same  thing.2  The  growth  of  plants, 
then,  is  to  be  regarded  as  an  incident  in  the  separation  of 
the  elements  by  Strife.  Some  of  the  fire  still  beneath  the 
earth  (fr.  52)  meeting  in  its  upward  course  with  earth,  still 
moist  with  water  and  “  running  ”  down  so  as  to  “  reach  its 
own  kind,”  unites  with  it,  under  the  influence  of  the  Love 
still  left  in  the  world,  to  form  a  temporary  combination, 
which  we  call  a  tree  or  a  plant. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  pseudo- Aristotelian  Treatise  on 
Plants, 3  we  are  told  that  Empedokles  attributed  desire, 
sensation,  and  the  capacity  for  pleasure  and  pain  to  plants, 
and  he  rightly  saw  that  the  two  sexes  are  combined  in  them. 

1  Arist.  De  an.  B,  4.  415  b  28. 

2  Theophr.  De  causis  plantarum,  i.  12,  5. 

3  [Arist.]  De  plantis,  A,  1.  815  a  15. 

t6 


Evolution 
of  animals. 


242  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 

This  is  mentioned  by  Aetios,  and  discussed  in  the  pseudo- 
Aristotelian  treatise.  If  we  may  so  far  trust  that  Byzantine 
translation  from  a  Latin  version  of  the  Arabic,1  we  get  a 
hint  as  to  the  reason.  Plants,  we  are  there  told,  came  into 
being  “in  an  imperfect  state  of  the  world,”  2  in  fact,  at  a 
time  when  Strife  had  not  so  far  prevailed  as  to  differentiate 
the  sexes.  We  shall  see  that  the  same  thing  applies  to  the 
original  race  of  animals.  It  is  strange  that  Empedokles 
never  observed  the  actual  process  of  generation  in  plants, 
but  simply  said  they  spontaneously  “  bore  eggs  ”  (fr.  79), 
that  is  to  say,  fruit. 

116.  The  fragments  which  deal  with  the  evolution  of 
animals  (57-62)  must  be  understood  in  the  light  of  the 
statement  (fr.  17)  that  there  is  a  double  coming  into  being 
and  a  double  passing  away  of  mortal  things.  The  four 
stages  are  accurately  distinguished  in  a  passage  of  Aetios,3 
and  we  shall  see  that  there  is  evidence  for  referring  two  of 
them  to  the  second  period  of  the  world’s  history  and  two  to 
the  fourth. 

The  first  stage  is  that  in  which  the  various  parts  of 
animals  arise  separately.  It  is  that  of  heads  without  necks, 
arms  without  shoulders,  and  eyes  without  foreheads  (fr.  57). 
It  is  clear  that  this  must  be  the  first  stage  in  what  we  have 
called  the  fourth  period  of  the  world’s  history,  that  in  which 
Love  is  coming  in  and  Strife  passing  out.  Aristotle  distinctly 
refers  it  to  the  period  of  Love,  by  which,  as  we  have  seen, 
he  means  the  period  when  Love  is  increasing.4  It  is  in 
accordance  with  this  that  he  also  says  these  scattered 
members  were  subsequently  put  together  by  Love.5 

1  Alfred  the  Englishman  translated  the  Arabic  version  into  Latin  in 
the  reign  of  Henry  III.  It  was  retranslated  from  this  version  into  Greek 
at  the  Renaissance  by  a  Greek  resident  in  Italy. 

2  A,  2.  817  b  35,  “  mundo  .  .  .  diminuto  et  non  perfecto  in  com- 

plemento  suo  ”  (Alfred).  3  Aet.  v.  19,  5  (R.  p.  I73). 

<  Arist.  De  caelo,  T,  2.  300  b  29  (R.  P.  x73  a).  Cf.  De  gen.  an.  A,  18. 
722  ^  I9>  where  fr.  57  is  introduced  by  the  words  Kaddirep  ’E/xTreSo/cXns 
yevvq.  M  tt)s^c\6tVtos:  So  Simplicius,  De  caelo,  p.  587,  18,  says  powo- 
pe\T)  Zti  t'o.  yvta  dirb  rij s  roO  Nfhcous  SiaKplaews  bvra  dirXavaro. 

5  Arist.  De  an.  r,  6.  430  a  30  (R.  P.  173  a). 


EMPEDOKLES  OF  AKRAGAS 


243 

The  second  stage  is  that  in  which  the  scattered  limbs 
are  united.  At  first,  they  were  combined  in  all  possible 
ways  (fr.  59).  There  were  oxen  with  human  heads, 
creatures  with  double  faces  and  double  breasts,  and  all 
manner  of  monsters  (fr.  61).  Those  of  them  that  were 
fitted  to  survive  did  so,  while  the  rest  perished.  That  is 
how  the  evolution  of  animals  took  place  in  the  period  of 
Love.1 

The  third  stage  belongs  to  the  period  when  the  unity  of 
the  Sphere  is  being  destroyed  by  Strife.  It  is,  therefore, 
the  first  stage  in  the  evolution  of  our  world.  It  begins  with 
“  whole-natured  forms  ”  in  which  there  is  not  any  distinc¬ 
tion  of  sex  or  species.2  They  are  composed  of  earth  and 
water,  and  are  produced  by  the  upward  motion  of  fire 
seeking  to  reach  its  like. 

In  the  fourth  stage,  the  sexes  and  species  have  been 
separated,  and  new  animals  no  longer  arise  from  the  elements, 
but  are  produced  by  generation. 

In  both  these  processes  of  evolution,  Empedokles  was 
guided  by  the  idea  of  the  survival  of  the  fittest.  Aristotle 
severely  criticises  this.  “  We  may  suppose,”  he  says, 
“  that  all  things  have  fallen  out  accidentally  just  as 
they  would  have  done  if  they  had  been  produced  for  some 
end.  Certain  things  have  been  preserved  because  they 
had  spontaneously  acquired  a  fitting  structure,  while  those 
which  were  not  so  put  together  have  perished  and  are 
perishing,  as  Empedokles  says  of  the  oxen  with  human 
faces.”  3  This,  according  to  Aristotle,  leaves  too  much  to 
chance.  One  curious  instance  has  been  preserved.  Verte- 
bration  was  explained  by  saying  that  an  early  invertebrate 
animal  tried  to  turn  round  and  broke  its  back  in  so 

1  This  is  well  put  by  Simplicius,  De  caelo,  p.  587,  20.  It  is  Sre  tou 
NeUovs  iweicp&Tei  \ourbv  t)  ...  ini  rijs  <J>c\6tt)tos  ovv  6  ’EpireSoK\rjs 

ticeiva  ehrev,  oux  ws  iniKpa.To6<n)s  f/Sp  tt)s  <t>i\6rr)ros,  dXA’  cir  p.e\\ov<n)s 
iwiKpaTeiv.  In  Phys.  p.  371,  33,  he  says  the  oxen  with  human  heads 
were  /card  Trjv  rrjs  4>tXcas  apxw- 

3  Cf.  Plato,  Symp.  189  e. 

3  Arist.  Phys.  B,  8.  198  b  29  (R.  P.  173  a). 


244 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


doing.  This  was  a  favourable  variation  and  so  survived.1 
It  should  be  noted  that  it  clearly  belongs  to  the  period  of 
Strife,  and  not,  like  the  oxen  with  human  heads,  to  that 
of  Love.  The  survival  of  the  fittest  was  the  law  of 
evolution  in  both  periods. 

Physio  117.  The  distinction  of  the  sexes  was  a  result  of  the 
differentiation  brought  about  by  Strife.  Empedokles  dif¬ 
fered  from  the  theory  given  by  Parmenides  in  his  Second 
Part  (§  95)  in  holding  that  the  warm  element  preponderated 
in  the  male  sex,  and  that  males  were  conceived  in  the  warmer 
part  of  the  uterus  (fr.  65).  The  foetus  was  formed  partly 
from  the  male  and  partly  from  the  female  semen  (fr.  63)  : 
and  it  was  just  the  fact  that  the  substance  of  a  new  being’s 
body  was  divided  between  the  male  and  the  female  that 
produced  desire  when  the  two  were  brought  together  by 
sight  (fr.  64).  A  certain  symmetry  of  the  pores  in  the  male 
and  female  semen  is  necessary  for  procreation,  and  from 
its  absence  Empedokles  explained  the  sterility  of  mules. 
The  children  resemble  that  parent  who  contributed  most  to 
their  formation.  The  influence  of  statues  and  pictures  was 
also  noted,  however,  as  modifying  the  appearance  of  the 
offspring.  Twins  and  triplets  were  due  to  a  superabundance 
and  division  of  the  semen.2 

Empedokles  held  that  the  foetus  was  enveloped  in  a 
membrane,  and  that  its  formation  began  on  the  thirty-sixth 
day  and  was  complete  on  the  forty-ninth.  The  heart  was 
formed  first,  the  nails  and  such  things  last.  Respiration 
did  not  begin  till  the  time  of  birth,  when  the  fluids  round 
the  foetus  were  withdrawn.  Birth  took  place  in  the  ninth 
or  seventh  month,  because  the  day  had  been  originally  nine 
months  long,  and  afterwards  seven.  Milk  arises  on  the 
tenth  day  of  the  eighth  month  (fr.  68). 3 

Death  was  the  final  separation  by  Strife  of  the  fire  and 


1  Arist.  De  pari.  an.  A,  i.  640  a  19. 

2  Aet.  v.  10,  1  ;  11,  1  ;  i2,  2  ;  14,  2. 
Untersuchungen,  pp.  126  sqq. 

3  Aet.  v.  15,  3  ;  21,  1  (Dox.  p.  190). 


Cf.  Fredrich,  Hippokraiische 


EMPEDOKLES  OF  AKRAGAS  245 

earth  in  the  body,  each  of  which  had  all  along  been  striving 
to  reach  its  own  kind.”  Sleep  was  a  temporary  separation 
to  a  certain  extent  of  the  fiery  element.1  At  death  the 
animal  is  resolved  into  its  elements,  which  either  enter  into 
fresh  combinations,  or  are  permanently  united  with  “  their 
own  kind.  There  can  be  no  question  here  of  an  immortal 
soul. 

Even  in  life,  we  may  see  the  attraction  of  like  to  like 
operating  in  animals  just  as  it  did  in  the  upward  and  down¬ 
ward  growth  of  plants.  Hair  is  the  same  thing  as  foliage 
(fr.  82)  ;  and,  generally  speaking,  the  fiery  part  of  animals 
tends  upwards  and  the  earthy  downwards,  though  there 
are  exceptions,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  case  of  certain  shell¬ 
fish  (fr.  76),  where  the  earthy  part  is  above.  These  excep¬ 
tions  are  only  possible  because  there  is  still  a  great  deal  of 
Love  in  the  world.  We  also  see  the  attraction  of  like  for 
like  in  the  habits  of  different  species  of  animals.  Those 
that  have  most  fire  in  them  fly  up  into  the  air  ;  those  in 
which  earth  preponderates  take  to  the  earth,  as  did  the  dog 
which  always  sat  upon  a  tile.2  Aquatic  animals  are  those 
in  which  water  predominates.  This  does  not,  however, 
apply  to  fishes,  which  are  very  fiery,  and  take  to  the  water 
to  cool  themselves.3 

Empedokles  paid  great  attention  to  respiration,  and  his 
explanation  of  it  has  been  preserved  in  a  continuous  form 
(fr.  100).  We  breathe,  he  held,  through  all  the  pores  of  the 
skin,  not  merely  through  the  organs  of  respiration.  The 
cause  of  the  alternate  inspiration  and  expiration  of  breath 
was  the  movement  of  the  blood  from  the  heart  to  the  surface 
of  the  body  and  back  again,  which  was  explained  by  the 
klepsydra. 

The  nutrition  and  growth  of  animals  is,  of  course,  to  be 
explained  from  the  attraction  of  like  to  like.  Each  part 


1  Aet.  V.  25,  4  ( Dox .  p.  437). 

2  Aet.  v.  19,  5  [Dox.  p.  431).  Cf.  Eth.  Eud.  H,  i-  1235  a  IT- 

3  Arist.  De  respir.  14.  477  a  32  ;  Theophr.  De  causis  plant,  i.  21. 


246 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


of  the  body  has  pores  into  which  the  appropriate  food  will 
fit.  Pleasure  and  pain  were  derived  from  the  absence  or 
presence  of  like  elements,  that  is,  of  nourishment  which 
would  fit  the  pores.  Tears  and  sweat  arose  from  a  disturb¬ 
ance  which  curdled  the  blood  ;  they  were,  so  to  say,  the 
whey  of  the  blood.1 

118.  For  the  theory  of  perception  held  by  Empedokles 
we  have  the  original  words  of  Theophrastos  : 


Empedokles  speaks  in  the  same  way  of  all  the  senses,  and 
says  that  perception  is  due  to  the  “  effluences  ”  fitting  into  the 
passages  of  each  sense.  And  that  is  why  one  cannot  judge  the 
objects  of  another ;  for  the  passages  of  some  of  them  are  too 
wide  and  those  of  others  too  narrow  for  the  sensible  object,  so 
that  the  latter  either  hold  their  course  right  through  without 
touching  or  cannot  enter  at  all.  R.  P.  177  b. 

He  tries,  too,  to  explain  the  nature  of  sight.  He  says  that  the 
interior  of  the  eye  consists  of  fire,  while  round  about  it  is  earth 
and  air,2  through  which  its  rarity  enables  the  fire  to  pass  like  the 
light  in  lanterns  (fr.  84).  The  passages  of  the  fire  and  water  are 
arranged  alternately  ;  through  those  of  the  fire  we  perceive  fight 
objects,  through  those  of  the  water,  dark  ;  each  class  of  objects 
fits  into  each  class  of  passages,  and  the  colours  are  carried  to 
the  sight  by  effluence.  R.  P.  ib. 


But  eyes  are  not  all  composed  in  the  same  way ;  some  are 
composed  of  like  elements  and  some  of  opposite  ;  some  have  the 
fire  in  the  centre  and  some  on  the  outside.  That  is  why  some 
animals  are  keen-sighted  by  day  and  others  by  night.  Those 
which  have  less  fire  are  keen-sighted  in  the  daytime,  for  the  fire 
within  is  brought  up  to  an  equality  by  that  without ;  those  which 
have  less  of  the  opposite  (i.e,  water),  by  night,  for  then  their 
deficiency  is  supplemented.  But,  in  the  opposite  case,  each  will 
behave  in  the  opposite  manner.  Those  eyes  in  which  fire  pre¬ 
dominates  will  be  dazzled  in  the  daytime,  since  the  fire  being 
still  further  increased  will  stop  up  and  occupy  the  pores  of  the 
water.  Those  in  which  water  predominates  will,  he  says,  suffer 


pleasure  and  pain,  Aet.  iv.  9,  15 


1  Nutrition,  Aet.  v.  27, 
tears  and  sweat,  v.  22,  1. 

•a  \ Th,at  ls*  wateiT  vapour,  not  the  elemental  air  or  aW-qp  (§  107)  It  is 
identical  with  the  “  water”  mentioned  below.  It  is  unnecessary,  there¬ 
fore,  to  insert  Kal  C5u>p  after  irvp  with  Karsten  and  Diels,. 


EMPEDOKLES  OF  AKRAGAS  247 

the  same  at  night,  for  the  fire  will  be  obstructed  by  the  water. 
And  this  goes  on  till  the  water  is  separated  off  by  the  air,  for  in 
each  case  it  is  the  opposite  which  is  a  remedy.  The  best  tempered 
and  the  most  excellent  vision  is  one  composed  of  both  in 

equal  proportions.  This  is  practically  what  he  says  about 
sight. 

Hearing,  he  holds,  is  produced  by  sound  outside,  when  the 
air  moved  by  the  voice  sounds  inside  the  ear ;  for  the  sense  of 
hearing  is  a  sort  of  bell  sounding  inside  the  ear,  which  he  calls  a 
fleshy  sprout.”  When  the  air  is  set  in  motion  it  strikes  upon 
the  solid  parts  and  produces  a  sound.1  Smell,  he  holds,  arises 
from  respiration,  and  that  is  why  those  smell  most  keenly  whose 
breath  has  the  most  violent  motion,  and  why  most  smell  comes 
from  subtle  and  fight  bodies.2  As  to  touch  and  taste,  he  does 
not  lay  down  how  nor  by  means  of  what  they  arise,  except  that 
he  gives  us  an  explanation  applicable  to  all,  that  sensation  is 
produced  by  adaptation  to  the  pores.  Pleasure  is  produced  by 
what  is  like  in  its  elements  and  their  mixture  ;  pain,  by  what  is 
opposite.  R.  P.  ib. 

And  he  gives  a  precisely  similar  account  of  thought  and 
ignorance.  Thought  arises  from  what  is  like  and  ignorance  from 
what  is  unlike,  thus  implying  that  thought  is  the  same,  or  nearly 
the  same,  as  perception.  For  after  enumerating  how  we  know 
each  thing  by  means  of  itself,  he  adds,  “  for  all  things  are 
fashioned  and  fitted  together  out  of  these,  and  it  is  by  these  men 
think  and  feel  pleasure  and  pain  ”  (fr.  107).  And  for  this 
reason  we  think  chiefly  with  our  blood,  for  in  it  of  all  parts 
of  the  body  all  the  elements  are  most  completely  mingled. 
R.  P.  178. 

All,  then,  in  whom  the  mixture  is  equal  or  nearly  so,  and  in 
whom  the  elements  are  neither  at  too  great  intervals  nor  too 
small  or  too  large,  are  the  wisest  and  have  the  most  exact  per¬ 
ceptions  ;  and  those  who  come  next  to  them  are  wise  in  propor¬ 
tion.  Those  who  are  in  the  opposite  condition  are  the  most 
foolish.  Those  whose  elements  are  separated  by  intervals  and 
rare  are  dull  and  laborious  ;  those  in  whom  they  are  closely 
packed  and  broken  into  minute  particles  are  impulsive,  they 
attempt  many  things  and  finish  few  because  of  the  rapidity  with 
which  their  blood  moves.  Those  who  have  a  well-proportioned 


1  Beare,  p.  96,  n.  1. 


*  Ibid.  p.  133. 


248 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


mixture  in  some  one  part  of  their  bodies  will  be  clever  in  that 
respect.  That  is  why  some  are  good  orators  and  some  good 
artificers.  The  latter  have  a  good  mixture  in  their  hands, 
and  the  former  in  their  tongues,  and  so  with  all  other  special 
capacities.  R.  P.  ib. 

Perception,  then,  is  due  to  the  meeting  of  an  element  in 
us  with  the  same  element  outside.  This  takes  place  when 
the  pores  of  the  organ  of  sense  are  neither  too  large  nor  too 
small  for  the  “  effluences  ”  which  all  things  are  constantly 
giving  off  (fr.  89).  Smell  was  explained  by  respiration. 
The  breath  drew  in  along  with  it  the  small  particles  which 
fit  into  the  pores.  Empedokles  proved  this  by  the  example 
of  people  with  a  cold  in  their  head,1  who  cannot  smell,  just 
because  they  have  a  difficulty  in  breathing.  We  also  see 
from  fr.  101  that  the  scent  of  dogs  was  referred  to  in  support 
of  the  theory.  Empedokles  seems  to  have  given  no  detailed 
account  of  smell,  and  did  not  refer  to  touch  at  all.2  Hearing 
was  explained  by  the  motion  of  the  air  which  struck  upon  the 
cartilage  inside  the  ear  and  made  it  swing  and  sound  like 
a  bell.3 

The  theory  of  vision 4  is  more  complicated  ;  and,  as 
Plato  makes  his  Timaios  adopt  most  of  it,  it  is  of  great 
importance  in  the  history  of  philosophy.  The  eye  was  con¬ 
ceived,  as  by  Alkmaion  (§  96)  ,5  to  be  composed  of  fire  and 
water.  Just  as  in  a  lantern  the  flame  is  protected  from  the 
wind  by  horn  (fr.  84),  so  the  fire  in  the  iris  is  protected  from 
the  water  which  surrounds  it  in  the  pupil  by  membranes 
with  very  fine  pores,  so  that,  while  the  fire  can  pass  out, 
the  water  cannot  get  in.  Sight  is  produced  by  the  fire  inside 
the  eye  going  forth  to  meet  the  object. 

Empedokles  was  aware,  too,  that  “  effluences,”  as  he 
called  them,  came  from  things  to  the  eyes  as  well ;  for  he 
defined  colours  as  “  effluences  from  forms  (or  ‘  things  ’) 


1  Aet.  iv.  17,  2  ( Dox .  p.  407).  Beare,  p.  133. 

^  Beare,  pp.  161-3,  180-81.  '  3  Ibid_  pp.  g5  sqq_ 

4  Ibld-  PP’  14  m-  5  Theophr.  De  sens.  26. 


EMPEDOKLES  OF  AKRAGAS  249 

fitting  into  the  pores  and  perceived.”  1  It  is  not  quite 
clear  how  these  two  accounts  of  vision  were  reconciled,  or 
how  far  we  are  entitled  to  credit  Empedokles  with  the 
theory  of  Plato’s  Timaeus.  The  statements  quoted  seem 
to  imply  something  very  like  it.2 

Theophrastos  tells  us  that  Empedokles  made  no  dis¬ 
tinction  between  thought  and  perception,  a  remark  already 
made  by  Aristotle.3  The  chief  seat  of  perception  was  the 
blood,  in  which  the  four  elements  are  most  evenly  mixed, 
and  especially  the  blood  near  the  heart  (fr.  105). 4  This 
does  not,  however,  exclude  the  idea  that  other  parts  of  the 
body  may  perceive  also  ;  indeed,  Empedokles  held  that  all 
things  have  their  share  of  thought  (fr.  103).  But  the  blood 
was  specially  sensitive  because  of  its  finer  mixture.5  From 
this  it  naturally  follows  that  Empedokles  adopted  the  view, 
already  maintained  in  the  Second  Part  of  the  poem  of  Par¬ 
menides  (fr.  16),  that  our  knowledge  varies  with  the  varying 
constitution  of  our  bodies  (fr.  106). 

1 19.  The  theoretical  theology  of  Empedokles  reminds  Theology 
us  of  Xenophanes,  his  practical  religious  teaching  of  Pytha-  “hgion. 
goras  and  the  Orphics.  We  are  told  in  the  earlier  part  of 
the  poem  that  certain  "  gods  ”  are  composed  of  the  ele¬ 
ments  ;  and  that  therefore  though  they  "  five  long  lives  ” 
they  must  pass  away  (fr.  21).  The  elements  and  the  Sphere 
are  also  called  gods,  but  that  is  in  quite  another  sense  of  the 
word,  and  the  elements  do  not  pass  away. 

If  we  turn  to  the  religious  teaching  of  the  Purifications, 

1  The  definition  is  quoted  from  Gorgias  in  Plato,  Men.  76  d  4.  All 
our  MSS.  have  airoppoai  axypdrojv,  but  Ven.  T  has  in  the  margin  yp. 

Xpyp-6.ru v,  which  may  well  be  an  old  tradition.  The  Ionic  for  "  things  " 
is  xP'Qpara.  See  Diels,  Empedokles  und  Gorgias,  p.  439. 

2  See  Beare,  Elementary  Cognition,  p.  18. 

3  Arist.  De  an.  r,  3.  427  a  21. 

4  R.  P.  178  a.  This  was  the  characteristic  doctrine  of  the  Sicilian 

school,  from  whom  it  passed  to  Aristotle  and  the  Stoics.  Plato  and 

Hippokrates,  on  the  other  hand,  adopted  the  view  of  Alkmaion  (§  97) 
that  the  brain  was  the  seat  of  consciousness.  At  a  later  date,  Philistion 
of  Syracuse,  Plato's  friend,  substituted  the  xj/vx^bv  i rvevp.a  ("animal 
spirits  ”)  which  circulated  along  with  the  blood.  6  Beare,  p.  253. 


250 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


we  find  that  everything  turns  on  the  doctrine  of  trans¬ 
migration.  On  the  general  significance  of  this  enough  has 
been  said  above  (§  42) ;  the  details  given  by  Empedokles  are 
peculiar.  According  to  a  decree  of  Necessity,  “  daemons  ” 
who  have  sinned  are  forced  to  wander  from  their  home  in 
heaven  for  three  times  ten  thousand  seasons  (fr.  115).  He 
himself  is  such  an  exiled  divinity,  and  has  fallen  from  his 
high  estate  because  he  put  his  trust  in  raving  Strife.  The 
four  elements  toss  him  from  one  to  the  other  with  loathing  ; 
and  so  he  has  not  only  been  a  human  being  and  a  plant, 
but  even  a  fish.  The  only  way  to  purify  oneself  from  the 
taint  of  original  sin  is  by  the  cultivation  of  ceremonial 
holiness,  by  purifications,  and  abstinence  from  animal 
flesh.  For  the  animals  are  our  kinsmen  (fr.  137),  and  it  is 
parricide  to  lay  hands  on  them.  In  all  this  there  are  certain 
points  of  contact  with  the  cosmology.  We  have  the 
“  mighty  oath  ”  (fr.  115 ;  cf.  fr.  30),  the  four  elements, 
Hate  as  the  source  of  original  sin,  and  Kypris  as  queen  in 
the  Golden  Age  (fr.  128).  But  these  points  are  not  funda¬ 
mental,  and  the  cosmological  system  of  Empedokles  leaves 
no  room  for  an  immortal  soul,  which  is  presupposed  by  the 
Purifications.  All  through  this  period,  there  seems  to  have 
been  a  gulf  between  men’s  religious  beliefs,  if  they  had  any, 
and  their  cosmological  views.  The  few  points  of  contact 
we  have  mentioned  may  have  been  enough  to  hide  this  from 
Empedokles  himself. 


CHAPTER  VI 


ANAXAGORAS  OF  KLAZOMENAI 

120.  All  that  Apollodoros  tells  us  with  regard  to  the  date  Date, 
of  Anaxagoras  seems  to  rest  on  the  authority  of  Demetrios 
Phalereus,  who  said  of  him,  in  his  Register  of  Ar chons,  that  he 
began  to  be  a  philosopher”  at  Athens  at  the  age  of  twenty, 
in  the  archonship  of  Kallias  or  Kalliades  (480-79  b.c.).1 
This  date  was  probably  derived  from  a  calculation  based  on 
the  philosopher’s  age  at  the  time  of  his  trial,  which  Demetrios 
had  every  opportunity  of  learning  from  sources  no  longer 
extant.  Apollodoros  inferred  that  Anaxagoras  was  bom 
in  01.  LXX.  (500-496  b.c.),  and  he  adds  that  he  died  at  the 
age  of  seventy-two  in  01.  LXXXVIII.  1  (428-27  b.c.).2 
He  doubtless  thought  it  natural  that  he  should  not 
survive  Perikles,  and  that  he  should  die  the  year  Plato 
was  born.3  We  have  a  further  statement,  of  doubtful 
origin,  but  probably  due  also  to  Demetrios,  that  Anaxagoras 
lived  at  Athens  for  thirty  years.  If  it  is  correct,  we 
get  from  about  480  to  450  b.c.  as  the  time  he  lived  there. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  these  dates  are  very  nearly 
right.  Aristotle  tells  us  4  that  Anaxagoras  was  older  than 
Empedokles,  who  was  probably  born  before  490  b.c.  (§  98)  ; 

1  Diog.  ii.  7  (R.  P.  148).  For  the  variation  in  the  archon’s  name,  see 
Jacoby,  p.  244,  w.  1,  and  for  the  chronology  generally,  see  A.  E.  Taylor 
in  Classical  Quarterly,  xi.  81  sqq.,  whose  arguments  appear  to  me  con¬ 
vincing. 

8  We  must  read  dySoijKoo-T/js  with  Scaliger  to  make  the  figures  come 
right.  3  On  the  statements  of  Apollodoros,  see  Jacoby,  pp.  244  sqq, 

4  Arist.  Met.  A,  3.  984  a  ix  (R.  P.  150  a). 

251 


252 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Early  life. 


and  Theophrastos  said  1  that  Empedokles  was  born  “  not 
long  after  Anaxagoras.”  Demokritos,  too,  said  that  he 
himself  was  a  young  man  in  the  old  age  of  Anaxagoras,  and 
he  must  have  been  born  about  460  b.c.2 

121.  Anaxagoras  was  from  Klazomenai,  and  Theophras¬ 
tos  tells  us  that  his  father’s  name  was  Hegesiboulos.3  The 
tradition  was  that  he  neglected  his  possessions  to  follow 
science.4  It  is  certain,  at  any  rate,  that  already  in  the 
fourth  century  he  was  regarded  as  the  type  of  the  man  who 
leads  the  “  theoretic  life.”  5  Of  course  the  story  of  his 
contempt  for  worldly  goods  was  seized  on  later  by  the 
historical  novelist  and  tricked  out  with  1;he  usual  apoph¬ 
thegms.  These  do  not  concern  us  here. 

One  incident  belonging  to  the  early  manhood  of  Anaxa¬ 
goras  is  recorded,  namely,  the  fall  of  a  huge  meteoric  stone 
into  the  Aigospotamos  in  468-67  b.c.6  Our  authorities  tell 
us  he  predicted  this  phenomenon,  which  is  plainly  absurd. 
But  we  shall  see  reason  to  believe  that  it  may  have  occa¬ 
sioned  one  of  his  most  striking  departures  from  the  earlier 
cosmology,  and  led  to  his  adoption  of  the  very  view  for 
which  he  was  condemned  at  Athens.  At  all  events,  the  fall 
of  the  stone  made  a  profound  impression  at  the  time,  and 
it  was  still  shown  to  tourists  in  the  days  of  Pliny  and 
Plutarch.7 


1  Phys.  Op.  fr.  3  (Box.  p.  477),  ap.  Simpl.  Phys.  p.  25,  19  (R.  P.  162  e). 
Diog.  ix.  41  (R.  P.  187).  On  the  date  of  Demokritos,  see  Chap.  IX. 

§  171- 

3  Phys.  Op.  It.  4  {Box.  p.  478),  repeated  by  the  doxographers. 

«  Plato,  Hipp.  ma.  283  a,  roivavrlov  yap  ’A va^ayopq.  <pa<rl  <rvp.prjvcu 

KaTaXeL(t>d^v  7*P  airv  iroXXffir  xpVP-druv  Kara, ueXrjacu  Kal  droXAra* 
Travra-  oCrajs  avrbv  dvbr/Ta  <ro<plt«r6ai.  Cf.  Plut.  Per.  16. 

6  Arist.  Eth.  Nic.  K,  g.  1179  a  13.  Cf.  Eth.  Eud.  A,  4.  1215  b  6  and 
15,  1216  a  10. 

T  °  U’  10  (R'  P’  149  a)'  PlinY>  N  H-  ii-  M9.  gives  the  date  as  Ol. 

EAXV111.  2  ;  and  Eusebios  gives  it  under  Ol.  LXXVIII.  3.  But  cf. 

Marm.  Par.  57,  d<fi’  oS  tv  A lybs  wora/uots  6  \l6o s  tweae  .  .  .  tr-p  HHII 
dpxovros  ’ Adrjvrjai  OeayevlSov,  which  is  468-67  B.C.  The  text  of  Diog’ 
n.  II  is  corrupt.  For  suggested  restorations,  see  Jacoby,  p.  244  n  2’ 
and  Diels,  Vors.  46  a  1.  F  44  , 

7  Pliny,  loc.  cit.,  "  qui  lapis  etiam  nunc  ostenditur  magnitudine  vehis 
colore  adusto.”  Cf.  Plut.  Lys.  12,  Ka l  deUwrai  ...  in  vvv. 


ANAXAGORAS  OF  KLAZOMENAI  253 

122.  The  doxographers  speak  of  Anaxagoras  as  the  pupil  Reiation 
of  Anaximenes.1  This  can  hardly  be  correct ;  Anaximenes  to  the 
most  probably  died  before  Anaxagoras  was  born.  But  it  is  sch^i. 
not  enough  to  say  that  the  statement  arose  from  the  fact 
that  the  name  of  Anaxagoras  followed  that  of  Anaximenes 
m  the  Successions.  We  have  its  original  source  in  a  fragment 
of  Theophrastos  himself,  which  states  that  Anaxagoras  had 
been  an  associate  of  the  philosophy  of  Anaximenes.”  2 
Now  this  expression  has  a  very  distinct  meaning  if  we  accept 
the  view  as  to  “  schools  ”  of  science  set  forth  in  the  Intro¬ 
duction  (§  XIV.).  It  means  that  the  old  Ionic  school  sur¬ 
vived  the  destruction  of  Miletos  in  494  b.c.,  and  continued 
to  flourish  m  the  other  cities  of  Asia.  It  means,  further, 
that  it  produced  no  man  of  distinction  after  its  third  great 
representative,  and  that  “  the  philosophy  of  Anaximenes  ” 

was  still  taught  by  whoever  was  now  at  the  head  of  the 
society. 

At  this  point,  then,  it  may  be  well  to  indicate  briefly  the 
conclusions  we  shall  come  to  in  the  next  few  chapters  with 
regard  to  the  development  of  philosophy  during  the  first 
half  of  the  fifth  century  b.c.  We  shall  find  that,  while  the 
old  Ionic  school  was  still  capable  of  training  great  men,  it 
was  now^  powerless  to  keep  them.  Anaxagoras  went  his  own 
way  ;  Melissos  and  Leukippos,  though  they  still  retained 
enough  of  the  old  views  to  bear  witness  to  the  source  of  their 
inspiration,  were  too  strongly  influenced  by  the  Eleatic 
dialectic  to  remain  content  with  the  theories  of  Anaximenes. 

It  was  left  to  second-rate  minds  like  Diogenes  to  champion 
the  orthodox  system,  while  third-rate  minds  like  Hippon 

1  Cicero,  De  nat.  d.  i.  26  (after  Philodemos),  "  Anaxagoras  qui  accepit 
ab  Anaximene  disciplinam  ( i.e .  Si-r/Kovae )  ;  Diog.  i.  13  (R,  p  ^  an(j  jj  g . 

Strabo,  xiv.  p.  645,  KXafo^ios  S’  duhp  ’A vafryopas  6  <bv<nKbs 

Avakovs  0fu\VTfr;  Euseb.  P.E.  p.  504;  [Galen]  Hist.  Phil  2  • 
Augustine,  De  civ.  Dei,  viii.  2. 

*  Phys.  Op.  fr.  4  (Dox.  p.  478),  ’Arafa yopas  fxh,  y&p  'H yVa^ob\ov 
KAafo/^tos  KOivuivrpxas  rr, s  ’Ava^pUvovs  pikocoplas  kt\.  In  his  fifth  edition 
(P-  973.  n.  2)  Zeller  adopts  the  view  given  in  the  text,  and  confirms  it 
by  comparing  the  very  similar  statement  as  to  Leukippos,  Ko^vhaa, 

H.app.evL5ri  rrjs  pChoaotpias.  See  below.  Chap.  IX.  §  172. 


254 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Anaxa¬ 
goras  at 
Athens. 


of  Samos  went  back  to  the  cruder  theory  of  Thales.  The 
details  of  this  anticipatory  sketch  will  become  clearer  as  we 
go  on  ;  for  the  present,  it  is  only  necessary  to  call  the 
reader’s  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  old  Ionic  Philosophy 
now  forms  a  sort  of  background  to  our  story,  just  as  Orphic 
and  Pythagorean  religious  ideas  have  done  in  the  preceding 
chapters. 

123.  Anaxagoras  was  the  first  philosopher  to  take  up 
his  abode  at  Athens.  We  are  not  informed  what  brought 
him  there  in  the  year  of  Salamis.  He  was,  however,  a 
Persian  subject ;  for  Klazomenai  had  been  reduced  after 
the  suppression  of  the  Ionian  Revolt,  and  it  seems  likely 
enough  that  he  was  in  the  Persian  army.1 

Anaxagoras  is  said  to  have  been  the  teacher  of  Perikles, 
and  the  fact  is  placed  beyond  the  reach  of  doubt  by  the 
testimony  of  Plato.  In  the  Phaedrus  2  he  makes  Sokrates 
say  :  “  For  all  arts  that  are  great,  there  is  need  of  talk  and 
discussion  on  the  parts  of  natural  science  that  deal  with 
things  on  high ;  for  that  seems  to  be  the  source  which  in¬ 
spires  high-mindedness  and  effectiveness  in  every  direction. 
Perikles  added  this  very  acquirement  to  his  original  gifts. 
He  fell  in,  it  seems,  with  Anaxagoras,  who  was  a  scientific 
man ;  and,  satiating  himself  with  the  theory  of  things  on 
high,  and  having  attained  to  a  knowledge  of  the  true  nature 
of  mind  and  intellect,  which  was  just  what  the  discourses 
of  Anaxagoras  were  mainly  about,  he  drew  from  that  source 
whatever  was  of  a  nature  to  further  him  in  the  art  of  speech.” 
This  clearly  means  that  Perikles  associated  with  Anaxagoras 
before  he  became  a  prominent  politician.  So  too  Isokrates 
says  that  Perikles  was  the  pupil  of  two  “  sophists,”  Anaxa- 

1  That  might  explain  the  charge  of  "  Medism  ”  which  was  perhaps 

brought  against  him  at  his  trial  (§  124).  It  is  also,  perhaps,  significant 
that  Apollodoros  (and  probably  Demetrios  of  Phaleron)  spoke  of  him  as 
twenty  years  old  /card.  tt)v  hiafiacnv,  which  means,  of  course,  the 

crossing  of  the  Hellespont,  and  would  hardly  be  relevant  if  Anaxagoras 
had  not  been  with  Xerxes  then.  It  is  certainly  difficult  to  see  what  else 
could  bring  a  young  Klazomenian  to  Athens  at  that  date. 

2  270  a  (R.  P.  148  c). 


ANAXAGORAS  OF  KLAZOMENAI  255 

goras  and  Damon.1  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  teaching 
of  Damon  belongs  to  the  youth  of  Perikles,2  and  it  is  to  be 
inferred  that  the  same  is  true  of  that  of  Anaxagoras. 

A  more  difficult  question  is  the  alleged  relation  of 
Euripides  to  Anaxagoras.  The  oldest  authority  for  it  is 
Alexander  of  Aitolia,  poet  and  librarian,  who  lived  at  the 
court  of  Ptolemy  Philadelphos  ( c .  280  b.c.).  He  referred  to 
Euripides  as  the  “  nursling  of  brave  Anaxagoras.”  3  The 
famous  fragment  on  the  blessedness  of  the  scientific  life 
might  just  as  well  refer  to  any  other  cosmologist  as  to  Anaxa¬ 
goras,  and  indeed  suggests  more  naturally  a  thinker  of  a 
more  primitive  type.4  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  likely  enough 
that  Anaxagoras  did  not  develop  his  system  all  at  once, 
and  he  doubtless  began  by  teaching  that  of  Anaximenes! 

Besides  there  is  one  fragment  which  distinctly  expounds  the 
central  thought  of  Anaxagoras,  and  could  hardly  be  referred 
to  any  one  else.5 

124.  It  is  clear  that,  if  we  adopt  the  chronology  of  The  trial. 
Demetrios  of  Phaleron,  the  trial  of  Anaxagoras  must  be 
placed  early  in  the  political  career  of  Perikles.6  That  is 
the  tradition  preserved  by  Satyros,  who  says  that  the 

1  Isokrates,  Ilepl  imSSreus,  235,  Ilepi^s  88  Svoiv  (ao<purTa.h>)  iyhero 
!iadi]Ti]s,  'kva^aybpov  re  tov  K\a£op.evtov  nal  Ad/xuvos. 

2  Damon  (or  Damonides)  must  have  been  politically  active  about 
460  b.c.  (Meyer.  Gesch.  des  Altert.  iii.  567  ;  Wilamowitz,  Aristoteles  und 
Athen,  i.  134),  so  that  he  must  have  been  born  about  500  b.c.  He  was 
ostracised  before  443  b.c.  according  to  Meyer,  and  an  ostrakon  with 
the  name  of  Damon  son  of  Damonides  has  been  found  (Bruckner,  Arch. 

Anz.,  1914,  p.  95)-  If  we  suppose  that  he  was  ostracised  in  445  and  re¬ 
turned  in  435,  his  subsequent  relations  with  Sokrates  are  quite  natural. 

Plato  can  hardly  have  known  him  personally.  On  the  whole  subject, 
see  Rosenberg  in  Neue  Jahrb.  xxxv.  p.  205  sqq. 

8  Gell.  xv.  20,  “  Alexander  autem  Aetolus  hos  de  Euripide  versus 
composuit  ”  ;  8  8’  ’  kva^aybpov  rp6(f>tpos  xai°v  (s0  Valckenaer  for  dpxaiov ) 
kt\.  1  See  Introd.  p.  10,  n.  3.  «  R.  P.  i5o  b. 

6  The  trial  of  Anaxagoras  is  generally  referred  to  the  period  just  before 
the  Peloponnesian  War.  That  is  how  it  was  represented  by  Ephoros 
(reproduced  by  Diod.  xii.  38),  and  the  same  account  is  followed  by 
Plutarch  (V .  Per.  32).  The  pragmatic  character  of  the  chronology  of 
Ephoros  is,  however,  sujficiently  established,  and  we  cannot  infer  any¬ 
thing  from  it.  Sotion,  who  made  Kleon  the  accuser,  must  also  have 
assumed  a  late  date  for  the  trial. 


256 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


accuser  was  Thoukydides,  son  of  Melesias,  and  that  the 
charge  was  impiety  and  Medism.1  As  Thoukydides  was 
ostracised  in  443  b.c.,  that  would  make  it  probable  that  the 
trial  of  Anaxagoras  took  place  about  450  b.c.,  and  would 
bring  it  into  connexion  with  the  ostracism  of  the  other 
teacher  of  Perikles,  Damon.2  If  that  is  so,  we  understand 
at  once  why  Plato  never  makes  Sokrates  meet  with 
Anaxagoras.  He  had  handed  his  school  over  to  Archelaos 
before  Sokrates  was  old  enough  to  take  an  interest  in 
scientific  theories.3  We  do  learn  from  Plato,  however, 
what  the  charge  of  impiety  was  based  on.  It  was  that 
Anaxagoras  taught  the  sun  was  a  red-hot  stone,  and 
the  moon  earth,4  and  we  shall  see  that  he  certainly  did 
hold  these  views  (§  133).  For  the  rest,  the  most  likely 
account  is  that  he  was  got  out  of  prison  and  sent  away 
by  Perikles.5  We  know  that  such  things  were  possible  at 
Athens. 

Driven  from  his  adopted  home,  Anaxagoras  naturally 
went  back  to  Ionia,  where  at  least  he  would  be  free  to  teach 
what  he  pleased.  He  settled  at  Lampsakos,  a  colony  of 
Miletos,  and  we  shall  see  reason  to  believe  that  he  founded 
a  school  there.  If  so,  he  must  have  lived  at  Lampsakos  for 
some  time  before  his  death.8  The  Lampsakenes  erected  an 
altar  to  his  memory  in  their  market-place,  dedicated  to 

1  Diog.  ii.  12,  Xdrvpos  S’  iv  rots  B lots  inrd  eovKvSLSov  <pT)<rlv  d<raxOyv<u  rqv 
SU-qv,  dvTiiroXiTcvofjJvov  rip  II epucXei  ’  jcal  ou  pbvov  dcre/3 das  a\\a  Kal  p.-qSiu pov ' 
Kai  dirbvTO.  KaraSiKairdfivai  davdrip. 

2  This  would  be  in  complete  agreement  with  the  statement  that 
Anaxagoras  lived  thirty  years  at  Athens  (p.  251).  For  the  ostracism  of 
Damon,  see  p.  255,  n.  2. 

3  The  well-known  passage  of  the  Phaedo  (97  b  8  sqq.)  distinctly 

implies  that  Anaxagoras  had  left  Athens  when  Sokrates  was  still  quite 
young.  He  hears  of  his  doctrine  only  at  second-hand  (from  Archelaos  ?) 
and  he  at  once  procures  the  book  of  Anaxagoras  and  reads  it.  If  Anaxa¬ 
goras  had  sail  been  at  Athens,  it  would  have  been  a  simple  matter  for 
Sokrates  to  seek  him  out  and  question  him,  and  it  would  have  made  an 
excellent  subject  for  a  Platonic  dialogue.  The  fact  that  Plato  does  make 
Sokrates  meet  Parmenides  and  Zeno  and  does  not  make  him  meet  Anaxa¬ 
goras  is  clearly  significant.  *  Apol.  26  d. 

6  Plut.  Nic.  23  (R.  P.  148  c).  Cf.  Per.  32  (R.  P.  148). 

6  See  the  account  of  Archelaos  in  Chap.  X.  §  191. 


ANAXAGORAS  OF  KLAZOMENAI  257 

Mind  and  Truth  ;  and  the  anniversary  of  his  death  was  long 
kept  as  a  holiday  for  school-children,  it  was  said  at  his  own 
request.1 

125.  Diogenes  includes  Anaxagoras  in  his  list  of  philo-  writings, 
sophers  who  left  only  a  single  book,  and  he  has  also  preserved 
the  accepted  criticism  of  it,  namely,  that  it  was  written  “  in 
a  lofty  and  agreeable  style.”  2  There  is  no  evidence  of  any 
weight  to  set  against  this  testimony,  which  comes  ultimately 
from  the  librarians  of  Alexandria.3  The  story  that  Anaxa¬ 
goras  wrote  a  treatise  on  perspective  as  applied  to  scene¬ 
painting  is  most  improbable  ;  4  and  the  statement  that  he 
composed  a  work  dealing  with  the  quadrature  of  the  circle 
is  a  misunderstanding  of  an  expression  in  Plutarch.5  We 
learn  from  the  passage  in  the  Apology,  referred  to  above, 
that  the  works  of  Anaxagoras  could  be  bought  at  Athens 
for  a  drachma  ;  and  that  the  book  was  of  some  length  may 
be  gathered  from  the  way  in  which  Plato  makes  Sokrates 
go  on  to  speak  of  it.6  In  the  sixth  century  a.d.  Simplicius 
had  access  to  a  copy,  doubtless  in  the  library  of  the  Academy; 
and  it  is  to  him  we  owe  the  preservation  of  all  our  fragments, 
with  one  or  two  very  doubtful  exceptions.  Unfortunately 
his  quotations  seem  to  be  confined  to  the  First  Book,  that 
dealing  with  general  principles,  so  that  we  are  left  somewhat 
in  the  dark  as  to  the  treatment  of  details. 

1  The  oldest  authority  for  the  honours  paid  to  Anaxagoras  is  Alkidamas, 
the  pupil  of  Gorgias,  who  said  these  were  still  kept  up  in  his  own  time. 

Arist.  Rhet.  B,  23.  1398  b  15. 

2  Diog.  i.  16  ;  ii.  6  (R.  P.  5  ;  153). 

3  Schaubach  {An.  Claz.  Fragm.  p.  57)  fabricated  a  work  entitled  Tb 
■rrpbs  Aexiveov  out  of  the  pseudo- Aristotelian  De  plantis,  817  a  27.  But  the 
Latin  version  of  Alfred,  which  is  the  original  of  the  Greek,  has  simply  et 
ideo  dicit  lechineon  ;  and  this  seems  to  be  due  to  failure  to  make  out  the 
Arabic  text  from  which  the  Latin  was  derived.  Cf.  Meyer,  Gesch.  d. 

Bot.  i.  60. 

4  Vitruvius,  vii.  pr.  11.  A  forger,  seeking  to  decorate  his  production 
with  a  great  name,  would  think  at  once  of  the  philosopher  who  was  said 
to  have  taught  Euripides. 

s  Plut.  De  exilio,  607  f.  The  words  merely  mean  that  he  used  to 
draw  figures  relating  to  the  quadrature  of  the  circle  on  the  prison  floor. 

6  Apol.  26  d-e.  The  expression  fiifiXia  perhaps  implies  that  it  filled 
more  than  one  roll. 

17 


258  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 

men £**  1 26'  1  §ive  the  fragments  according  to  the  text  and 

arrangement  of  Diels  : 


(1)  All  things  were  together,  infinite  both  in  number  and  in 
smallness  ,  for  the  small  too  was  infinite.  And,  when  all  things 
were  together,  none  of  them  could  be  distinguished  for  their 
smallness.  For  air  and  aether  prevailed  over  all  things,  being 
both  of  them  infinite  ;  for  amongst  all  things  these  are  the  greatest 
both  in  quantity  and  size.  1  R.  P.  151. 

(2)  For  air  and  aether  are  separated  off  from  the  mass  that 
surrounds  the  world,  and  the  surrounding  mass  is  infinite  in 
quantity.  R.  P.  ib. 

(3)  Nor  is  there  a  least  of  what  is  small,  but  there  is  always  a 
smaller  ;  for  it  cannot  be  that  what  is  should  cease  to  be  by  being 
cut.2  But  there  is  also  always  something  greater  than  what  is 
p-eat,  and  it  is  equal  to  the  small  in  amount,  and,  compared  with 
itself,  each  thing  is  both  great  and  small.  R.  P.  159  a. 

(4)  And  since  these  things  are  so,  we  must  suppose  that  there 
are  contained  many  things  and  of  all  sorts  in  the  things  that  are 
uniting,  seeds  of  all  things,  with  all  sorts  of  shapes  and  colours 
and  savours  (R.  P.  ib .),  and  that  men  have  been  formed  in  them 
and  the  other  animals  that  have  fife,  and  that  these  men  have’ 
inhabited  cities  and  cultivated  fields  as  with  us ;  and  that  they 
have  a  sun  and  a  moon  and  the  rest  as  with  us  ;  and  that  their 
earth  brings  forth  for  them  many  things  of  all  kinds  of  which 
they  gather  the  best  together  into  their  dwellings,  and  use  them 

‘  1  0  k)‘  Thus  much  have  I  said  with  regard  to  separating 

off,  to  show  that  it  will  not  be  only  with  us  that  things  are 
separated  off,  but  elsewhere  too. 

But  before  they  were  separated  off,  when  ah  things  were 
together,  not  even  was  any  colour  distinguishable;  for  the 
mixture  of  all  things  prevented  it— of  the  moist  and  the  dry 
and  the  warm  and  the  cold,  and  the  light  and  the  dark,  and  of 
muc  eart  t  at  was  in  it,  and  of  a  multitude  of  innumerable 
seeds  m  no  way  like  each  other.  For  none  of  the  other  things 


Simplicius  tells  us  this  was  at  the  beginning  of  Book  I  The 
sentence  quoted  by  Dioe  ii  6  P  ,8  ,  8  DOOK  Alle 

but  a  summarv  likp  ‘  '  53^  s  not  a  fragment  of  Anaxagoras, 

p.  146).  l  k  th  ™VTa  pU  ascribed  to  Herakleitos  (Chap  III. 

ra  ^  Zwmch  DiTls  reteins661113  t0  *  COnvincing  correction  of  the  MS. 


ANAXAGORAS  OF  KLAZOMENAI 


259 

either  is  like  any  other.  And  these  things  being  so,  we  must 
hold  that  all  things  are  in  the  whole.  R.  P.  15 1.1 

(5)  And  those  things  having  been  thus  decided,  we  must 
know  that  all  of  them  are  neither  more  nor  less  ;  for  it  is  not 
possible  for  them  to  be  more  than  all,  and  all  are  always  equal. 
R.  P.  151. 

(6)  And  since  the  portions  of  the  great  and  of  the  small  are 
equal  in  amount,  for  this  reason,  too,  all  things  will  be  in  every¬ 
thing  ;  nor  is  it  possible  for  them  to  be  apart,  but  all  things  have 
a  portion  of  everything.  Since  it  is  impossible  for  there  to  be  a 
least  thing,  they  cannot  be  separated,  nor  come  to  be  by  them¬ 
selves  ;  but  they  must  be  now,  just  as  they  were  in  the  beginning, 
all  together.  And  in  all  things  many  things  are  contained,  and 
an  equal  number  both  in  the  greater  and  in  the  smaller  of  the 
things  that  are  separated  off. 

(7)  .  .  .  So  that  we  cannot  know  the  number  of  the  things 
that  are  separated  off,  either  in  word  or  deed. 

(8)  The  things  that  are  in  one  world  are  not  divided  nor  cut 
off  from  one  another  with  a  hatchet,  neither  the  warm  from  the 
cold  nor  the  cold  from  the  warm.  R.  P.  155  e. 

(9)  .  .  .  as  these  things  revolve  and  are  separated  off  by 
the  force  and  swiftness.  And  the  swiftness  makes  the  force. 
Their  swiftness  is  not  like  the  swiftness  of  any  of  the  things  that 
are  now  among  men,  but  in  every  way  many  times  as  swift. 

(10)  How  can  hair  come  from  what  is  not  hair,  or  flesh  from 
what  is  not  flesh  ?  R.  P.  155,  f,  n.  1. 

(11)  In  everything  there  is  a  portion  of  everything  except 
Nous,  and  there  are  some  things  in  which  there  is  Nous  also. 
R.  P.  160  b. 

(12)  All  other  things  partake  in  a  portion  of  everything, 
while  Nous  is  infinite  and  self-ruled,  and  is  mixed  with  nothing, 
but  is  alone,  itself  by  itself.  For  if  it  were  not  by  itself,  but  were 
mixed  with  anything  else,  it  would  partake  in  all  things  if  it  were 
mixed  with  any ;  for  in  everything  there  is  a  portion  of  every¬ 
thing,  as  has  been  said  by  me  in  what  goes  before,  and  the  things 
mixed  with  it  would  hinder  it,  so  that  it  would  have  power  over 
nothing  in  the  same  way  that  it  has  now  being  alone  by  itself. 
For  it  is  the  thinnest  of  all  things  and  the  purest,  and  it  has  all 

1  I  had  already  pointed  out  in  the  first  edition  that  Simplicius  quotes 
this  three  times  as  a  continuous  fragment,  and  that  we  are  not  entitled 
to  break  it  up.  Diels  now  prints  it  as  a  single  passage. 


260 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


knowledge  about  everything  and  the  greatest  strength  ;  and 
Nous  has  power  over  all  things,  both  greater  and  smaller,  that 
have  life.  And  Nous  had  power  over  the  whole  revolution,  so 
t  at  it  began  to  revolve  in  the  beginning.  And  it  began  to 
revolve  first  from  a  small  beginning ;  but  the  revolution  now 
extends  over  a  larger  space,  and  will  extend  over  a  larger  still 
And  all  the  things  that  are  mingled  together  and  separated  off 
and  distinguished  are  all  known  by  Nous.  And  Nous  set  in 
order  all  things  that  were  to  be,  and  all  things  that  were  and  are 
not  now  and  that  are,  and  this  revolution  in  which  now  revolve 
e  stars  and  the  sun  and  the  moon,  and  the  air  and  the  aether 
that  are  separated  off.  And  this  revolution  caused  the  separat¬ 
ing  and  the  rare  is  separated  off  from  the  dense,  the  warm 
from  the  cold,  the  light  from  the  dark,  and  the  dry  from  the 
moist  And  there  are  many  portions  in  many  things.  But  no 
thing  is  altogether  separated  off  nor  distinguished  from  anything 
else  except  Nous.  And  all  Nous  is  alike,  both  the  greater  and 
the  smaller;  while  nothing  else  is  like  anything  else,  but  each 

single  thing  is  and  was  most  manifestly  those  things  of  which  it 
has  most  in  it.  R.  P.  155. 

tnnlI3)i  Anf  Whe"  ^°US  b6gan  t0  move  thin£s>  separating  off 
took  place  from  all  that  was  moved,  and  so  much  as  Nous  set  in 

motion  was  all  separated.  And  as  things  were  set  in  motion  and 

separated,  Revolution  caused  them  to  be  separated  much  more. 

(r4)  And  Nous  which  ever  is,  is  certainly  there,  where  every- 

1  •f/Se‘S;  m  Jhe  surroundmg  mass,  and  in  what  has  been 
united  with  it  and  separated  off  from  it 1 

“the  aetL(“  “f'  ““  °U‘  t°™*  ^ther  P*rt 

(16)  From  these  as  they  are  separated  off  earth  is  solidified  • 

F°rom°th  mi^h  Ttef  13  Separated  off’  and  from  water  earth.’ 
From  the  earth  stones  are  solidified  by  the  cold,  and  these  rush 

outwards  more  than  water.  R.  p.  156. 

(17)  The  Hellenes  follow  a  wrong  usage  in  speaking  of  coming 

1  Simplicius  gives  fr.  14  thus  (p  k,  1  ,,  „  „ 

Kal  ,0,  iariv.  Diels  now  reads  6  Stvovsl  d<e(>  T  IT  n  T  ”  ^ 
The  correspondence  of  del  ,  „  .  ’  '  <m*  K&pTa  Kal  wv  £<jtiv. 

«  On  the  teS  oft  1,  5ee  R  p  "2™°^  “  °<  «*• 

adding  rf  from  Hippolytos.  5  '  haVe  <oUowed  ScliorI>  m 


ANAXAGORAS  OF  KLAZOMENAI  261 

into  being  and  passing  away ;  for  nothing  comes  into  being  or 
passes  away,  but  there  is  mingling  and  separation  of  things 
that  are.  So  they  would  be  right  to  call  coming  into  being 
mixture,  and  passing  away  separation.  R.  P.  150. 

(18)  It  is  the  sun  that  puts  brightness  into  the  moon. 

(19)  We  call  rainbow  the  reflexion  of  the  sun  in  the  clouds. 
Now  it  is  a  sign  of  storm  ;  for  the  water  that  flows  round  the 
cloud  causes  wind  or  pours  down  in  rain. 

(20)  With  the  rise  of  the  Dogstar  (?)  men  begin  the  harvest  ; 
with  its  setting  they  begin  to  till  the  fields.  It  is  hidden  for 
forty  days  and  nights. 

(21)  From  the  weakness  of  our  senses  we  are  not  able  to  judge 
the  truth. 

(21a)  What  appears  is  a  vision  of  the  unseen. 

(21&)  (We  can  make  use  of  the  lower  animals)  because  we 
use  our  own  experience  and  memory  and  wisdom  and  art. 

(22)  What  is  called  “  birds’  milk  ”  is  the  white  of  the  egg. 

127.  The  system  of  Anaxagoras,  like  that  of  Empedokles, 
aimed  at  reconciling  the  Eleatic  doctrine  that  corporeal 
substance  is  unchangeable  with  the  existence  of  a  world 
which  everywhere  presents  the  appearance  of  coming  into 
being  and  passing  away.  The  conclusions  of  Parmenides 
are  frankly  accepted  and  restated.  Nothing  can  be  added 
to  all  things  ;  for  there  cannot  be  more  than  all,  and  all  is 
always  equal  (fr.  5).  Nor  can  anything  pass  away.  What 
men  commonly  call  coming  into  being  and  passing  away 
is  really  mixture  and  separation  (fr.  17). 

It  is  in  every  way  probable  that  Anaxagoras  derived  his 
theory  of  mixture  from  his  younger  contemporary,  whose 
poem  may  have  been  published  before  his  own  treatise.1 
In  any  case,  we  have  seen  that  the  opinions  of  the  latter 
were  known  at  Athens  before  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century. 
We  have  seen  how  Empedokles  sought  to  save  the  world  of 

1  I  do  not  now  think,  however,  that  this  is  the  meaning  of  the  words 
rois  tpyois  Vo-repos  in  Arist.  Met.  A,  3.  984  a  12  (R.  P.  150  a).  At  any 
rate  Theophrastos  did  not  take  them  so  ;  for  he  imitates  the  passage  in 
speaking  of  Plato  ( Dox .  484,  19),  of  whom  he  says  Todrots  ttn.yevbp.ev os  nxdrwv 
T?7  pev  Sofj?  leal  rrj  Svvdpei  irpoTepos,  rois  Se  yporoij  varepo s.  It  seems  that  he 
understood  the  Aristotelian,  formula  as  "inferior  in  his  achievements.” 


Anaxa¬ 
goras  and 
his  pre¬ 
decessors. 


262 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


“  Every¬ 
thing 
in  every¬ 
thing.” 


The 

portions. 


appearance  by  maintaining  that  the  opposites — hot  and 
cold,  moist  and  dry — were  things,  each  one  of  which  was 
real  in  the  Parmenidean  sense.  Anaxagoras  regarded  this 
as  inadequate.  Everything  changes  into  everything  else,1 
the  things  of  which  the  world  is  made  are  not  “  cut  off  with 
a  hatchet  ”  (fr.  8)  in  this  way.  On  the  contrary,  the  true 
formula  must  be  :  There  is  a  portion  of  everything  in  every¬ 
thing  (fr.  11). 

128.  A  part  of  the  argument  by  which  Anaxagoras 
sought  to  prove  this  point  has  been  preserved  in  a  corrupt 
form  by  Aetios,  and  Diels  has  recovered  some  of  the  original 
words  from  the  scholiast  on  St.  Gregory  Nazianzene.  “  We 
use  a  simple  nourishment,”  he  said,  “  when  we  eat  the  fruit 
of  Demeter  or  drink  water.  But  how  can  hair  be  made  of 
what  is  not  hair,  or  flesh  of  what  is  not  flesh  ?  ”  (fr.  10). 2 
That  is  just  the  sort  of  question  the  early  Milesians  must 
have  asked,  only  the  physiological  interest  has  now  definitely 
replaced  the  meteorological.  We  shall  find  a  similar  train 
of  reasoning  in  Diogenes  of  Apollonia  (fr.  2). 

The  statement  that  there  is  a  portion  of  everything  in 
everything,  is  not  to  be  understood  as  referring  simply  to 
the  original  mixture  of  things  before  the  formation  of  the 
worlds  (fr.  1).  On  the  contrary,  even  now  “  all  things  are 
together,  and  everything,  however  small  and  however 
great,  has  an  equal  number  of  “  portions  ”  (fr.  6).  A 
smaller  particle  of  matter  could  only  contain  a  smaller 
number  of  portions,  if  one  of  those  portions  ceased  to  be  ; 
but  if  anything  is,  in  the  full  Parmenidean  sense,  it  is 
impossible  that  mere  division  should  make  it  cease  to  be 
(fr.  3).  Matter  is  infinitely  divisible  ;  for  there  is  no  least 
thing,  any  more  than  there  is  a  greatest.  But  however 
great  or  small  a  body  may  be,  it  contains  just  the  same 
number  of  “  portions,”  that  is,  a  portion  of  everything. 

129.  What  are  these  “  things  ”  of  which  everything 

1  Arist.  Phys.  A,  4.  187  b  1  (R.  P.  i55  a). 

witht“3-5l°‘“'P'279)'  I  read,.,* 


ANAXAGORAS  OF  KLAZOMENAI  263 

contains  a  portion  ?  It  once  was  usual  to  represent  the 
theory  of  Anaxagoras  as  if  he  had  said  that  wheat,  for 
instance,  contained  small  particles  of  flesh,  blood,  bones, 
and  the  like  ;  but  we  have  just  seen  that  matter  is  infinitely 
divisible  (fr.  3),  and  that  there  are  as  many  “  portions  ”  in 
the  smallest  particle  as  in  the  greatest  (fr.  6).  That  is  fatal 
to  the  old  view.  However  far  we  carry  division,  we  can 
never  reach  anything  “  unmixed,”  so  there  can  be  no  such 
thing  as  a  particle  of  simple  nature,  however  minute. 

This  difficulty  can  only  be  solved  in  one  way.1  In  fr.  8 
the  examples  given  of  things  which  are  not  “  cut  off  from 
one  another  with  a  hatchet  ”  are  the  hot  and  the  cold  ;  and 
elsewhere  (frs.  4,  15),  mention  is  made  of  the  other  traditional 

opposites.”  Aristotle  says  that,  if  we  suppose  the  first 
principles  to  be  infinite,  they  may  either  be  one  in  kind,  as 
with  Demokritos,  or  opposite.2  Simplicius,  following  Por¬ 
phyry  and  Themistios,  refers  the  latter  view  to  Anaxagoras ; 3 
and  Aristotle  himself  implies  that  the  opposites  of  Anaxa¬ 
goras  had  as  much  right  to  be  called  first  principles  as  the 
“  homoeomeries.”  4 

It  is  of  those  opposites,  then,  and  not  of  the  different 
forms  of  matter;  that  everything  contains  a  portion.  Every 

1  See  Tannery,  Science  hellene,  pp.  283  sqq.  I  still  think  that  Tannery's 
interpretation  is  substantially  right,  though  his  statement  of  it  requires 
some  modification.  It  is,  no  doubt,  difficult  for  us  to  think  of  the  hot 
and  cold,  dry  and  wet  as  “  things  ”  (xpripara)  ;  but  we  must  remember 
that,  even  when  the  notion  of  quality  (ttoiott??)  had  been  defined,  this 
way  of  thinking  survived.  Galen  ( De  nat.  jac.  i.  2,  4)  is  still  quite  clear 
on  the  point  that  it  is  the  qualities  which  are  eternal.  He  says  oi  Se 
TLves  eTvai  plv  tv  ax )rfj  (rfj  viroK.eip.tvr)  ovcrig.)  fiofiXovTai  ras  iroxbr-qras, 
apeTap\r)Tovs  St  Kai  arptirrovs  tt;  alQvos,  Kal  rd s  (paivoptvas  raxjras  aWoL&crei s  rj; 
SiaKplaec  re  Kal  trvyKpiaei  ylyveadal  tpacriv  <bs  ’  Ava^aybpas. 

2  Arist.  Phys.  A,  2.  184  b  21,  f)  oihais  (iiairep  AqpbKpiTos,  to  ytvos  tv, 
0"XT)paTi  St  r)  elSex  Sxaxpepoxjaas,  r)  Kal  ivavTias. 

8  Phys.  p.  44,  1.  He  goes  on  to  refer  to  eeppor-qras  ...  Kal 

tjrvxpbTi]Tas  ^ripSTiprAs  re  Kal  -  uyp6Ti)Tas  pavSirp-as  re  Kal  irvKVOTqras  Kal  ras 

&X\as  Kara  iroiorriTa  ivavTibr-qias.  He  observes,  however,  that  Alexander 
rejected  this  interpretation  and  "took  Sxaxpepou aas  q  Kal  evavrlas  closely 
together  as  both  referring  to  Demokritos. 

4  Phys.  A,  4.  187  a  25,  t6v  plv  (’ Ava^aybpav)  &wetpa  iroielv  rd  re  opoiopeprj 
Kal  ravavria.  Aristotle’s  own  theory  only  differs  from  this  in  so  far  as 
he  makes  v\i)  prior  to  the  evavria. 


264 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Seeds. 


particle,  however  large  or  however  small,  contains  every 
one  of  those  opposite  qualities.  That  which  is  hot  is  also 
to  a  certain  extent  cold.  Even  snow,  Anaxagoras  affirmed, 
was  black  ;  1  that  is,  even  the  white  contains  a  certain 
portion  of  the  opposite  quality.  It -is  enough  to  indicate 
the  connexion  of  this  with  the  views  of  Herakleitos  (§  80). 2 

*30*  The  difference,  then,  between  the  theory  of  Anaxa¬ 
goras  and  that  of  Empedokles  is  this.  Empedokles  had 
taught  that,  if  you  divide  the  various  things  which  make  up 
this  world,  and  in  particular  the  parts  of  the  body,  such  as 
flesh,  bones,  and  the  like,  far  enough,  you  come  to  the  four 
“  roots  ”  or  elements,  which  are,  accordingly,  the  ultimate 
reality.  Anaxagoras  held  that,  however  far  you  may  divide 
any  of  these  things— and  they  are  infinitely  divisible— you 
never  come  to  a  part  so  small  that  it  does  not  contain 
portions  of  all  the  opposites.  On  the  other  hand,  everything 
can  pass  into  everything  else  just  because  the  “  seeds,”  as 
he  called  them,  of  each  form  of  matter  contain  a  portion  of 
everything,  that  is,  of  all  the  opposites,  though  in  different 
proportions.  If  we  are  to  use  the  word  “  element  ”  at  all, 
it  is  these  seeds  that  are  the  elements  in  the  system  of 
Anaxagoras. 


Aristotle  expresses  this  by  saying  that  Anaxagoras 
regards  the  op,ocofieprj  as  aroi^ela.3  We  have  seen  that 
the  term  crroLXdov  is  of  later  date  than  Anaxagoras,  and  it 

1  Sext-  Pyrrh.  i.  33  (R.  P.  161  b). 

^  already  n°ted  ^  the  eclectic  HeraJdeitean  to 
ri  1  t*nbute  n'Pl  Sialrr>*-  i-  3-4  (see  above,  Chap.  III.  p.  i5o  «  2) 
Cf.  the  words  <x«  *  d,r’  dXM)XW„  rd  ^  wSp  a.6  ro/oW  xd  lypbv.  £ 

vyp  vs'  TA  5i  ***  M  ro°  *  y*r «-»  - 

'st.  De  gen.  corr.  A.  i,  314  a  18,  6  piv  yap  (Anaxagoras)  t4 

ZZT”  *TOlXfla  TlerV’  *"  ^  Kal  ^ a  led  Tfir  axxi  fr 

aiTVp0\  Tb  ^p0S  ^Tiv-  This  was-  of  c°urse,  repeated  by 
Theophrastos  and  the  doxographers  ;  but  it  is  to  be  noted  that  Aetios7 

supposing  as  he  does  that  Anaxagoras  himself  used  the  term,  gives  it  an 

r  -LTT6  “g'  He  “ys  *h,t  the  were  eo  called 

fron,  the  hkceesa  „f  ,he  parhclea  of  the  ,h„se  the  body  (Dm_ 

account  oAh^'  M  '  ^LuCretlus’  83°  sqq.  (R.  P.  150  a)  has  a  similar 
matter,  derived  from  Epicurean  sources  Obviously  it 
cannot  be  reconciled  with  what  Aristotle  says.  Y‘ 


ANAXAGORAS  OF  KLAZOMENAI  265 

is  natural  to  suppose  that  the  word  0p.0L0p.epr,  is  also  only 
Aristotle  s  name  for  the  “  seeds.”  In  his  own  system,  the 
ofioiofieprj  are  intermediate  between  the  elements  {<rrotXeui), 
of  which  they  are  composed,  and  the  organs  (, Spyava ),  which 
are  composed  of  them.  The  heart  cannot  be  divided  into 
hearts,  but  the  parts  of  flesh  are  flesh.  That  being  so, 
Aristotle  s  statement  is  quite  intelligible  from  his  own  point 
of  view,  but  there  is  no  reason  for  supposing  that  Anaxa¬ 
goras  expressed  himself  in  that  particular  way.  All  we 
are  entitled  to  infer  is  that  he  said  the  “  seeds,”  which  he 
substituted  for  the  “  roots  ”  of  Empedokles,  were  not  the 
opposites  in  a  state  of  separation,  but  each  contained  a 
portion  of  them  all.  If  Anaxagoras  had  used  the  term 

homoeomeries  himself,  it  would  be  very  strange  that 
Simplicius  should  quote  no  fragment  containing  it. 

The  difference  between  the  two  systems  may  also  be 
regarded  from  another  point  of  view.  Anaxagoras  was  not 
obliged  by  his  theory  to  regard  the  elements  of  Empedokles 
as  primary,  a  view  to  which  there  were  obvious  objections, 
especially  in  the  case  of  earth.  He  explained  them  in  quite 
another  way.  Though  everything  has  a  portion  of  every- 
thmg  in  it,  things  appear  to  be  that  of  which  there  is  most 
in  them  (fr.  12  sub  fin.).  We  may  say,  then,  that  Air  is 
that  in  which  there  is  most  cold,  Fire  that  in  which  there  is 
most  heat,  and  so  on,  without  giving  up  the  view  that  there 
is  a  portion  of  cold  in  the  fire  and  a  portion  of  heat  in  the 
a^r>1  The  great  masses  which  Empedokles  had  taken  for 
elements  are  really  vast  collections  of  all  manner  of  “  seeds.” 
Each  of  them  is,  in  fact,  a  Travtnreppia2 

1  Cf.  above,  p.  263. 

Arist.  De  gen.  corr.  A,  1.  314  a  29.  The  word  wavawtppLa  was  used 
by  Demokritos  (Anst.  De  an.  A,  2.  404  a  8;  R.  P.  200),  and  it  occurs  in  the 
Hcpl  SiaiTTji  ( loc .  cit.).  It  seems  natural  to  suppose  that  it  was  used  by 
Anaxagoras  himself,  as  he  used  the  term  m rbppara.  Much  difficulty  has 
been  caused  by  the  apparent  inclusion  of  Water  and  Fire  among  the 
bp.owp.tpri  in  Arist.  Met.  A,  3.  984  a  n  (R.  P.  i5o  a).  Bonitz  under, 
stands  the  words  Kadawtp  VSojp  1)  wop  to  mean  “  as  we  have  just  seen  that 
Fire  and  Water  do  in  the  system  of  Empedokles.”  In  any  case,  KO.66.-wtp 
goes  closely  with  oOtoj,  and  the  general  sense  is  that  Anaxagoras  applies 


“AH 

things 

together.’ 


266  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 

131.  From  all  this  it  follows  that,  when  “  all  things 
•  were  together,”  and  when  the  different  seeds  of  things  were 
mixed  together  in  infinitely  small  particles  (fr.  1),  the 
appearance  presented  would  be  that  of  one  of  what  had 
hitherto  been  regarded  as  the  primary  substances.  As  a 
matter  of  fact,  they  did  present  the  appearance  of  "  air  and 
aether  ”  ;  for  the  qualities  (things)  which  belong  to  these 
— i.e.  the  hot  and  the  cold,  prevail  in  quantity  over  all  other 
things  in  the  universe,  and  everything  is  most .  obviously 
that  of  which  it  has  most  in  it  (fr.  12  sub  fin.).  Here,  then, 
Anaxagoras  attaches  himself  to  Anaximenes.  The  primary 
condition  of  things,  before  the  formation  of  the  worlds,  is 
much  the  same  in  both  ;  only,  with  Anaxagoras,  the  original 
mass  is  no  longer  the  primary  substance,  but  a  mixture  of 
innumerable  seeds  divided  into  infinitely  small  parts. 

This  mass  is  infinite,  like  the  air  of  Anaximenes,  and  it 
supports  itself,  since  there  is  nothing  surrounding  it.* 1 
Further,  the  seeds  of  all  things  which  it  contains  are 
infinite  in  number  (fr.  1).  But,  as  the  innumerable  seeds 
may  be  divided  into  those  in  which  the  portions  of  cold, 
moist,  dense,  and  dark  prevail,  and  those  which  have  most 
of  the  warm,  dry,  rare,  and  light  in  them,  we  may  say 
that  the  original  mass  was  a  mixture  of  infinite  Air  and 
of  infinite  Fire.  The  seeds  of  Air,  of  course,  contain 
“  Portions  ”  of  the  “  things  ”  that  predominate  in  Fire,  and 
vice  versa  >  but  we  regard  everything  as  being  that  of  which 
it  has  most  in  it.  Lastly,  there  is  no  void  in  this  mixture, 
an  addition  to  the  theory  made  necessary  by  the  arguments 
of  Parmenides.  It  is,  however,  worthy  of  note  that  Anaxa¬ 
goras  added  an  experimental  proof  of  this  to  the  purely 
dialectical  one  of  the  Eleatics.  He  used  the  klefisydra 

to  the  0fj.010fj.eprj  what  is  really  true  of  the  arocXda.  It  would  be  better  to 
delete  the  comma  after  vOp  and  add  one  after  for  avyKpl^  koI  a»a«*r« 
n6vov  is  explanatory  of  ofi™  .  .  .  Ka.ed.vep.  In  the  next  sentence  I  read 
avXas  for  dX\w  with  Zeller  (Arch.  ii.  261).  See  also  Arist.  De  caelo 
r,  3.  302  b  1  (R.  P.  150  a),  where  the  matter  is  very  clearly  put 

1  Arist.  Phys.  T,  5.  205  b  1  (R.  P.  i54  a). 


ANAXAGORAS  OF  KLAZOMENAI  267 

experiment  as  Empedokles  had  done  (fr.  100),  and  also 
showed  the  corporeal  nature  of  air  by  means  of  inflated 
skins.1 

132.  Like  Empedokles,  Anaxagoras  required  some  Nous, 
external  cause  to  produce  motion  in  the  mixture.  Body, 
Parmenides  had  shown,  would  never  move  itself,  as  the 
Milesians  had  assumed.  Anaxagoras  called  the  cause  of 
motion  by  the  name  of  Nous.  It  was  this  which  made 
Aristotle  say  that  he  “  stood  out  like  a  sober  man  from  the 
random  talkers  that  had  preceded  him,”  2  and  he  has  often 
been  credited  with  the  introduction  of  the  spiritual  into 
philosophy.  The  disappointment  expressed  by  Sokrates 
in  the  Phaedo  as  to  the  way  in  which  Anaxagoras  worked  out 
the  theory  should,  however,  make  us  pause  to  reflect  before 
accepting  too  exalted  a  view  of  it.  Plato  3  makes  Sokrates 
say  :  “I  once  heard  a  man  reading  a  book,  as  he  said,  of 
Anaxagoras,  and  saying  it  was  Mind  that  ordered  the  world 
and  was  the  cause  of  all  things.  I  was  delighted  to  hear 
of  this  cause,  and  I  thought  he  really  was  right.  .  .  .  But 
my  extravagant  expectations  were  all  dashed  to  the  ground 
when  I  went  on  and  found  that  the  man  made  no  use  of 
Mind  at  all.  He  ascribed  no  causal  power  whatever  to  it 
in  the  ordering  of  things,  but  to  airs,  and  aethers,  and  waters, 
and  a  host  of  other  strange  things.”  Aristotle,  of  course 
with  this  passage  in  mind,  says  :  4  “  Anaxagoras  uses  Mind 
as  a  deus  ex  machina  to  account  for  the  formation  of  the 
world  ;  and  whenever  he  is  at  a  loss  to  explain  why  anything 
necessarily  is,  he  drags  it  in.  But  in  other  cases  he  makes 
anything  rather  than  Mind  the  cause.”  These  utterances 
may  well  suggest  that  the  Nous  of  Anaxagoras  was  some¬ 
thing  on  the  same  level  as  the  Love  and  Strife  of  Empedokles, 

1  Phys.  Z,  6.  213  a  22  (R.  P.  159).  We  have  a  full  discussion  of  the 
experiments  with  the  klepsydra  in  Probl.  914  b  9  sqq.,  a  passage  which 
we  have  already  used  to  illustrate  Empedokles,  fr.  100.  See  above, 
p.  219,  n.  2. 

2  Arist.  Met.  A,  3.  984  b  15  (R.  P.  152). 

3  Plato,  Phaed.  97  b  S  (R.  P.  155  d). 

4  Arist.  Met.  A,  4.  985  a  18  (R.  P.  155  d). 


268  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


and  this  will  be  confirmed  when  we  look  at  what  he  has  to 
say  about  it. 


In  the  first  place,  Nous  is  unmixed  (fr.  12),  and  does  not, 
like  other  things,  contain  a  portion  of  everything.  This 
would  hardly  be  worth  saying  of  an  immaterial  mind  ;  no 
one  would  suppose  that  to  be  hot  or  cold.  The  result  of 
its  being  unmixed  is  that  it  “  has  power  over  ”  everything, 
that  is  to  say,  in  the  language  of  Anaxagoras,  it  causes  things 
to  move.1  Herakleitos  had  said  as  much  of  Fire,  and  Empe- 
dokles  of  Strife.  Further,  it  is  the  “  thinnest  ”  of  all  things, 
so  that  it  can  penetrate  everywhere,  and  it  would  be  mean¬ 
ingless  to  say  that  the  immaterial  is  “  thinner  ”  than  the 
material.  It  is  true  that  Nous  also  “  knows  all  things  ”  ; 
but  so,  perhaps,  did  the  Fire  of  Herakleitos,2  and  certainly 
the  Air  of  Diogenes.3  Zeller  holds,  indeed,  that  Anaxagoras 
meant  to  speak  of  something  incorporeal ;  but  he  admits 
that  he  did  not  succeed  in  doing  so,4  and  that  is  historically 
the  important  point.  Nous  is  certainly  imagined  as  occupy¬ 
ing  space  ;  for  we  hear  of  greater  and  smaller  parts  of  it 
(fr.  12). 


The  truth  probably  is  that  Anaxagoras  substituted  Nous 
for  the  Love  and  Strife  of  Empedokles,  because  he  wished 
to  retain  the  old  Ionic  doctrine  of  a  substance  that  “  knows  ” 
all  things,  and  .  to  identify  that  with  the  new  theory  of  a 
substance  that  “  moves  ”  all  things.  Perhaps,  too,  it  was 
his  increased  interest  in  physiological  as  distinguished  from 
purely  cosmological  matters  that  led  him  to  speak  of  Mind 
rather  than  Soul.  The  former  word  certainly  suggests  to 
the  Greek  an  intimate  connexion  with  the  living  body  which 


-  yS;  G’  5'  256  b  24>  Sld  Kal  '^y6pas  dpdws  \iyec,  to*  voGr 

'pi°K“V  Ka  ^  W  avrbv  eW  ovrai 

yap  &  povus  KivoLr,  Ad^ros  Hu  Kai  KparoLr,  dpuyps  This  is  only  quoted  for 

°!  KpaTfv\  0f  course-  the  words  idvnro*  <bv  are  not  meant 
3  e  historical  and  still  less  is  the  interpretation  in  De  an.  T,  4.  429  a 

fthe  old°MeineS  °f  Ap°f °mt  (fr-  5)  COUPles  M  KavTo.  KVfrp»S*6 at 

(the  old  Milesian  word)  with  tt&vtuv  Kpareiv. 

.  2,.If  We  reta“  the  MS-  dS^  in  fr-  1.  In  any  case,  the  name  rd  <ro<M„ 

lmphes  as  much.  a  See  3>  5.  t  Zeller>  p  9gs;  ^ 


ANAXAGORAS  OF  KLAZOMENAI  269 

the  latter  does  not.  But,  in  any  case,  the  originality  of 

Anaxagoras  lies  far  more  in  the  theory  of  substance  than  in 
that  of  Nous. 

133.  The  formation  of  a  world  starts  with  a  rotatory  Formation 
motion  which  Nous  imparts  to  a  portion  of  the  mixed  mass  °^des 
m  which  all  things  are  together  ”  (fr.  13),  and  this  rotatory 
motion  gradually  extends  over  a  wider  and  wider  space. 

Its  rapidity  (fr.  9)  produced  a  separation  of  the  rare  and  the 
ense,  the  cold  and  the  hot,  the  dark  and  the  light,  the 
moist  and  the  dry  (fr.  15).  This  separation  produces  two 
great  masses,  the  one  consisting  mostly  of  the  rare  hot 
light,  and  dry,  called  the  “  Aether  ”  ;  the  other,  in  which 
the  opposite  qualities  predominate,  called  “Air”  (fr.  1) 

Of  these  the  Aether  or  Fire  1  took  the  outside  while  the  Air 
occupied  the  centre  (fr.  15). 

The  next  stage  is  the  separation  of  the  air  into  clouds, 
water,  earth,  and  stones  (fr.  16).  In  this  Anaxagoras  follows 
Anaximenes  closely.  In  his  account  of  the  origin  of  the 
heavenly  bodies,  however,  he  showed  himself  more  original 
We  read  at  the  end  of  fr.  16  that  stones  “rush  outwards 
more  than  water,”  and  we  learn  from  the  doxographers  that 
the  heavenly  bodies  were  explained  as  stones  torn  from  the 
earth  by  the  rapidity  of  its  rotation  and  made  red-hot  by 
the  speed  of  their  own  motion.2  Perhaps  the  fall  of  the 
meteoric  stone  at  Aigospotamoi  had  something  to  do  with 
the  origin  of  this  theory.  It  will  also  be  observed  that  it 
necessarily  implies  the  rotation  of  the  flat  earth  along  with 
the  “  eddy  ”  ( Slvr 7). 


134-  That  Anaxagoras  adopted  the  ordinary  Ionian  innumer- 
theory  of  innumerable  worlds  is  clear  from  fr  4  which  wp  able 
have  no  right  to  regard  as  other  than  continuous.3  The 

1  Note  that  Anaxagoras  says  “  air  "  where  Empedokles  said  “  aether  " 

and  that  “  aether  ”  is  with  him  equivalent  to  fire.  Cf.  Arist.  De  caelo,  r  ’3 
302  b  4,  t6  yap  7 rup  Kal  tou  aide  pa  Trpoaayopevei  rauri  and  ib.  A,  3.  270  b  ->4 
AvaHayopas  Si  Karaypprai  rip  Mp.an  robry  ov  Ka\ws-  6  yopdfri  yb.pa.Mpa  ivrl 
xupbs.  '  ' 

2  Aet.  ii.  13,  3  (Dox.  p.  341  ;  R.  P.  157  c). 

3  See  above,  p.  259,  n.  1. 


270 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Cos¬ 

mology. 


words  "  that  it  was  not  only  with  us  that  things  were 
separated  off,  but  elsewhere  too  ”  can  only  mean  that  Nous 
has  caused  a  rotatory  movement  in  more  parts  of  the  bound¬ 
less  mixture  than  one .  Aetios  certainly  includes  Anaxagoras 
among  those  who  held  there  was  only  one  world  1 ;  but  this 
testimony  cannot  be  considered  of  the  same  weight  as  that 
of  the  fragments.  Zeller’s  reference  of  the  words  to  the 
moon  is  very  improbable.  Is  it  likely  that  any  one  would 
say  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  moon  “  have  a  sun  and 
moon  as  with  us  ”  ?  2 

135.  The  cosmology  of  Anaxagoras  is  clearly  based  upon 
that  of  Anaximenes,  as  will  be  seen  from  a  cpmparison  of 
the  following  passage  of  Hippolytos  3  with  the  quotations 
given  in  Chap.  I.  (§  29)  : 

(3)  The  earth  is  flat  in  shape,  and  remains  suspended  because 
of  its  size  and  because  there  is  no  vacuum.4 *  For  this  reason  the 
air  is  very  strong,  and  supports  the  earth  which  is  borne  up  by  it. 

(4)  Of  the  moisture  on  the  surface  of  the  earth,  the  sea  arose 
from  the  waters  in  the  earth  (for  when  these  were  evaporated  the 
remainder  turned  salt),6  and  from  the  rivers  which  flow  into  it. 

(5)  Rivers  take  their  being  both  from  the  rains  and  from  the 
waters  in  the  earth  ;  for  the  earth  is  hollow  and  has  waters  in 
its  cavities.  And'  the  Nile  rises  in  summer  owing  to  the  water 
that  comes  down  from  the  snows  in  Ethiopia.6 


1  Aet.  ii.  1,  3  ( Dox .  p.  327). 

2  Further,  it  can  be  proved  that  this  passage  (fr.  4)  occurred  quite  near 
the  beginning  of  the  work.  Cf.  Simpl.  Pliys.  p.  34,  28  fxer  6\iya  7-4 s 
apXV s  T°f’  Trp&rov  Ilepl  fucreuis ,  p.  156,  I,  Kai  fier'  6\tya  (after  fr.  2), 
which  itself  occurred,  fj-er  6Xlyov  (after  fr.  i),  which  was  the  beginning  of 
the  book.  A  reference  to  other  "  worlds  ”  would  be  quite  in  place  here, 
but  not  a  reference  to  the  moon. 

8  Ref.  i.  8,  3  (Dox.  p.  562). 

4  This  is  an  addition  to  the  older  view-  occasioned  by  the  Eleatic  denial 

of  the  void. 

6  The  text  is  corrupt  here,  but  the  general  sense  can  be  got  from 
Aet.  iii.  16.  2. 

6  The  MS.  reading  is  iv  rots  &pktois,  for  which  Diels  adopts  Fredrichs’ 
tv  rots  avrapKTiKoh.  I  have  thought  it  safer  to  translate  the  tv  7-5  MOioiriq 
of  Aetios  (iv.  1,  3).  This  view  is  mentioned  by  Herodotos  (ii.  22). 
Seneca  ( N.Q .  iv.  2,  17)  points  out  that  it  was  adopted  by  Aischylos  ( Suppl . 
559,  fr.  300,  Nauck),  Sophokles  (fr.  797),  and  Euripides  (Hel.  3,  fr.  228), 
who  would  naturally  take  their  opinions  from  Anaxagoras. 


ANAXAGORAS  OF  KLAZOMENAI  271 

(6)  The  sun  and  the  moon  and  all  the  stars  are  fiery  stones 
earned  round  by  the  rotation  of  the  aether.  Under  the  stars 
are  the  sun  and  moon,  and  also  certain  bodies  which  revolve 
with  them,  but  are  invisible  to  us. 

(7)  We  do  not  feel  the  beat  of  the  stars  because  of  the  great¬ 
ness  of  their  distance  from  the  earth  ;  and,  further,  they  are  not 
so  warm  as  the  sun,  because  they  occupy  a  colder  region.  The 
moon  is  below  the  sun,  and  nearer  us. 

(8)  The  sun  surpasses  the  Peloponnesos  in  size.  The  moon 
has  not  a  light  of  her  own,  but  gets  it  from  the  sun.  The  course 
of  the  stars  goes  under  the  earth. 

(9)  The  moon  is  eclipsed  by  the  earth  screening  the  sun’s 
Hght  from  it,  and  sometimes,  too,  by  the  bodies  below  the  moon 
coming  before  it.  The  sun  is  eclipsed  at  the  new  moon,  when  the 
moon  screens  it  from  us.  Both  the  sun  and  the  moon  turn  back 
in  their  courses  owing  to  the  repulsion  of  the  air.  The 

moon  turns  back  frequently,  because  it  cannot  prevail  over 
the  cold. 

(10)  Anaxagoras  was  the  first  to  determine  what  concerns 
the  eclipses  and  the  illumination  of  the  sun  and  moon.  And  he 
said  the  moon  was  of  earth,  and  had  plains  and  ravines  in  it. 
The  Milky  Way  was  the  reflexion  of  the  light  of  the  stars  that 
were  not  illuminated  by  the  sun.  Shooting  stars  were  sparks,  as 
it  were,  which  leapt  out  owing  to  the  motion  of  the  heavenly 
vault. 

(n)  Winds  arose  when  the  air  was  rarefied  by  the  sun,  and 
when  things  were  burned  and  made  their  way  to  the  vault  of 
heaven  and  were  carried  off.  Thunder  and  lightning  were  pro¬ 
duced  by  heat  striking  upon  clouds. 

(12)  Earthquakes  were  caused  by  the  air  above  striking  on 
that  beneath  the  earth  ;  for  the  movement  of  the  latter  caused 
the  earth  which  floats  on  it  to  rock. 

All  this  confirms  the  statement  of  Theophrastos, 
that  Anaxagoras  had  belonged  to  the  school  of  An¬ 
aximenes.  The  flat  earth  floating  on  the  air,  the 
dark  bodies  below  the  -moon,  the  explanation  of  the 
solstices  and  the  "  turnings  back  ”  of  the  moon  by 
the  resistance  of  air,  the  explanations  of  wind  and  of 
thunder  and  lightning,  are  all  derived  from  the  Milesian. 


Biology. 


272  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 

As  to  the  moon’s  light  and  the  cause  of  eclipses,  it 
was  natural  that  Anaxagoras  should  be  credited  at  Athens 
with  these  discoveries.  On  the  other  hand,  it  seems 
very  unlikely  that  they  were  made  by  a  believer  in  a 
flat  earth,  and  there  is  sufficient  evidence  that  they  are 
really  Pythagorean.1 

136.  “  There  is  a  portion  of  everything  in  everything 
except  Nous,  and  there  are  some  things  in  which  there  is 
Nous  also  ”  (fr.  11).  In  these  words  Anaxagoras  laid  down 
the  distinction  between  animate  and  inanimate  things.  He 
tells  us  that  it  is  the  same  Nous  that  “  has  power  over,” 
that  is,  sets  in  motion,  ah  things  that  have  life,  both  the 
greater  and  the  smaller  (fr.  12).  The  N ous  in  living  creatures 
is  the  same  in  all  (fr.  12),  and  from  this  it  followed  that  the 
different  grades  of  intelligence  we  observe  in  the  animal  and 
vegetable  worlds  depend  entirely  on  the  structure  of  the 
body.  The  Nous  was  the  same,  but  it  had  more  oppor¬ 
tunities  in  one  body  than  another.  Man  was  the  wisest  of 
animals,  not  because  he  had  a  better  sort  of  Nous,  but 
because  he  had  hands.2  This  is  in  accordance  with  the 
previous  development  of  thought  upon  the  subject.  Par¬ 
menides,  in  his  Second  Part  (fr.  16),  had  already  made 
the  thought  of  men  depend  on  the  constitution  of  their 
limbs. 

As  all  Nous  is  the  same,  we  are  not  surprised  to  find  that 
plants  were  regarded  as  living  creatures.  If  we  may  trust 
the  pseudo- Aristotelian  Treatise  on  Plants  3  so  far,  Anaxa¬ 
goras  argued  that  they  must  feel  pleasure  and  pain  in 
connexion  with  their  growth  and  with  the  fall  of  their  leaves. 
Plutarch  says  4  that  he  called  plants  “  animals  fixed  in  the 
earth.” 

Both  plants  and  animals  originated  in  the  first  instance 
from  the  TravamepfiLa.  Plants  arose  when  the  seeds  of 

1  See  p.  177,  n.  i. 

2  Arist.  De  part.  an.  A,  io.  687  a  7  (R.  P.  160  b). 

8  [Arist.]  De  plant.  A,  1.  815  a  15  (R.  P.  160). 

4  Plut.  Q.N.  I  (R.  P.  160),  ftio?  .  .  .  eyy elov. 


ANAXAGORAS  OF  KLAZOMENAI 


273 

them  which  the  air  contained  were  brought  down  by 
the  rain-water,1  and  animals  originated  in  a  similar  way.2 
Like  Anaximander,  Anaxagoras  held  that  animals  first  arose 
in  the  moist  element.3 

137.  In  these  scanty  notices  we  seem  to  see  traces  of  a 
polemical  attitude  towards  Empedokles,  and  the  same  may 
be  observed  in  what  we  are  told  of  the  theory  of  perception 
adopted  by  Anaxagoras,  especially  in  the  view  that  percep¬ 
tion  is  of  contraries.4  The  account  which  Theophrastos 
gives  of  this  5  is  as  follows  : 

But  Anaxagoras  says  that  perception  is  produced  by  opposites  ; 
for  like  things  cannot  be  effected  by  like.  He  attempts  to  give  a. 
detailed  enumeration  of  the  particular  senses.  We  see  by  means 
of  the  image  in  the  pupil ;  but  no  image  is  cast  upon  what  is  of 
the  same  colour,  but  only  on  what  is  different.  With  most  living 
creatures  things  are  of  a  different  colour  to  the  pupil  by  day, 
though  with  some  this  is  so  by  night,  and  these  are  accordingly 
keen-sighted  at  that  time.  Speaking  generally,  however,  night 
is  more  of  the  same  colour  with  the  eyes  than  day.  And  an 
image  is  cast  on  the  pupil  by  day,  because  light  is  a  concomitant 
cause  of  the  image,  and  because  the  prevailing  colour  casts  an 
image  more  readily  upon  its  opposite.6 

It  is  in  the  same  way  that  touch  and  taste  discern  their 
objects.  That  which  is  just  as  warm  or  just  as  cold  as  we  are 
neither  warms  us  nor  cools  us  by  its  contact ;  and,  in  the  same 
way,  we  do  not  apprehend  the  sweet  and  the  sour  by  means  of 
themselves.  We  know  cold  by  warm,  fresh  by  salt,  and  sweet 
by  sour,  in  virtue  of  our  deficiency  in  each  ;  for  all  these  are  in 
us  to  begin  with.  And  we  smell  and  hear  in  the  same  manner  ; 
the  former  by  means  of  the  accompanying  respiration,  the  latter 
by  the  sound  penetrating  to  the  brain,  for  the  bone  which  sur¬ 
rounds  this  is  hollow,  and  it  is  upon  it  that  the  sound  falls.7 

And  all  sensation  implies  pain,  a  view  which  would  seem  to 
be  the  consequence  of  the  first  assumption,  for  all  unlike  things 

1  Theophr.  Hist.  Plant,  iii.  i,  4  (R-  p-  l6°)- 

2  Irenaeus,  Adv.  Haer.  ii.  14,  2  (R.  P.  160  a). 

3  Hipp.  Ref.  i.  8,  12  {Box.  p.  563). 

4  Beare,  p.  37.  5  Theophr.  Be  sensu,  27  sqq.  [Box.  p.  507). 

«  Beare,  p.  38.  7  Beare,  p.  208. 

18 


Percep¬ 

tion.. 


274 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


produce  pain  by  their  contact.  And  this  pain  is  made  percept¬ 
ible  by  the  long  continuance  or  by  the  excess  of  a  sensation. 
Brilliant  colours  and  excessive  noises  produce  pain,  and  we  cannot 
dwell  long  on  the  same  things.  The  larger  animals  are  the  more 
sensitive,  and,  generally,  sensation  is  proportionate  to  the  size 
of  the  organs  of  sense.  Those  animals  which  have  large,  pure, 
and  bright  eyes,  see  large  objects  and  from  a  great  distance,  and 
contrariwise.1 

And  it  is  the  same  with  hearing.  Large  animals  can  hear 
great  and  distant  sounds,  while  less  sounds  pass  unperceived  ] 
small  animals  perceive  small  sounds  and  those  near  at  hand.2 
It  is  the  same  too  with  smell.  Rarefied  air  has  more  smell  ; 
for,  air  is  heated  and  rarefied,  it  smells.  A  large  animal 

when  it  breathes  draws  in  the  condensed  air  along  with  the 
rarefied,  while  a  small  one  draws  in  the  rarefied  by  itself ;  so 
the  large  one  perceives  more.  For  smell  is  better  perceived  when 
it  is  near  than  when  it  is  far  by  reason  of  its  being  more  con¬ 
densed,  while  when  dispersed  it  is  weak.  But,  roughly  speaking, 
large  animals  do  not  perceive  a  rarefied  smell,  nor  small  animals 
a  condensed  one.3 

This  theory  marks  in  some  respects  an  advance  on  that 
of  Empedokles.  It  was  a  happy  thought  of  Anaxagoras  to 
make  sensation  depend  upon  irritation  by  opposites,  and  to 
connect  it  with  pain.  Many  modern  theories  are  based  upon 
a  similar  idea. 

That  Anaxagoras  regarded  the  senses  as  incapable  of 
reaching  the  truth  of  things  is  shown  by  the  fragments 
preserved  by  Sextus.  But  we  must  not,  for  all  that,  turn 
him  into  a  sceptic.  The  saying  preserved  by  Aristotle  4 
that  "  things  are  as  we  suppose  them  to  be/'  has  no  value 
at  all  as  evidence.  It  comes  from  some  collection  of  apoph¬ 
thegms,  not  from  the  treatise  of  Anaxagoras  himself  ;  and 
it  had,  as  likely  as  not,  a  moral  application.  He  did  say 
(fr.  21)  that  the  weakness  of  our  senses  prevents  our 
discerning  the  truth,”  but  this  meant  simply  that  we  do 
not  see  the  “  portions  ”  of  everything  which  are  in  every- 

1  Beare,  p.  209. 


2  Ibid. 


ANAXAGORAS  OF  KLAZOMENAI 


275 

thing  ;  for  instance,  the  portions  of  black  which  are  in  the 
white.  Our  senses  simply  show  us  the  portions  that  prevail. 
He  also  said  that  the  things  which  are  seen  give  us  the 
power  of  seeing  the  invisible,  which  is  the  very  opposite 
of  scepticism  (fr.  21a). 


CHAPTER  VII 


The 
Pytha¬ 
gorean 
school. 


THE  PYTHAGOREANS 

138.  After  losing  their  supremacy  in  the  Achaian  cities, 
the  Pythagoreans  concentrated  themselves  at  Rhegion  ;  but 
the  school  founded  there  did  not  maintain  itself  for  long, 
and  'only  Archytas  stayed  behind  in  Italy.  Philolaos  and 
Lysis,  the  latter  of  whom  had  escaped  as  a  young  man  from 
the  massacre  of  Kroton,  had  already  found  their  way  to 
Thebes.1  We  know  from  Plato  that  Philolaos  was  there 
towards  the  close  of  the  fifth  century,  and  Lysis  was  after¬ 
wards  the  teacher  of  Epameinondas.2  Some  of  the  Pytha¬ 
goreans,  however,  were  able  to  return  to  Italy  later.  Philo¬ 
laos  certainly  did  so,  and  Plato  implies  that  he  had  left 
Thebes  some  time  before  399  b.c.,  the  year  Sokrates  was  put 
to  death.  In  the  fourth  century,  the  chief  seat  of  the  school 
is  the  Dorian  city  of  Taras,  and  we  find  the  Pythagoreans 
eading  the  opposition  to  Dionysios  of  Syracuse.  It  is  to 
this  period  that  the  activity  of  Archytas  belongs.  He  was 
the  friend  of  Plato,  and  almost  realised  the  ideal  of  the 
philosopher  king.  He  ruled  Taras  for  years,  and  Aristoxenos 
tells  us  that  he  was  never  defeated  in  the  field  of  battle.3 

ThiIrbl  V'  fyth'  251  ■  The  Ornate  authority  for  all  this  is  Timaios 

to  <-  ^ 

Smp“oS°ssl:“  y  ** 

A*  For  Phif  y  *  Wh°haVe  been  dealt  ™th  in  the  preceding  section 

7 : e  7 : “d  for  Arist0- 

The  story  o7  Damon3  Aristoxenos  himself  came  from  Taras, 

time  aDd  PhmtlaS  <told  by  Aristoxenos)  belongs  to  this 


276 


THE  PYTHAGOREANS 


2  77 

He  was  also  the  inventor  of  mathematical  mechanics.  At 
the  same  time,  Pythagoreanism  had  taken  root  in  the  East. 
Lysis  remained  at  Thebes,  where  Simmias  and  Kebes  had 
heard  Philolaos,  while  the  remnant  of  the  Pythagorean  school 
of  Rhegion  settled  at  Phleious.  Aristoxenos  was  personally 
acquainted  with  the  last  generation  of  this  school,  and 
mentioned  by  name  Xenophilos  the  Chalkidian  from  Thrace, 
with  Phanton,  Echekrates,  Diokles,  and  Polymnastos  of 
Phleious.  They  were  all,  he  said,  disciples  of  Philolaos  and 
Eurytos,1  and  we  learn  from  Plato  that  Simmias  and  Kebes 
of  Thebes  and  Echekrates  of  Phleious  were  also  associates  of 
Sokrates.2  Xenophilos  was  the  teacher  of  Aristoxenos,  and 
lived  in  perfect  health  at  Athens  to  the  age  of  a  hundred 
and  five.3 

139.  This  generation  of  the  school  really  belongs,  how¬ 
ever,  to  a  later  period  ;  it  is  with  Philolaos  we  have  now  to 
deal.  The  facts  we  know  about  his  teaching  from  external 
sources  are  few  in  number.  The  doxographers,  indeed, 
ascribe  to  him  an  elaborate  theory  of  the  planetary  system, 
but  Aristotle  never  mentions  his  name  in  connexion  with 
that.  He  gives  it  as  the  theory  of  “  the  Pythagoreans  ”  or 
of  “  some  Pythagoreans.”  4  It  seems  natural  to  suppose, 
however,  that  the  Pythagorean  elements  of  Plato’s  Phaedo 
and  Gorgias  come  mainly  from  Philolaos.  Plato  makes 
Sokrates  express  surprise  that  Simmias  and  Kebes  had  not 
learnt  from  him  why  it  is  unlawful  for  a  man  to  take  his 
life,5  and  it  seems  to  be  implied  that  the  Pythagoreans  at 
Thebes  used  the  word  “  philosopher  ”  in  the  special  sense  of 

1  Diog.  viii.  46  (R.  P.  62). 

2  The  whole  mise  en  scene  of  the  Phaedo  presupposes  this,  and  it  is 
quite  incredible  that  Plato  should  have  misrepresented  the  matter. 
Simmias  and  Kebes  were  a  little  younger  than  Plato  and  he  could  hardly 
have  ventured  to  introduce  them  as  disciples  of  Sokrates  if  they  had  not 
in  fact  been  so.  Xenophon  too  (Mem.  i.  2.  48)  includes  Simmias  and  Kebes 
in  his  list  of  genuine  disciples  of  Sokrates,  and  in  another  place  (iii.  11,  7) 
he  tells  us  that  they  had  been  attracted  from  Thebes  by  Sokrates  and 
never  left  his  side. 

3  See  Aristoxenos  ap.  Val.  Max.  viii.  13,  ext.  3  ;  and  Souidas  s.v. 

4  See  below,  §§  150-152.  6  Plato,  Phaed.  61  d  6. 


Philolaos. 


278 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


a  man  who  is  seeking  to  find  a  way  of  release  from  the  burden 
of  this  life.1  It  is  probable  that  Philolaos  spoke  of  the  body 
(<r&fia)  as  the  tomb  (afjfia)  of  the  soul.2  We  seem  to  be 
justified,  then,  in  holding  that  he  taught  the  old  Pytha¬ 
gorean  religious  doctrine  in  some  form,  and  that  he  laid 
special  stress  on  knowledge  as  a  means  of  release.  That 
is  the  impression  we  get  from  Plato,  who  is  far  the  best 


authority  we  have. 

We  know  further  that  Philolaos  wrote  on  “  numbers  ”  ; 
for  Speusippos  followed  him  in  the  account  he  gave  of  the 
Pythagorean  theories  on  that  subject.3  It  is  probable 
that  he  busied  himself  mainly  with  arithmetic,  and  we  can 


hardly  doubt  that  his  geometry  was  of  the  primitive  type 
described  in  an  earlier  chapter.  Eurytos  was  his  disciple, 
and  we  have  seen  (§  47)  that  his  views  were  still  very  crude. 

We  also  know  now  that  Philolaos  wrote  on  medicine,4 
and  that,  while  apparently  influenced  by  the  theories  of  the 
Sicilian  school,  he  opposed  them  from  the  Pythagorean 
standpoint.  In  particular,  he  said  that  our  bodies  were 
composed  only  of  the  warm,  and  did  not  participate  in  the 

_  1  This  aPP-rs  to  follow  from  the  remark  of  Simmias  in  Phaed.  64  b. 
The  whole  passage  would  be  pointless  if  the  words  tf>(X<W or,  </>tXo<ro<W 
<pi\oao<pui  had  not  in  some  way  become  familiar  to  the  ordinary  Theban 
of  the  fifth  century.  Now  Herakleides  Pontikos  made  Pythagoras  invent 
the  word,  and  expound  it  in  a  conversation  with  Leon,  tyrant  of  Sikyon 
or  Phleious.  Cf.  Diog.  i.  12  (R.  P.  3),  viii.  8  ;  Cic.  Tusc.  v.  3.  8.  Cf.  also 
the  remark  of  Alkidamas  quoted  by  Arist.  Rhet.  B,  23.  1398  b  18,  Q^Bv<nV 

ol  TTpotTrarai  <pi\6ao<poi.  ey bvovro  Kal  eiSaip.6rr]<rev  tj 

2  For  reasons  which  will  appear,  I  do  not  attach  importance  in  this 
connexion  to  Philolaos,  fr.  14  Diels=23  Mullach  (R.  P.  89),  but  it  does 
seem  likely  that  the  p.v6o\oy£>v  Kop.\f/b%  av-fip  of  Gorg.  493  a  5  (R.  P.  89  b) 
is  responsible  for  the  whole  theory  there  given.  He  is  certainly,  in  any 
case,  the  author  of  the  rerp^ros  rrldos,  which  implies  the  same  general 
V167;  OW  he  is  ca!Ied  tc-cur  2txe\6s  ns  i)  ’IraXixds,  which  means  he  was 
an  Italian  ;  for  the  2lKe\6s  res  is  merely  an  allusion  to  the  ZmeXbs  KopMs 
avVp  Tore  rav  par  bp  ?<pa  of  Timokreon.  We  do  not  know  of  any  Italian 
from  whom  Sokrates  could  have  learnt  these  views  except  Philolaos  or  one 
of  his  associates. 

3  See  above.  Chap.  II.  p.  102,  n.  2. 

4  ls  a  good  lustration  of  the  defective  character  of  our  tradition 
(Introd.  p.  26)  that  this  was  quite  unknown  till  the  publication  of  the 
extracts  from  Menon's  Iatrika  contained  in  the  Anonymus  Londinensis. 
bee  Diels  in  Hermes,  xxviii.  pp.  417  sqq. 


THE  PYTHAGOREANS 


279 

cold.  It  was  only  after  birth  that  the  cold  was  introduced 
by  respiration.  The  connexion  of  this  with  the  old  Pytha¬ 
gorean  theory  is  clear.  Just  as  the  Fire  in  the  macrocosm 
draws  in  and  limits  the  cold  dark  breath  which  surrounds 
the  world  (§  53),  so  do  our  bodies  inhale  cold  breath  from 
outside.  Philolaos  made  bile,  blood,  and  phlegm  the  causes 
of  disease  ;  and,  in  accordance  with  this  theory,  he  had  to 
deny  that  the  phlegm  was  cold,  as  the  Sicilian  school  held. 
Its  etymology  proved  it  to  be  warm.  We  shall  see  that  it 
was  probably  this  preoccupation  with  the  medicine  of  the 
Sicilian  school  that  gave  rise  to  some  of  the  most  striking 
developments  of  later  Pythagoreanism. 

140.  Such,  so  far  as  I  can  judge,  was  the  historical 
Philolaos,  though  he  is  usually  represented  in  a  very  different 
light  and  has  even  been  called  a  predecessor  of  Copernicus. 
To  understand  this,  we  must  turn  our  attention  to  the  story 
of  a  literary  conspiracy. 

We  have  seen  that  there  are  one  or  two  references  to 
Philolaos  in  Plato,1  but  these  hardly  suggest  that  he  played 
an  important  part  in  the  development  of  Pythagorean 
science.  The  most  elaborate  account  we  have  of  this  is  put 
by  Plato  into  the  mouth  of  Timaios  the  Lokrian,  of  whom 
we  know  no  more  than  he  has  chosen  to  tell  us.  It  is  clear 
at  least  that  he  is  supposed  to  have  visited  Athens  when 
Sokrates  was  still  in  the  prime  of  life,2  and  that  he  must 
have  been  practically  a  contemporary  of  Philolaos.  It 
hardly  seems  likely  that  Plato  should  have  given  him  the 
credit  of  discoveries  which  were  really  due  to  his  better- 
known  contemporary.  However,  Plato  had  many  enemies 
and  detractors,  and  Aristoxenos  was  one  of  them.  We  know 
he  made  the  extraordinary  statement  that  most  of  the 
Republic  was  to  be  found  in  a  work  by  Protagoras,3  and  he 

1  See  p.  276,  n.  2,  and  p.  278,  n.  2. 

2  This  follows  at  once  from  the  fact  that  he  is  represented  as  conversing 
with  the  elder  Kritias  (p.  203,  n.  3),  who  is  very  aged,  and  with  Hermokrates, 
who  is  quite  young. 

3  Diog.  iii.  37.  For  similar  charges,  cf.  Zeller,  Plato,  p.  429,  n.  7. 


Plato 
and  the 
Pytha¬ 
goreans. 


28o 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


seems  also  to  be  the  original  source  of  the  story  that  Plato 
bought  “  three  Pythagorean  books  ”  from  Philolaos  and 
copied  the  Timaeus  out  of  them.  According  to  this,  the 
“  three  books  ”  had  come  into  the  possession  of  Philolaos  ; 
and,  as  he  had  fallen  into  great  poverty,  Dion  was  able  to 
buy  them  from  him,  or  from  his  relatives,  at  Plato’s  request, 
for  a  hundred  minae.1  It  is  certain,  at  any  rate,  that  this 
story  was  already  current  in  the  third  century ;  for  the 
sillographer  Timon  of  Phleious  addresses  Plato  thus  :  “  And 
of  thee  too,  Plato,  did  the  desire  of  discipleship  lay  hold. 
For  many  pieces  of  silver  thou  didst  get  in  exchange  a  small 
book,  and  starting  from  it  didst  learn  to  write  Timaeus.”  2 
Hermippos,  the  pupil  of  Kallimachos,  said  that  “  some 
writer  said  Plato  himself  bought  the  books  from  the 
relatives  of  Philolaos  for  forty  Alexandrian  minae  and 
copied  the  Timaeus  out  of  it;  while  Satyros,  the  Arist- 
archean,  says  he  got  it  through  Dion  for  a  hundred  minae? 
There  is  no  suggestion  in  any  of  these  accounts  that  the  book 
was  by  Philolaos  himself;  they  imply  rather  that  what 
Plato  bought  was  either  a  book  by  Pythagoras,  or  at  any 
rate  authentic  notes  of  his  teaching,  which  had  come  into 
the  hands  of  Philolaos.  In  later  times,  it  was  generally 
supposed  that  the  forgery  entitled  The  Soul  of  the  World, 
which  goes  by  the  name  of  Timaios  the  Lokrian,  was  meant ; 4 
but  it  has  now  been  proved  that  this  cannot  have  existed 
earlier  than  the  first  century  a.d.  Moreover,  it  is  plain  that 
it  is  based  on  Plato  s  Timaeus  itself,  and  that  it  was  written 
in  order  to  bolster  up  the  story  of  Plato’s  plagiarism.  It 
does  not,  however,  fulfil  the  most  important  requirement, 
that  of  being  in  three  books,  which  is  always  an  essential 
feature  of  that  story.8 


1  Iambi.  V.  Pyth.  199.  Diels  is  clearly  right  in  ascribing  the  story  to 
Anstoxenos  (Arch.  iii.  p.  461,  n.  26). 

*  Timon,  fr.  54  (Diels),  ap.  Gell.  iii.  17  (R.  p.  60  a). 

3  For  Hermippos  and  Satyros,  see  Diog.  iii.  9  ;  viii.  84,  85. 

4  So  Iambi,  in  Nicom.  p.  105,  n  ;  Proclus,  in  Tim.  p.  i,  Diehl. 

.  ™  eP^°6^  TPia  (Iambi.  V.  Pyth.  199),  ra  StaB^ra 

rpia  pipMa  (Diog.  vm.  15). 


THE  PYTHAGOREANS 


281 


Not  one  of  the  writers  just  mentioned  professes  to  have 
seen  these  famous  “  three  books  ;  1  but  at  a  later  date 
there  were  at  least  two  works  which  claimed  to  represent 
them.  Diels  has  shown  how  a  treatise  in  three  sections, 
entitled  n cuhevTucov,  7 roXiTi/cov,  (jivaiKov,  was  composed  in 
the  Ionic  dialect  and  attributed  to  Pythagoras.  It  was 
largely  based  on  the  TlvOdyopucai  airo^ao-ea  of  Aristoxenos, 
but  its  date  is  uncertain.2  In  the  first  century  b.c., 
Demetrios  Magnes  professes  to  quote  the  opening  words 
of  the  work  published  by  Philolaos.3  These,  however, 
are  in  Doric.  Demetrios  does  not  actually  say  this 
work  was  written  by  Philolaos  himself,  though  it  is 
no  doubt  the  same  from  which  a  number  of  extracts 
are  preserved  under  his  name  in  Stobaios  and  later 
writers.  If  it  professed  to  be  by  Philolaos,  that  was 
not  quite  in  accordance  with  the  original  story  ;  but  it 
is  easy  to  see  how  his  name  may  have  become  attached 
to  it.  We  are  told  that  the  other  book  which  passed  under 
the  name  of  Pythagoras  was  really  by  Lysis.4  Boeckh  has 
shown  that  the  work  ascribed  to  Philolaos  probably  con¬ 
sisted  of  three  books  also,  and  Proclus  referred  to  it  as  the 
Bakchai,5  a  fanciful  Alexandrian  title  which  recalls  the 
Muses  ’  of  Herodotos.  Two  of  the  extracts  in  Stobaios 
bear  it.  It  must  surely  be  confessed  that  the  whole  story 
is  very  suspicious. 

141.  Boeckh  argued  that  all  the  fragments  preserved  The 
under  the  name  of  Philolaos  were  genuine  ;  but  no  one  will  mentfot 
now  go  so  far  as  that.  The  lengthy  extract  on  the  soul  is  philo!aos-” 
given  up  even  by  those  who  maintain  the  genuineness  of  the 

1  As  Bywater  said  (/.  Phil.  i.  p.  29),  the  history  of  this  work  "reads 
like  the  history,  not  so  much  of  a  book,  as  of  a  literary  ignis  faluus  floating 
before  the  minds  of  imaginative  writers." 

2  Diels,  "  Ein  gefalschtes  Pythagorasbuch  "  (Arch.  iii.  pp.  451  sqq.). 

Diog.  viii.  85  (R.  P.  63  b).  Diels  reads  trpCjTov  irSovvaL  t&v  IlvOa- 

yopLK&v  </3t/3Ata  /cat  iniypd\pai  Ilf  ply  <f ‘6aeias. 

4  Diog.  viii.  7. 

6  Proclus,  in-  Eucl.  p.  22,  15  (Friedlein).  Cf.  Boeckh,  Philolaos,  pp. 

36  sqq.  Boeckh  refers  to  a  sculptured  group  of  three  Bakchai,  whom  he 
supposes  to  be  Ino,  Agaue,  and  Autonoe. 


282 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


rest.1  It  cannot  be  said  that  this  position  is  plausible. 
Boeckh  saw  there  was  no  ground  for  supposing  that  there 
ever  was  more  than  a  single  work,  and  he  drew  the  conclu¬ 
sion  that  we  must  accept  all  the  remains  as  genuine  or 
reject  all  as  spurious.2  As,  however,  many  scholars 
still  maintain  the  genuineness  of  most  of  the  fragments, 
we  cannot  ignore  them  altogether.  Arguments  based  on 
their  doctrine  would,  it  is  true,  present  the  appearance 
of  a  vicious  circle  at  this  stage,  but  there  are  two  serious 

objections  to  the  fragments,  which  may  be  mentioned  at 
once. 

In  the  first  place,  we  must  ask  whether  it  is  likely  that 
Philolaos  should  have  written  in  Doric  ?  Ionic  was  the 
dialect  of  science  and  philosophy  till  the  time  of  the  Pelo¬ 
ponnesian  War,  and  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  the  early 
Pythagoreans  used  any  other.3  Pythagoras  was  himself  an 
Ionian,  and  it  is  not  likely  that  in  his  time  the  Achaian 
states  in  which  he  founded  his  Order  had  adopted  the  Dorian 
dialect.  Alkmaion  of  Kroton  seems  to  have  written  in 
Ionic.5  Diels  says  that  Philolaos  and  then  Archytas  were 
the  first  Pythagoreans  to  use  the  dialect  of  their  homes  ;  6 
but  Philolaos  can  hardly  be  said  to  have  had  a  home,  and  it 
is  hard  to  see  why  an  Achaian  refugee  at  Thebes  should 


1  "fhe  passage  is  given  in  R.  P.  68.  For  a  full  discussion  of  this  and 
pA  , ther  fragments,  see  Bywater,  “  On  the  Fragments  attributed  to 
Philolaus  the  Pythagorean  "  (/.  Phil.  i.  pp.  2i  sqq.). 

*B°7kh’  ?hhil°!a0S’  38‘  Diels  (Vors-  P-  246)  distinguishes  the 
Bakchai  from  the  three  books  Ilepl  os  [ib.  P.  239).  As,  however  he 

iaf>the  IattCr  With  the  "  three  b0°ks  ”  bouSht  from  Philolaos,  and 
regards  it  as  genuine,  this  does  not  seriously  affect  the  argument 
3  See  Diels  in  Arch.  iii.  pp.  460  sqq. 

Invkrift**  Afaian  dialect’  see  °'  Hoffmann  in  Collitz  and  Bechtel,  Dialekt- 

states  mav  Z  '  PfI5I'  How  slowly  Doric  penetrated  mto  the  Chalkidian 
states  may  be  seen  from  the  mixed  dialect  of  the  inscription  of  Mikythos 
of  Rhegion  (. Dial.-Inschr .  iii.  2,  p.  498),  which  is  later  than  468-67  b  c 

tenaceiousnofrhafe°n  ^SUpP°Se  th,at  the  Achaian  diaJect  of  Kroton  was  less 
acious  of  nfe  We  can  see  from  Herodotos  that  there  was  a  strong 
prejudice  against  the  Dorians  there.  ^ 

/fr  ;;r::rAu-ty  fragmfnts.con*ain  0ne  Doric  (or  Achaian  ?)  form,  tXovn 
'  '  ^  ,  .  ’|naiA°n,  Ca  S  hlmself  KpoTwvibrys,  which  is  very  significant;  for 

K-poTajvMTas  is  the  Achaian  as  well  as  the  Doric  form.  3  A^h.  m.  p.  460. 


THE  PYTHAGOREANS  283 

write  in  Doric.1  Nor  did  Archytas  write  in  the  Laconian 
dialect  of  Taras,  but  in  what  may  be  called  “  common 
Doric,”  and  he  is  a  generation  later  than  Philolaos,  which 
makes  a  great  difference.  In  the  time  of  Philolaos  and 
later,  Ionic  was  still  used  even  by  the  citizens  of  Dorian 
states  for  scientific  purposes.  The  Syracusan  historian 
Antiochos  wrote  in  Ionic,  and  so  did  the  medical  writers  of 
Dorian  Kos  and  Knidos.  The  forged  work  of  Pythagoras, 
which  some  ascribed  to  Lysis,  was  in  Ionic  ;  and  so  was 
the  book  on  the  Akousmata  attributed  to  Androkydes,2 
which  shows  that,  even  in  Alexandrian  times,  it  was 
believed  that  Ionic  was  the  proper  dialect  for  Pythagorean 
writings. 

In  the  second  place,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  one  of 
the  fragments  refers  to  the  five  regular  solids,  four  of  which 
are  identified  with  the  elements  of  Empedokles.3  Now 
Plato  tells  us  in  the  Republic  that  stereometry  had  not  been 
adequately  investigated  at  the  time  that  dialogue  is  supposed 
to  take  place,4  and  we  have  express  testimony  that  the  five 

Platonic  figures,”  as  they  were  called,  were  discovered  in 
the  Academy.  In  the  Scholia  to  Euclid  we  read  that  the 
Pythagoreans  only  knew  the  cube,  the  pyramid  (tetra¬ 
hedron),  and  the  dodecahedron,  while  the  octahedron  and 

1  He  is  distinctly  called  a  Krotoniate  in  the  extracts  from  Menon’s 
’I arpLKa.  (cf.  Diog.  viii.  84).  It  is  true  that  Aristoxenos  called  him  and 
Eurytos  Tarentines  (Diog.  viii.  46),  but  this  only  means  that  he  settled  at 
Taras  after  leaving  Thebes.  These  variations  are  common  in  the  case  of 
migratory  philosophers.  Eurytos  is  also  called  a  Krotoniate  and  a  Meta- 
pontine  (Iambi.  V.  Pyth.  148,  266).  Cf.  also  p.  330,  n.  1  on  Leukippos, 
and  p.  351,  n.  1  on  Hippon. 

2  For  Androkydes,  see  Diels,  Vors.  p.  281.  As  Diels  points  out  (Arch. 
iii.  p.  461),  even  Lucian  has  sufficient  sense  of  style  to  make  Pythagoras 
speak  Ionic. 

3  Cf.  fr.  12=20  M.  (R.  P.  79),  which  I  read  as  it  stands  in  the  MS.  of 
Stobaios,  but  bracketing  an  obvious  adscript  or  dittography,  Kal  rd  tv 
T<f.  atpalpq.  adap-ara  Trtvre  ivrl  [t a  tv  t( i  atpalptp],  rr vp,  {iStxip  Kal  yd  Kal  drip, 
Kal  6  Tas  a  (pal  pas  PXkcls  Ktp.TTTov .  In  any  case,  we  are  not  justified  in 
reading  ret  pkv  rds  a  (pal  pas  auip-ara  with  Diels,  For  the  identification  of 
the  four  elements  with  four  of  the  regular  solids,  cf.  §  147,  and  for  the 
description  of  the  fifth,  the  dodecahedron,  cf.  §  148. 

4  Plato,  Rep.  528  b. 


284 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


The 

Problem. 


the  icosahedron  were  discovered  by  Theaitetos.1  This  suffi¬ 
ciently  justifies  us  in  regarding  the  “  fragments  of  Philolaos  ” 
with  suspicion,  and  all  the  more  so  as  Aristotle  does  not 
appear  to  have  seen  the  work  from  which  these  fragments 
come.2 

142.  We  must  look,  then,  for  other  evidence.  From 
what  has  been  said,  it  will  be  clear  that  it  is  above  all  from 
Plato  we  can  learn  to  regard  Pythagoreanism  sympatheti- 
cally.  Aristotle  was  out  of  sympathy  with  Pythagorean 
ways  of  thinking,  but  he  took  great  pains  to  understand 
them.  This  was  because  they  played  so  great  a  part  in  the 
philosophy  of  Plato  and  his  successors,  and  he  had  to  make 
the  relation  of  the  two  doctrines  as  clear  as  he  could  to 
himself  and  his  disciples.  What  we  have  to  do,  then,  is 
to  interpret  what  Aristotle  tells  us  in  the  spirit  of  Plato, 
and  then  to  consider  how  the  doctrine  we  thus  arrive  at  is 
related  to  the  systems  which  preceded  it.  It  is  a  delicate 
operation,  no  doubt,  but  it  has  been  made  much  safer  by 
recent  discoveries  in  the  early  history  of  mathematics  and 
medicine. 


1  Heiberg  s  Euclid,  vol.  v.  p.  654,  1,  iy  rofn-ip  t$  fhf3X'up,  Tovrtcm 
TV  ‘7 1  7 paipercu  ra  Xeyipera  II Xaruros  e  <7xfifJ-0.ro,,  &  avrou  pdv  ovk  ecrnv, 
rpla  St  rwv  irpoeipypivuv  e  oxv/jdroi v  ruv  Uvday opduv  icrrtv,  6'  re  Kvpol 
Kai  i]  Tvpaph  Kal  t6  Sudendedpov,  OecuTr/Tov  St  t6  re  dKrdeSpov  Kal  to 
elKocrdeSpov.  It  is  no  objection  to  this  that,  as  Newbold  points  out  (Arch. 
xix.  p.  204),  the  inscription  of  the  dodecahedron  is  more  difficult  than  that 
of  the  octahedron  and  icosahedron.  We  have  no  right  to  reject  the  definite 
testimony  quoted  above  (no  doubt  from  Eudemos)  on  grounds  of  a  priori 
probability.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  there  are  Celtic  and  Etruscan  dodeca- 
hedra  of  considerable  antiquity  in  the  Louvre  and  elsewhere  (G.  Lori  a, 
Scienze  esatte,  p.  39),  and  the  fact  is  significant  in  view  of  the  connexion 
between  Pythagoreanism  and  the  North  which  has  been  suggested. 

2  Philolaos  is  quoted  only  once  in  the  Aristotelian  corpus,  in  Eth.  Eud 
B,  8.  1225  a  33  d\X’  (baircp  <ktXoXaos  e<pr)  Aval  Tivas  Xoyovs  Kpeirrovs  rtp-Giv, 
which  looks  like  an  apophthegm.  His  name  is  not  even  mentioned  any. 
where  else,  and  this  would  be  inconceivable  if  Aristotle  had  ever  seen 
a  work  of  his  which  expounded  the  Pythagorean  system.  He  must  have 
known  the  importance  of  Philolaos  from  Plato's  Phaedo,  and  would  certainly 
have  got  hold  of  his  book  if  it  had  existed.  It  should  be  added  that 
Tannery  held  the  musical  theory  of  our  fragments  to  be  too  advanced  for 
Philolaos.  It  must,  he  argued,  be  later  than  Plato  and  Archytas  (Rev.  de 
Phil,  xxviii.  pp.  233  sqq.).  His  opinion  on  such  a  point  is  naturally  of 
the  greatest  weight. 


THE  PYTHAGOREANS  285 

Zeller  has  cleared  the  ground  by  eliminating  the  Platonic 
elements  which  have  crept  into  later  accounts  of  the  system. 
These  are  of  two  kinds.  First  of  all,  we  have  genuine 
Academic  formulae,  such  as  the  identification  of  the  Limit 
and  the  Unlimited  with  the  One  and  the  Indeterminate 
Dyad  ,  1  and  secondly,  there  is  the  Neoplatonic  doctrine 
which  represents  the  opposition  between  them  as  one 
between  God  and  Matter.2  It  is  not  necessary  to  repeat 
Zeller’s  arguments  here,  as  no  one  will  now  attribute  the 
doctrine  in  that  form  to  the  Pythagoreans. 

This  simplifies  the  problem,  but  it  is  still  very  difficult. 
According  to  Aristotle,  the  Pythagoreans  said  Things 
are  numbers,  though  that  is  not  the  doctrine  of  the 
fragments  of  "  Philolaos.”  According  to  them,  things 
have  number,  which  makes  them  knowable,  while  their 
real  essence  is  something  unknowable.3  We  have  seen 
reason  for  believing  that  Pythagoras  himself  said  Things 
are  numbers  (§  52),  and  there  is  no  doubt  as  to  what 
his  followers  meant  by  the  formula;  for  Aristotle  -  says 
they  used  it  in  a  cosmological  sense.  The  world,  accord¬ 
ing  to  them,  was  made  of  numbers  in  the  same  sense 
as  others  had  said  it  was  made  of  “  four  roots  ”  or 

innumerable  seeds.  It  will  not  do  to  dismiss  this 
as  mysticism.  The  Pythagoreans  of  the  fifth  century 
were  scientific  men,  and  must  have  meant  something  quite 
definite.  We  shall,  no  doubt,  have  to  say  that  they 
used  the  words  Things  are  numbers  in  a  somewhat  non¬ 
natural  sense,  but  there  is  no  difficulty  in  that.  The 
Pythagoreans  had  a  great  veneration  for  the  actual  words 
of  the  Master  (auTo?  e<f>a)  ;  but  such  veneration  is  often 

1  Aristotle  says  distinctly  {Mel.  A,  6.  987  b  25)  that  "  to  set  up  a  dyad 
instead  of  the  unlimited  regarded  as  one,  and  to  make  the  unlimited  consist 
of  the  great  and  small,  is  distinctive  of  Plato.” 

2  Zeller,  p.  369  sqq.  (Eng.  trans.  p.  397  sqq.). 

2  For  the  doctrine  of  “  Philolaos,”  cf.  fr.  r  (R.  P.  64)  ;  and  for  the  un¬ 
knowable  4mi>  TWV  wpayfiiruiv,  see  fr.  3  (R.  P.  67).  It  has  a  suspicious 
resemblance  to  the  later  V\v,  which  Aristotle  would  hardly  have  failed  to 
note.  He  is  always  on  the  look-out  for  anticipations  of  V\v. 


286 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Aristotle 
on  the 
Numbers. 


accompanied  by  a  singular  licence  of  interpretation.  We 
shall  start,  then,  from  what  Aristotle  tells  us  about  the 
numbers. 

143.  In  the  first  place,  Aristotle  is  quite  clear  that 
Pythagoreanism  was  intended  to  be  a  cosmological  system 
like  the  others.  “  Though  the  Pythagoreans,”  he  tells  us, 
“  made  use  of  less  obvious  first  principles  and  elements  than 
the  rest,  seeing  that  they  did  not  derive  them  from  sensible 
objects,  yet  all  their  discussions  and  studies  had  reference  to 
nature  alone.  They  describe  the  origin  of  the  heavens, 
and  they  observe  the  phenomena  of  its  parts,  all  that  happens 
to  it  and  all  it  does.”  1  They  apply  their  first  principles 
entirely  to  these  things,  “  agreeing  apparently  with  the 
other  natural  philosophers  in  holding  that  reality  was  just 
what  could  be  perceived  by  the  senses,  and  is  contained 
within  the  compass  of  the  heavens,”  2  though  “  the 
first  principles  and  causes  they  made  use  of  were  really 
adequate  to  explain  realities  of  a  higher  order  than  the 
sensible.”  3 

The  doctrine  is  more  precisely  stated  by  Aristotle  to  be 
that  the  elements  of  numbers  are  the  elements  of  things, 
and  that  therefore  things  are  numbers.4  He  is  equally 
positive  that  these  “  things  ”  are  sensible  things,5  and  indeed 
that  they  are  bodies/*  the  bodies  of  which  the  world  is  con- 

1  Arist.  Met.  A,  8.  989  b  2g  (R.  P.  92  a). 

2  Anst.  Met.  A,  8.  990  a  3,  dpo\oyovi>Tes  rois  dXAocs  <pv<rio\6yois  S in  rd 
y  fly  tout’  iariv  Saov  aiad-prov  dcrrc  /ecu  irepielX-qcpev  0  KaXoupevos  ovpavb s. 

3  Met.  zb.  990  a  5,  rds  S’  atria s  /ecu  rds  dpXa s,  wtnrep  diropev,  Uavas 
Xtyovmv  iwavapijvai.  Kal  eirl  rd  aycorepco  rCiv  dyrcoy,  /ecu  pdXXov  1)  rots  ire  pi 
<pvaem  \6yoi s  apporroiaas. 

*  Met.  A,  5.  986  a  I,  rd  redy  dpidpQv  aroixeia  rwv  flyrcoy  aroixeia  vdvruv 
MXapov  ehat ;  N,  3.  logo  a  22,  elyac  pev  dpiSpobs  iirolr, cray  rd  Sura,  ov 
X(j)pi(TTO\Js  d\\’  if-  apidfxCjv  rd  6vtol. 

6  Met.  M,  6.  1080  b  2,  cos  e/e  rCiv  dpcdpuv  evvirapxbvruv  &vra  rd  alad^rd  ; 
ib.  1080  b  1 7,  SktoSto v  {rov  paeppariKov  dpid/aoD)  rds  aicrdrrrds  oMas  avveardvai 
<pa<rlv. 

*  Met.  M,  8.  1083  b  II,  rd  cridpara  df  dpidpwv  ehai  trvyKelpeva  ;  ib.  b  17, 
iKfV0 ‘  Tbv  dpiBpSv  rd  6vra  Xtyovaiv  rd  yovv  0eu ipr)para  xpoadwrowL  roh 
aup<x<riv  cos  d£  d/cefycoy  flyrcoy  redy  dpidp coy  ;  N,  3.  1090  a  32,  Kara  pivroi  rd 
Troteiy  d£  dpidpdiv  rd  tf/i/cn/cd  adpara,  d/e  pr,  dX6yrcoy  j3dpos  pV8e  KOv^rrjra  (Xovr a 
KovtpSrTjTa  Kal  fSapos . 


THE  PYTHAGOREANS  287 

structed.1  This  construction  of  the  world  out  of  numbers 

was  a  real  process  in  time,  which  the  Pythagoreans  described 
in  detail.2 

Further,  the  numbers  were  intended  to  be  mathematical 
numbers,  though  they  were  not  separated  from  the  things 
of  sense.3  On  the  other  hand,  they  were  not  mere  predicates 
of  something  else,  but  had  an  independent  reality  of  their 
own.  “  They  did  not  hold  that  the  limited  and  the  un¬ 
limited  and  the  one  were  certain  other  substances,  such  as 
fire,  water,  or  anything  else  of  that  sort ;  but  that  the 
unlimited  itself  and  the  one  itself  were  the  reality  of  the 
things  of  which  they  are  predicated,  and  that  is  why  they 
said  that  number  was  the  reality  of  everything.”  4  Accord¬ 
ingly  the  numbers  are,  in  Aristotle's  own  language,  not 
only  the  formal,  but  also  the  material,  cause  of  things.5 

Lastly,  Aristotle  notes  that  the  point  in  which  the 
Pythagoreans  agreed  with  Plato  was  in  giving  numbers  an 
independent  reality  of  their  own  ;  while  Plato  differed  from 
the  Pythagoreans  in  holding  that  this  reality  was  distin¬ 
guishable  from  that  of  sensible  things.6  Let  us  consider 
these  statements  in  detail. 

144.  Aristotle  speaks  of  certain  “  elements  ”  (aroi^eia)  The 
of  numbers,  which  were  also  the  elements  of  things.  That  elements 
is  clearly  the  key  to  the  problem,  if  we  can  discover  what  it  numkers. 
means.  Primarily,  the  "  elements  of  number  ”  are  the  Odd 
and  the  Even,  but  that  does  not  seem  to  help  us  much.  We 
find,  however,  that  the  Odd  and  Even  were  identified  with 
the  Limit  and  the  Unlimited,  which  we  have  seen  reason  to 
regard  as  the  original  principles  of  the  Pythagorean  cosmo- 

1  Met.  A,  5.  986  a  2,  rbv  o\ov  odpavbv  appovlav  dvc u  Kai  dpidpAv)  A,  8. 

990  a  21,  rbv  dpidpbv  tovtov  oS  auveoTpKtv  6  Kdcrpos;  M,  6.  1080  b  18 ,’rbv 
-yap  oXov  ovpavbv  Karaaicevd^ovaiv  dpidpwv ;  De  caelo,  T,  I.  300  a  15,  T’oh 
dpiO/Mv  ffwurr&ai  rbv  ovpavbv  •  (vtoi  yap  rfp  <pbaiv  <f£  dpidpUbv  avvcardoiv 
(bairep  tlov  TlvQu  /opelojv  tlv{s, 

2  Met.  N,  3.  1091  a  18,  Koapoiroiovai  Kai  <pv<riKu>s  ^oiiXovrai  \tyav. 

3  Met.  M,  6.  1080  b  16  ;  N,  3.  1090  a  20. 

4  Arist.  Met.  A,  5.  987  a  15.  6  Met.  ib.  986  a  15  (R.  p,  66). 

8  Met.  A,  6.  987  b  27,  0  ptv  (ri X&tuv)  rods  dpiOpous  irapd  ra  alaOijrd, 
oi  S’  (oi  Hvdaybpeioi)  dpidpobs  elval  <pacnv  at ha  rd  a iad-qra. 


288 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


logy  (§  53).  Aristotle  tells  us  that  it  is  the  Even  which  gives 
things  their  unlimited  character  when  it  is  contained  in 
them  and  limited  by  the  Odd,1  and  the  commentators  are 
at  one  in  understanding  this  to  mean  that  the  Even  is  in 
some  way  the  cause  of  infinite  divisibility.  They  get  into 
difficulties,  however,  when  they  try  to  show  how  this  can 
be.  Simplicius  has  preserved  an  explanation,  in  all  proba¬ 
bility  Alexander’s,  to  the  effect  that  they  called  the  even 
number  unlimited  “  because  every  even  is  divided  into 
equal  parts,  and  what  is  divided  into  equal  parts  is  unlimited 
in  respect  of  bipartition  ;  for  division  into  equals  and  halves 
goes  on  ad  infinitum.  But,  when  the  odd  is  added,  it  limits 
it ;  for  it  prevents  its  division  into  equal  parts.”  2  Now  it 
is  plain  that  we  must  not  impute  to  the  Pythagoreans  the 
view  that  even  numbers  can  be  halved  indefinitely.  They 
must  have  known  that  the  even  numbers  6  and  10  can  only 
be  halved  once.  The  explanation  is  rather  to  be  found  in  a 
fragment  of  Aristoxenos,  where  we  read  that  “  even  numbers 
are  those  which  are  divided  into  equal  parts,  while  odd 
numbers  are  divided  into  unequal  parts  and  have  a  middle 
term.”  3  This  is  still  further  elucidated  by  a  passage  which  is 
quoted  in  Stobaios  and  ultimately  goes  back  to  Poseidonios. 
It  runs  :  “  When  the  odd  is  divided  into  two  equal  parts, 
a  unit  is  left  over  in  the  middle  ;  but  when  the  even  is  so 
divided,  an  empty  field  is  left,  without  a  master  and  without 
a  number,  showing  that  it  is  defective  and  incomplete.”  4 

1  Met.  A,  5.  986  a  17  (R.  P.  66)  ;  Phys.  T,  4.  203  a  10  (R.  P.  66  a). 

2  Simpl.  Phys.  p.  455,  20  (R.  P.  66  a).  I  owe  the  passages  which  I 
have  used  in  illustration  of  this  subject  to  W.  A.  Heidel,  “  IRpas  and  direipov 
in  the  Pythagorean  Philosophy”  (Arch.  xiv.  pp.  384  sqq.).  The  general 
principle  of  my  interpretation  is  the  same  as  his,  though  I  think  that, 
by  bringing  the  passage  into  connexion  with  the  numerical  figures,  I  have 
avoided  the  necessity  of  regarding  the  words  -r,  yhp  els  taa  Kai  , )plaV’ Scalpeacs 
kr  direipov  as  "  an  attempted  elucidation  added  by  Simplicius.” 

*  Aristoxenos,  fr.  81,  ap.  Stob.  i.  p.  20,  1,  iK  rQv  'A pcaro^kvov  II epl 
apidnTjTiicrjs.  .  .  rwv  Sk  dpidp&v  Aprio  1  pip  elaiv  0 1  els  taa  8iaipo8pe voi,  irepiaaoi 
Sk  ol  els  Avtaa  Kai  pkaov  kyovres. 

i  [Plut.]  ap.  Stob.  i.  p.  22,  19,  Kai  pjjv  els  860  81a.1povp.kvwv  taa  tov  pkv 
irepiaaou  povas  kv  pkap  ireplean  rov  8k  dprlov  Kevrj  Xelnerai  opa  /cat  adkaworos 
Kal  dvdpedpos,  tits  av  kvSeous  Kai  areXoOs  6vtos. 


THE  PYTHAGOREANS 


289 

Again,  Plutarch  says  :  “  In  the  division  of  numbers,  the 
even,  when  parted  in  any  direction,  leaves  as  it  were 
within  itself  ...  a  field ;  but,  when  the  same  thing  is 
done  to  the  odd,  there  is  always  a  middle  left  over  from 
the  division.”  1  It  is  clear  that  all  these  passages  refer 
to  the  same  thing,  and  that  can  hardly  be  anything  else 
than  the  “  terms  ”  or  dots  with  which  we  are  already 
familiar  (§  47).  The  division  must  fall  between  these; 
for,  if  it  meets  with  an  indivisible  unit,  it  is  at  once 
arrested. 

145.  Now  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  by  his  Unlimited 
Pythagoras  meant  something  spatially  extended  ;  for  he 
identified  it  with  air,  night,  or  the  void.  We  are  prepared, 
then,  to  find  that  his  followers  also  thought  of  the  Unlimited 
as  extended.  Aristotle  certainly  regarded  it  so.  He  argues 
that,  if  the  Unlimited  is  itself  a  reality,  and  not  merely  the 
predicate  of  some  other  reality,  then  every  part  of  it  must 
be  unlimited  too,  just  as  every  part  of  air  is  air.2  The  same 
thing  is  implied  in  his  statement  that  the  Pythagorean 
Unlimited  was  outside  the  heavens.3  Further  than  this,  it 
is  not  safe  to  go.  Philolaos  and  his  followers  cannot  have 
regarded  the  Unlimited  as  Air  ;  for,  as  we  shall  see,  they 
adopted  the  theory  of  Empedokles  as  to  that  “  element,” 
and  accounted  for  it  otherwise.  One  of  them,  Xouthos, 
argued  that  rarefaction  and  condensation  implied  the  void  ; 
without  it  the  universe  would  overflow.4  We  do  not  know, 
however,  whether  he  was  earlier  than  the  Atomists  or  not. 

1  Plut.  De  E  apud  Delphos,  388  a,  rals  ydp  els  l era  ropais  rOiv  apiOpQv, 

6  pkv  &prios  TrdvTTj  SiXardpevos  viroXebrei  Tiva  Scktik^v  dpx^v  olov  iv  eavrtp 
Kal  Pav>  *v  TV  Trtp<-TTip  Tavrb  iradbvTi  pecrov  del  ireplecm  rps  vep-f/aeu is 
ybvipov.  The  words  which  I  have  omitted  in  translating  refer  to  the 
further  identification  of  Odd  and  Even  with  Male  and  Female.  The 
passages  quoted  by  Heidel  might  be  added  to.  Cf.,  for  instance,  what 
Nikomachos  says  (p.  13,  10,  Hoche),  £<rrt  oe  Apnov  pev  6  olov  re  els  5 60 
(<ra  8iaipe5pvai  povdSos  piaov  pr)  irapepm-rTTovaps,  irepLTrbv  S8  to  pp  Svvdpevov 
els  56a  taa  pepurdpvai  5i&  rpv  -rrpoeipppevpv  rrjs  povdSos  peacrelav.  He  significantly 
adds  that  this  definition  is  4k  rps  SppuiSovs  oTroX^peois. 

2  Arist.  Phys.  F,  4.  204  a  20  sqq.,  especially  a  26,  aXXa  ppv  wcrirep  alpos 
dpp  pbpos,  ovtoi  Kal  direipov  airelpov,  el  ye  ovola  earl  Kal  apxv. 

3  See  Chap.  II.  §  53.  4  Ar.  Phys.  A,  9.  216  b  25,  Kvpavel  rb  ti\ov. 

19 


The 

numbers 

spatial. 


The 

numbers 
as  magni¬ 
tudes. 


290  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


It  is  enough  to  say  that  the  Pythagoreans  meant  by  the 
Unlimited  the  res  extensa. 

As  the  Unlimited  is  spatial,  the  Limit  must  be  spatial 
too,  and  we  should  expect  to  find  that  the  point,  the  fine, 
and  the  surface  were  regarded  as  forms  of  the  Limit.  That 
was  the  later  doctrine  ;  but  the  characteristic  feature  of 
Pythagoreanism  is  just  that  the  point  was  not  regarded  as 
a  limit,  but  as  the  first  product  of  the  Limit  and  the  Un¬ 
limited,  and  was  identified  with  the  arithmetical  unit 
instead  of  with  zero.  According  to  this  view,  then,  the 
point  has  one  dimension,  the  fine  two,  the  surface  three,  and 
the  solid  four.1  In  other  words,  the  Pythagorean  points 
have  magnitude,  their  lines  breadth,  and  their  surfaces 
thickness.  The  whole  theory,  in  short,  turns  on  the  defini¬ 
tion  of  the  point  as  a  unit  “  having  position  ”  or a?  ekaiv 
exovaa) . 2  1 1  was  out  of  such  elements  that  it  seemed  possible 
to  construct  a  world. 

146.  This  way  of  regarding  the  point,  the  line,  and  the 
surface  is  closely  bound  up  with  the  practice  of  representing 
numbers  by  dots  arranged  in  symmetrical  patterns,  which 
we  have  seen  reason  for  attributing  to  the  Pythagoreans 
(§  47)-  Geometry  had  already  made  considerable  advances, 
but  the  old  view  of  quantity  as  a  sum  of  units  had  not  been 
revised,  and  so  the  point  was  identified  with  1  instead  of 
with  o.  That  is  the  answer  to  Zeller's  contention  that  to 
regard  the  Pythagorean  numbers  as  spatial  is  to  ignore  the 
fact  that  the  doctrine  was  originally  arithmetical  rather  than 
geometrical.  Our  interpretation  takes  full  account  of  that 


Cf.  Speusippos  m  the  extract  preserved  in  the  Theologumena  arith- 
metica,  p.  61  (Diels,  Vors.  32  A  13),  rd  pty  yap  d  OTiypAf,  rd  St  $  ypappi,,  rd  St 
y  rplywvov,  rd  St  5  irvpa/ils.  We  know  that  Speusippos  is  following 
Philolaos  here.  Arist.  Met.  Z,  ix.  1036  b  12,  Kal  Avdyoven  ttAvto.  els 
rous  dpidpovs,  Kal  ypap.fj.ijs  top  \byov  rbv  rCov  Sijo  elval  <f>aaiv  The  matter  is 
clearly  put  by  Proclus  in  Eucl.  I.  p.  97,  i9,  Td  &  aypelov  dvaboyov  riOePraj 
fLovah,  Tr/p  St  ypap.fj.nv  SvdSi,  TTfV  St  en<pdvecav  ry  rpcASi  Kal  rd  arepebv  rij 
rerpaSi.  Kalroi  ye  ws  Sjaararb.  Xap^Avovres  povaStKyp  ptv  evpnaopev  Eqp  ypapaiv 
SvaSiK^v  St  tt]v  irntpAveiav,  TpiaSiKov  St  rd  crrepeov. 

2  The  identification  of  the  point  with  the  unit  is  referred  to  bv  Aristotle 
Phys.  E,  3.  227  a  27. 


THE  PYTHAGOREANS 


291 


fact,  and  indeed  makes  the  peculiarities  of  the  whole  system 
depend  on  it.  Aristotle  is  very  decided  as  to  the  Pythagorean 
points  having  magnitude.  “  They  construct  the  whole  world 
out  of  numbers,”  he  tells  us,  “  but  they  suppose  the  units 
have  magnitude.  As  to  how  the  first  unit  with  magnitude 
arose,  they  appear  to  be  at  a  loss.”  1  Zeller  holds  that  this 
is  onty  an  inference  of  Aristotle’s,2  and  he  is  probably  right 
in  this  sense,  that  the  Pythagoreans  never  felt  the  need  of 
saying  in  so  many  words  that  points  had  magnitude.  It 
does  seem  probable,  however,  that  they  called  them 

v  3 
OJfCOl . 

Zeller,  moreover,  allows,  and  indeed  insists,  that  in  the 
Pythagorean  cosmology  the  numbers  were  spatial,  but  he 
raises  difficulties  about  the  other  parts  of  the  system.  There 
are  other  things,  such  as  the  Soul  and  Justice  and  Oppor¬ 
tunity,  which  are  said  to  be  numbers,  and  which  cannot  be 
regarded  as  constructed  of  points,  lines,  and  surfaces.4 
Now  it  appears  to  me  that  this  is  just  the  meaning  of  a  pas¬ 
sage  in  which  Aristotle  criticises  the  Pythagoreans.  They 
held,  he  says,  that  in  one  part  of  the  world  Opinion  prevailed, 
while  a  little  above  it  or  below  it  were  to  be  found  Injustice 
or  Separation  of  Mixture,  each  of  which  was,  according  to 
them,  a  number.  But  in  the  very  same  regions  of  the 
heavens  were  to  be  found  things  having  magnitude  which 
were  also  numbers.  How  can  this  be,  since  Justice  has  no 
magnitude  ?  5  This  means  surely  that  the  Pythagoreans 

1  Arist.  Met.  M,  6.  1080  b  18  sqq.,  1083  b  8  sqq.  ;  De  caelo,  T,  1.  300  a  16 
(R.  P.  76  a).  2  Zeller,  p.  381. 

3  Zeno  in  his  fourth  argument  about  motion,  which,  we  shall  see  (§  163), 
was  directed  against  the  Pythagoreans,  used  Sytcoi  for  points.  Aetios,  i.  3, 
19  (R.  P.  76  b),  says  that  Ekphantos  of  Syracuse  was  the  first  of  the 
Pythagoreans  to  say  that  their  units  were  corporeal.  Cf.  also  the  use  of 
fiy/coi  in  Plato,  Parm.  164  d,  and  Galen,  Hist.  Phil.  18  ( Dox .  p.  610),  'Hpa- 
/cAdS^s  SI  0  Hovnicbs  kclI  ’  Acnc\riin6,5rts  6  BiduvSs  dvAp/xovs  6jkovs  rds  apxds  viro- 
rldevrcu  tQ>v  HXwv.  4  Zeller,  p.  3®1- 

6  Arist.  Met.  A,  8.  990  a  22  (R.  P.  81  e).  I  read  and  interpret  thus  : 
“  For,  seeing  that,  according  to  them,  Opinion  and  Opportunity  are  in 
a  given  part  of  the  world,  and  a  little  above  or  below  them  Injustice  and 
Separation  and  Mixture, — in  proof  of  which  they  allege  that  each  of  these 
is  a  number, — and  seeing  that  it  is  also  the  case  (reading  <rvp.pal vV  with 


292 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 

had  failed  to  give  any  clear  account  of  the  relation  between 
these  more  or  less  fanciful  analogies  and  their  geometrical 
construction  of  the  universe. 

numbers  147-  We  seem  to  see  further  that  what  distinguished 

“emcS,.  pytha8°reani™  of  this  period  from  its  earlier  form  was 

that  it  sought  to  adapt  itself  to  the  new  theory  of  “  elements.” 
This  is  what  makes  it  necessary  to  take  up  the  consideration 
of  the  system  once  more  in  connexion  with  the  pluralists. 
When  the  Pythagoreans  returned  to  Southern  Italy  they 
would  find  views  prevalent  there  which  demanded  a  partial 
reconstruction  of  their  own  system.  We  do  not  know  that 
Empedokles  founded  a  philosophical  society,  but  there  can 
be  no  doubt  of  his  influence  on  the  medical  school  of  these 
regions  ;  and  we  also  know  now  that  Philolaos  played  a  part 
in  the  history  of  medicine.*  This  gives  us  the  clue  to  what 
ormerly  seemed  obscure.  The  tradition  is  that  the  Pytha¬ 
goreans  explained  the  elements  as  built  up  of  geometrical 
figures,  a  theory  we  can  study  for  ourselves  in  the  more 
developed  form  it  attained  in  Plato's  Timaeus .2  If  thev 
were  to  retain  their  position  as  the  leaders  of  medical 

study  m  Italy,  they  were  bound  to  account  for  the 
elements. 


Bonitz)  that  there  is  already  in  that  Dart  nf  tho  sirror-m  , 

posite  magnitudes  ( i.e .  composed  of  the  Limit  and  the  UnhmitedT  beca°m' 
those  affections  (of  numberl  are  +  zt,  ■  mited),  because 

(seeing  that  they  howThese  two  thm^  th  ^Respective  regions 
number  which  we  are  to  understand  efch  of  thesTth011  Whether  the 

be  is  the  same  as  the  number  in  the  world  (i  e  th  1DgS  ^pimon>  etc)  to 
or  a  different  one."  I  cannot  doubt  tTat  thte  th\C°Smol°gical  ™*ber) 
Wb.d,  are  composed  °rb"S 

and  the  unlimited,  or,  as  Aristotle  here  savs  th^  “  a  ’  the  blmted 

the  odd  and  the  even.  ZeUeT' 0"^'  “LtiflSS .? 
comes  near  this,  but  the  application  is  too  narrow  “““* 

(ir\7?5os)  of  those  bodies  that  is  in  question  w  tit'  •  ^  . *  the  number 

For^other  views  of  the  passage  see  Zeller,  p  '3gx  „  r  magmtude  (f^yeffos). 

from  -  whiS  ^  f  “  *  the  extract 

is  an  anachronism,5  ifthe  which 

than  Empedokles.  In  his  extract  from  th  shows  it  must  be  later 

-  doubtless  tepLrfL^irS'tef™68  ^ 


THE  PYTHAGOREANS 


293 

We  must  not  take  it  for  granted,  however,  that  the 
Pythagorean  construction  of  the  elements  was  exactly 
the  same  as  that  we  find  in  Plato’s  Tiwicieus.  As  we 
have  seen,  there  is  good  reason  for  believing  they 
only  knew  three  of  the  regular  solids,  the  cube,  the 
pyramid  (tetrahedron),  and  the  dodecahedron.1  Now 
Plato  makes  Timaios  start  from  fire  and  earth,2  and 
in  the  construction  of  the  elements  he  proceeds  in 
such  a  way  that  the  octahedron  and  the  icosahedron 
can  easily  be  transformed  into  pyramids,  while  the  cube 
and  the  dodecahedron  cannot.  From  this  it  follows 
that,  while  air  and  water  pass  readily  into  fire,  earth 
cannot  do  so,3  and  the  dodecahedron  is  reserved  for  another 
purpose,  which  we  shall  consider  presently.  This  would 
exactly  suit  the  Pythagorean  system  ;  for  it  would  leave 
room  for  a  dualism  of  the  kind  outlined  in  the  Second  Part 
of  the  poem  of  Parmenides.  We  know  that  Hippasos  made 
Fire  the  first  principle,  and  we  see  from  the  Timaeus  how 
it  would  be  possible  to  represent  air  and  water  as  forms  of 
fire.  The  other  element  is,  however,  earth,  not  air,  as  we 
have  seen  reason  to  believe  that  it  was  in  early  Pytha- 
goreanism.  That  would  be  a  natural  result  of  the  discovery 
of  atmospheric  air  by  Empedokles  and  of  his  general  theory 
of  the  elements.  It  would  also  explain  the  puzzling  fact, 
which  we  had  to  leave  unexplained  above,  that  Aristotle 
identifies  the  two  “  forms  ”  spoken  of  by  Parmenides  with 
Fire  and  Earth.4 

148.  The  most  interesting  point  in  the  theory  is,  however,  The 
the  use  made  of  the  dodecahedron.  It  was  identified,  we  hedron 
are  told,  with  the  “  sphere  of  the  universe,”  or,  as  it  is  put 

1  See  above,  p.  283.  2  Plato,  Tim.  31  b  5. 

3  Plato,  Tim.  54  c  4.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  in  Tim.  48  b  5  Plato 

says  of  the  construction  of  the  elements  ovSel s  ttu >  y^vc&iv  airruv  vy 

which  implies  that  there  is  some  novelty  in  the  theory  as  Timaios  states  it. 

If  we  read  the  passage  in  the  light  of  what  has  been  said  in  §  141,  we  shall 
be  inclined  to  believe  that  Plato  is  making  Timaios  work  out  the  Pytha¬ 
gorean  doctrine  on  the  lines  of  the  discovery  of  Theaitetos. 

4  See  above,  Chap.  IV.  p.  186. 


294  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


in  the  Philolaic  fragment,  with  the  “  hull  of  the  sphere.”  1 
Whatever  we  may  think  of  the  authenticity  of  the  fragments, 
there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  this  is  a  genuine  Pythagorean 
expression,  and  it  must  be  taken  in  close  connexion  with 
the  word  “  keel  ”  applied  to  the  central  fire.2  The  structure 
of  the  world  was  compared  to  the  building  of  a  ship,  an  idea 
of  which  there  are  other  traces.3  The  key  to  what  we  are 
told  of  the  dodecahedron  is  also  given  by  Plato.  In  the 
Phaedo,  which  must  have  been  written  before  the  doctrine 
of  the  regular  solids  was  fully  established,  we  read  that  the 
true  earth,”  if  looked  at  from  above,  is  “  many-coloured 
like  the  balls  that  are  made  of  twelve  pieces  of  leather.”  4 
In  the  Timaeus  the  same  thing  is  referred  to  in  these  words  : 

Further,  as  there  is  still  one  construction  left,  the  fifth, 
God  made  use  of  it  for  the  universe  when  he  painted  it.”  5 
The  point  is  that  the  dodecahedron  approaches  more  nearly 
to  the  sphere  than  any  other  of  the  regular  solids.  The 
twelve  pieces  of  leather  used  to  make  a  ball  would  all  be 
regular  pentagons  ;  and,  if  the  material  were  not  flexible 


1  Aet.  u-  6*  5  (R-  P.  8o)  ;  “  Philolaos,”  fr.  12  (=20  M.  ;  R.  P  79)  On 
See  Gundermann  in  Rhein.  Mus.  1904,  pp.  I45  sqq.  {n  the 

w^hTr  T  °f  Plat°’S  P0mCUS •  the  WOrld  13  4ardtd  »  a  ship,  of 

Sust  C  ^  The  ^  d) 

s  ** *»rt,  w«<re> 

..  ™^“ra  °f  Plato,  Rep.  616  c  3.  As  UXV  generally  means 

f“  shipbuilding  (when  it  does  not  mean  firewood),  I  suggest 
that  we  should  look  in  this  direction  for  an  explanation  of  the  technical  use 
ofjhe  word  in  later  philosophy.  Cf.  Plato,  PhileR  54  c  1, 

Question  '  ™paTl0-€a(>al  whlch  is  part  of  the  answer  to  the 

evdvTWTa  T TV<  7rXl\(>tL  ^  a"roLXelo}v  Si  twv  yaviuv  r'qv 

?  0l'7  eVKafMwh  H  ^ewteapw],  Kal  ry  r epcrdaec  dcrrep  at 

5  5rSrT°‘  a*aipai  KVKXoTeP*  ytyi'erac  Kal  7 repl\yTrTlK6V.  P 

7  j-  m°:.  Vm-  55  c  4-  Neither  this  passage  nor  the  last  can  refer  to  the 
Zodiac,  which  would  be  described  by  a  dodecagon,  not  a  dodecahedron 
hat  rs  imphed  is  the  division  of  the  heavens  into  twelve  pentagonal  field-’ 

■eeN^bSj  '?££L  F°r  ^  hiSt°ry  *  ^ 


THE  PYTHAGOREANS 


295 

like  leather,  we  should  have  a  dodecahedron  instead  of  a 
sphere.  That  proves  that  the  dodecahedron  was  well 
known  before  Theaitetos,  and  we  may  infer  that  it  was 
regarded  as  forming  the  “  timbers  ”  on  which  the  spherical 
hulk  of  the  heavens  was  built. 

The  tradition  confirms  in  an  interesting  way  the  import¬ 
ance  of  the  dodecahedron  in  the  Pythagorean  system. 
According  to  one  account  ,  Hippasos  was  drowned  at  sea  for 
revealing  “  the  sphere  formed  out  of  the  twelve  pentagons.”  1 
The  Pythagorean  construction  of  the  dodecahedron  we 
may  partially  infer  from  the  fact  that  they  adopted  the 
pentagram  or  pentalpha  as  their  symbol.  The  use  of  this 
figure  in  later  magic  is  well  known  ;  and  Paracelsus  still 
employed  it  as  a  symbol  of  health,  which  is  exactly  what  the 
Pythagoreans  called  it.2 

149.  The  view  that  the  soul  is  a  “  harmony,”  or  rather  The  Soul 
an  attunement,  is  intimately  connected  with  the  theory  of  morn-*" 
the  four  elements.  It  cannot  have  belonged  to  the  earliest 
form  of  Pythagoreanism  ;  for,  as  shown  in  Plato’s  Phaedo, 
it  is  quite  inconsistent  with  the  idea  that  the  soul  can  exist 
independently  of  the  body.  It  is  the  very  opposite  of  the 
belief  that  “  any  soul  can  enter  any  body.”  3  On  the  other 
hand,  we  are  told  in  the  Phaedo  that  it  was  accepted  by 
Simmias  and  Kebes,  who  had  heard  Philolaos  at  Thebes,  and 
by  Echekrates  of  Phleious,  who  was  the  disciple  of  Philolaos 
and  Eurytos.4  The  account  of  the  doctrine  given  by  Plato 
is  quite  in  accordance  with  the  view  that  it  was  of  medical 
origin.  Simmias  says  :  “  Our  body  being,  as  it  were,  strung 
and  held  together  by  the  warm  and  the  cold,  the  dry  and  the 

1  Iambi.  V.  Pyth.  247.  Cf.  above,  Chap.  II.  p.  106,  n.  1. 

2  See  Gow,  Short  History  of  Greek  Mathematics,  p.  151,  and  the 
passages  there  referred  to,  adding  Schol.  Luc.  p.  234,  21,  Rabe,  to 
wevTiiypa/j./j.oi’]  on  t6  ip  ttj  avvqOtLa  'Koybp.evov  trovTa\<pa  cnjp.(3o\or  t/p  wpbs  dWijAons 
HvOayopeLuir  av  ay  vwpLcrnK'ov  /cal  rodry  iv  ra  is  iiri<rTo\cus  ixp&VT0-  The 
Pythagoreans  may  quite  well  have  known  the  method  given  by  Euclid 
iv.  11  of  dividing  a  line  in  extreme  and  mean  ratio,  the  so-called  "golden 
section.” 

3  Arist.  De  an.  A,  3.  407  b  20  (R.  P.  86  c). 

4  Plato,  Phaed.  85  e  sqq.  ;  and  for  Echekrates,  ib.  88  d. 


296 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


The 

central 

fire. 


moist,  and  things  of  that  sort,  our  soul  is  a  sort  of  tempera¬ 
ment  and  attunement  of  these,  when  they  are  mingled  with 
one  another  well  and  in  due  proportion.  If,  then,  our  soul 
is  an  attunement,  it  is  clear  that,  when  the  body  has  been 
relaxed  or  strung  up  out  of  measure  by  diseases  and  other 
ills,  the  soul  must  necessarily  perish  at  once.”  1  This  is 
clearly  an' application  of  the  theory  of  Alkmaion  (§  96),  and 
is  in  accordance  with  the  views  of  the  Sicilian  school.  It 
completes  the  evidence  that  the  Pythagoreanism  of  the 
end  of  the  fifth  century  was  an  adaptation  of  the  old  doctrine 
to  the  new  principles  introduced  by  Empedokles. 

It  is  further  to  be  observed  that,  if  the  soul  is  regarded 
as  an  attunement  in  the  Pythagorean  sense,  we  should  expect 
it  to  contain  the  three  intervals  then  recognised,  the  fourth, 
the  fifth  and  the  octave,  and  this  makes  it  extremely 
probable  that  Poseidonios  was  right  in  saying  that  the 
doctrine  of  the  tripartite  soul,  as  we  know  it  from  the 
Republic  of  Plato,  was  really  Pythagorean.  It  is  quite 
inconsistent  with  Plato  s  own  view  of  the  soul,  but  agrees 
admirably  with  that  just  explained.2 

150.  The  planetary  system  which  Aristotle  attributes  to 
the  Pythagoreans  and  Aetios  to  Philolaos  is  sufficiently 
remarkable.3  The  earth  is  no  longer  in  the  middle  of  the 
world ;  its  place  is  taken  by  a  central  fire,  which  is  not  to 


1  Plato,  Phaed.  86  b  7— c  5. 

2  See  J.  L.  Stocks,  Plato  and  the  Tripartite  Soul  ( Mind  N.S.,  No.  94, 
1915.  PP-  207  sqq.).  Plato  himself  points  to  the  connexion’ in  Rep. 
443  d,  5  vwappdaavri 1  rpia  ovra,  ibcnrep  bpov s  rpeis  dppovlas  drexvQs,  redrrp 
re  koI  Awdnp  Kai  piaVs,  Kal  el  d\\a  drra  peratf  rvyXdret  6ura  (i.e.  the 
movable  notes).  Now  there  is  good  ground  for  believing  that  the  state¬ 
ment  of  Aristides  Quintilianus  (ii.  2)  that  the  dupuKov  is  intermediate 
between  the  \oyiK6r  and  the  d\oyov  comes  from  the  musician  Damon  (Deiters, 
De  Anstl^s  Quint,  fontibus,  1870),  the  teacher  of  Perikles  (p.  255,  n.  2),  to 
whom  the  Platonic  Sokrates  refers  as  his  authority  on  musical  matters,  but 
who  must  have  died  when  Plato  was  quite  young.  Moreover,  Poseidonios 
(ap.  Galen,  De  Hipp.  et  Plat.  pp.  425  and  478)  attributed  the  doctrine  of  the 

npartite  soul  to  Pythagoras,  airoD  ph,  rod  Uvdaydpov  avyypdpparos  oiSerds 
ets  Vpas  Scaacpioptrov,  reKpcupdperos  SI  &v  frtot  rCdv  padpTwi,  aired  yeypdd>a<nv. 

,  Folj  the  authontles  see  R-  P-  8i'83-  The  attribution  of  the  theory 
to  Philolaos  is  perhaps  due  to  Poseidonios.  The  “  three  books  ”  were 
doubtless,  in  existence  by  his  time. 


THE  PYTHAGOREANS 


297 

be  identified  with  the  sun.  Round  this  fire  revolve  ten 
bodies.  First  comes  the  Antichthon  or  Counter-earth,  and 
next  the  earth,  which  thus  becomes  one  of  the  planets.  After 
the  earth  comes  the  moon,  then  the  sun,  the  planets,  and 
the  heaven  of  the  fixed  stars.  We  do  not  see  the  central 
fire  and  the  antichthon  because  the  side  of  the  earth  on 
which  we  five  is  always  turned  away  from  them.  This  is  to 
be  explained  by  the  analogy  of  the  moon,  which  always 
presents  the  same  face  to  us,  so  that  men  living  on  the  other 
side  of  it  would  never  see  the  earth.  This  implies,  of  course, 
from  our  point  of  view,  that  these  bodies  rotate  on  their 
axes  in  the  same  time  as  they  revolve  round  the  central 
fire,1  and  that  the  antichthon  revolves  round  the  central  fire 
in  the  same  time  as  the  earth,  so  that  it  is  always  in  opposi¬ 
tion  to  it.2 

It  is  not  easy  to  accept  the  statement  of  Aetios  that  this 
system  was  taught  by  Philolaos.  Aristotle  nowhere  men¬ 
tions  him  in  connexion  with  it,  and  in  the  Phaedo  Sokrates 
gives  a  description  of  the  earth  and  its  position  in  the  world 
which  is  entirely  opposed  to  it,  but  is  accepted  without  demur 
by  Simmias  the  disciple  of  Philolaos.3  It  is  undoubtedly 
a  Pythagorean  theory,  however,  and  marks  a  noticeable 
advance  on  the  Ionian  views  current  at  Athens.  It  is  clear 
too  that  Sokrates  states  it  as  something  of  a  novelty  that  the 
earth  does  not  require  the  support  of  air  or  anything  of  the 
sort  to  keep  it  in  its  place.  Even  Anaxagoras  had  not  been 
able  to  shake  himself  free  of  that  idea,  and  Demokritos  still 

1  Plato  makes  Timaios  attribute  an  axial  rotation  to  the  heavenly  bodies, 
which  must  be  of  this  kind  [Tim.  40  a  7).  The  rotation  of  the  moon  upon 
its  axis  takes  the  same  time  as  its  revolution  round  the  earth ;  but  it  comes 
to  the  same  thing  if  we  say  that  it  does  not  rotate  at  all  relatively  to  its 
orbit,  and  that  is  how  the  Greeks  put  it.  It  would  be  quite  natural  for 
the  Pythagoreans  to  extend  this  to  all  the  heavenly  bodies.  This  led 
ultimately  to  Aristotle’s  view  that  they  were  all  fixed  {£v8e§sp.tva)  in 
corporeal  spheres. 

2  This  seems  more  natural  than  to  suppose  the  earth  and  counter¬ 
earth  to  be  always  in  conjunction.  Cf.  Aet.  iii.  ix,  3,  tt) v  oUovp.ivqv  yijv 
££  ivavrlas  K.tLjxtvr)v  Kal  TTepiepepo^hyv  r§  a vrlydovi. 

3  Plato,  Phaed.  108  e  4  sqq.  Simmias  assents  to  the  geocentric  theory 
in  the  emphatic  words  Kal  6p6us  ye. 


298 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


held  it  along  with  the  theory  of  a  flat  earth.  The  natural 
inference  from  the  Phaedo  would  certainly  be  that  the  theory 
of  a  spherical  earth,  kept  in  the  middle  of  the  world  by 
its  equilibrium,  was  that  of  Philolaos  himself.  If  so,  the 
doctrine  of  the  central  fire  would  belong  to  a  later  generation. 

It  seems  probable  that  the  theory  of  the  earth’s  revolu¬ 
tion  round  the  central  fire  really  originated  in  the  account 
of  the  sun’s  light  given  by  Empedokles.  The  two  things 
are  brought  into  close  connexion  by  Aetios,  who  says  that 
Empedokles  believed  in  two  suns,  while  “  Philolaos  ”  believed 
in  two  or  even  in  three.  His  words  are  obscure,  but  they 
seem  to  justify  us  in  holding  that  Theophrastos  regarded  the 
theories  as  akind  We  saw  that  Empedokles  gave  two 
inconsistent  explanations  of  the  alternation  of  day  and 
night  (§113),  and  it  may  well  have  seemed  that  the  solution 
of  the  difficulty  was  to  make  the  sun  shine  by  reflected  fight 
from  a  central  fire.  Such  a  theory  would,  in  fact,  be  the 
natural  issue  of  recent  discoveries  as  to  the  moon’s  fight 
and  the  cause  of  its  eclipses,  if  these  were  extended  to  the 
sun,  as  they  would  almost  inevitably  be. 

The  central  fire  received  a  number  of  mythological 
names,  such  as  the  “  hearth  of  the  world,”  the  “  house  ”  or 
‘  watch-tower  ”  of  Zeus,  and  “  the  mother  of  the  gods.”  2 
That  was  in  the.  manner  of  the  school,  but  it  must  not  blind 


*Ct\  Vr  13  (  P‘  VL  P-  238'  ”•  3)  compared  with  *.  I2 
.  ,°  *ve*y6ptws  Va\ou5rj  ro,  <JW,  SeXbpeV0V  piv  rod  iv  T$ 

™P  \  T,  aVTa^’  WoOvra  Si  wpit  ^  r6  ^  &<TT( 

Scrroos  vXloVS  yly^Oac,  t6  re  iv  T<?  0,pa^  Kal  t6  ^ 

Tvpoe.Sis  /card  rb  iaoTTpoeeSts  ■  el  p-r,  res  Kal  rplr ov  Xi^ec  rr,v  dird  rod 

coume'aTtat ement^f  Wp6s  ^  This  is  not.  of 

course,  a  statement  of  any  doctrine  held  by  “  Philolaos,”  but  a  rather 

it  i  rettv  cTer  thUth>aS  ^  °ften  find  iD  TheoPhrastos.  Moreover, 
pretty  clear  that  it  is  inaccurately  reported  The  nhrase  j 

ZZm'P  U“d  by  Th“Phr“*»*.  ">»«  surely  meL  the  cental 
win  6  *  TV  0VpaVV  ™PuSe*  must  be  the  same  thing  as  it  verv 

,,  PH-rr7'  f,eem^  that  Aetios  tells  us  himself  (ii.  7.  7>  R.  P.  81)  that 

Achilles  slys11^  ^  "7“  °'T'?  °f  Sublunary  region-  lt  is  true  that 
*  says  r 6  jvpude*  Kal  Stavyh  Xapfi&vovra  tLvudev  M  rod  deolov 

co^deb"Lt.aUth°nty  ^  ^  SUffiCle^  outweigh  £  3S 

Aet.  i.  7,  7  (R.  p.  81).  Proclus  in  Tim.  p.  106,  22  (R.  P.  83  e). 


THE  PYTHAGOREANS 


299 

us  to  the  fact  that  we  are  dealing  with  a  scientific  hypothesis. 
It  was  a  great  thing  to  see  that  the  phenomena  could  best 
be  “  saved  ”  by  a  central  luminary,  and  that  the  earth  must 
therefore  be  a  revolving  sphere  like  the  other  planets.1 
Indeed,  we  are  tempted  to  say  that  the  identification  of  the 
central  fire  with  the  sun  was  a  detail  in  comparison.  It  is 
probable,  at  any  rate,  that  this  theory  started  the  train  of 
thought  which  made  it  possible  for  Aristarchos  of  Samos  to 
reach  the  heliocentric  hypothesis,2  and  it  was  certainly 
Aristotle  s  successful  reassertion  of  the  geocentric  theory 
which  made  it  necessary  for  Copernicus  to  discover  the  truth 
afresh.  We  have  his  own  word  for  it  that  he  started  from 
what  he  had  read  about  the  Pythagoreans.3 

In  the  form  in  which  it  was  now  stated,  however,  the 
theory  raised  almost  as  many  difficulties  as  it  solved,  and  it 
did  not  maintain  itself  for  long.  It  is  clear  from  Aristotle 
that  its  critics  raised  the  objection  that  it  failed  to  “  save  the 
phenomena  inasmuch  as  the  assumed  revolution  of  the 
earth  would  produce  parallaxes  too  great  to  be  negligible, 
and  that  the  Pythagoreans  gave  some  reason  for  the  belief 
that  they  were  negligible.  Aristotle  has  no  clear  account 
of  the  arguments  on  either  side,  but  it  may  be  pointed  out 
that  the  earth  was  probably  supposed  to  be  far  smaller  than 
it  is,  and  there  is  no  reason  why  its  orbit  should  have  been 
thought  to  have  an  appreciably  greater  diameter  than  we 
now  know  the  earth  itself  to  have.4 

1  Aristotle  expresses  this  by  saying  that  the  Pythagoreans  held  tV  .  ■  • 
yijv  tv  tCjv  &<TTpo)v  ofyaav  kvkAcp  ptpopivpv  7 repl  t6  piaov  vukto.  re  Kal  pptpav  iroieTv 
(Be  caelo,  B,  13.  293  a  23). 

2  I  do  not  discuss  here  the  claims  of  Herakleides  to  be  the  real  author 
of  the  heliocentric  hypothesis. 

3  In  a  letter  to  Pope  Paul  III.,  Copernicus  quotes  Plut.  Plac.  iii.  13,  2-3 
(P-  P-  83  a)  and  adds  Inde  igitur  occasionem  nactus,  coepi  et  ego  de  terrae 
mobilitate  cogitare. 

1  C£  Ar.  De  caelo,  B,  13-  293  b  25  b-rrel  yap  ovk  £<ttiv  p  yp  Kivrpov , 
birtyf.L  t6  ppierpalpcov  avrijs  flAov ,  ov&kv  KCoAdecv  olovt cu  t a  <paiv6peva  avp^alveiv 
op-olw  p.T)  KaroiKodcnv  pp.lv  bid  tov'  KevTpou,  &airep  kcLv  el  iid  roO  pJaov  pv  p  yp- 
ovObv  yap  o i' b c  vuv  iroielv  bwidpAov  Tpv  pp^aei av  cnvcyovras  ppas  Sidperpov. 
(Of  course  the  words  t6  ppi<r<paipiov  avrps  HAov  refer  to  Aristotle’s  own 
theory  of  celestial  spheres  ;  he  really  means  the  radius  of  its  orbit.) 


3oo 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


A  truer  view  of  the  earth’s  dimensions  would  naturally 
suggest  that  the  alternation  of  night  and  day  was  due  to 
the  earth’s  rotation  on  its  own  axis,  and  in  that  case  the 
earth  could  once  more  be  regarded  as  in  the  centre.  It  does 
not  appear  that  Aristotle  knew  of  any  one  who  had  held  this 
view,  but  Theophrastos  seems  to  have  attributed  it  to 
Hiketas  and  Ekphantos  of  Syracuse,  of  whom  we  know 
very  little  otherwise.* 1 *  Apparently  they  regarded  the 
heaven  of  the  fixed  stars  as  stationary,  a  thing  Aristotle 
would  almost  have  been  bound  to  mention  if  he  had  ever 
heard  of  it,  since  his  own  system  turns  entirely  on  the  diurnal 
revolution. 

Both  theories,  that  of  the  earth’s  revolution  round  a 
central  fire  and  that  of  its  rotation  on  its  own  axis,  had  the 
effect  of  making  the  revolution  of  the  fixed  stars,  to  which 
the  Pythagoreans  certainly  adhered,  very  difficult  to 
account  for.  They  must  either  be  stationary  or  their 
motion  must  be  something  quite  different  from  the  diurnal 


Now  it  is  inconceivable  that  any  one  should  have  argued  that,  since 
the  geocentric  parallax  is  negligible,  parallax  in  general  is  negligible. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  geocentric  Pythagorean  (the  real  Philolaos  ?),  whose 
views  are  expounded  by  Sokrates  in  the  Phaedo,  appears  to  have  made  a 
special  point  of  saying  that  the  earth  was  wa/iueya  (109  a  9),  and  that  would 
make  the  theory  of  the  central  fire  very  difficult  to  defend.  If  Philolaos 
was  one  of  the  Pythagoreans  who  held  that  the  radius  of  the  moon's  orbit 
is  only  three  times  that  of  the  earth  s  (Plut.  De  an.  procr.  1028  b),  he  cannot 
have  used  the  argument  quoted  by  Aristotle. 

1  Aetl  m‘  I3’  3 * * * * * 9 *  'H P^Xd8Vs  6  Uoptlkos  Kal  T-k^ros  6  llvdayipetos  Ktvovai 

T7]i>  yyv  •  ov  p.r)v  ye  fJ.€Tafia.TLKujs,  aXXa  TpewTiKUS  [1.  (TT/ieirrt/cajs]  rpoxov  SUyv 

ivt)ioviapJ:Vt)v,  air 6  8v<yp.Civ  err’  dvaroXdr  xepl  to  ISiov  aurrjs  Ktvrpov.  Cicero 

attributes  the  same  doctrine  to  Hiketas  (Acad.  pr.  ii.  39),  but  makes  nonsense 

of  it  by  saying  that  he  made  the  sun  and  moon  stationary  as  well  as  the 

fixed  stars.  Tannery  regarded  Hiketas  and  Ekphantos  as  fictitious  person¬ 

ages  from  a  dialogue  of  Herakleides,  but  it  seems  clear  that  Theophrastos 

recognised  their  existence.  It  may  be  added  that  the  idea  of  the  earth’s 
rotation  was  no  novelty.  The  Milesians  probably  (§21)  and  Anaxagoras 
certainly  (p.  269)  held  this  view  of  their  flat  earth.  All  that  was  new  was 
the  application  of  it  to  a  sphere.  If  we  could  be  sure  that  the  geocentric 
Pythagoreans  who  made  the  earth  rotate  placed  the  central  fire  in  the 
interior  of  the  earth,  that  would  prove  them  to  be  later  in  date  than  the 
system  of  “  Philolaos.”  Simplicius  appears  to  say  this  (De  caelo,  p.  512 

9  sqq.),  and  he  may  be  quoting  from  Aristotle’s  lost  work  on  the  Pytha¬ 

goreans.  The  point,  however,  is  doubtful. 


THE  PYTHAGOREANS  30I 

revolution.1  It  was  probably  this  that  led  to  the  abandon- 
ment  of  the  theory. 

In  discussing  the  views  of  those  who  hold  the  earth  to 
be  in  motion,  Aristotle  only  mentions  one  theoryasaltemative 
to  that  of  its  revolution  round  the  central  fire,  and  he  says 
that  it  is  that  of  the  Timaeus.  According  to  this  the  earth 
is  not  one  of  the  planets  but  “  at  the  centre,”  while  at  the 
same  time  it  has  some  kind  of  motion  relatively  to  the  axis 
of  the  universe.2  Now  this  motion  can  hardly  be  an  axial 
rotation,  as  was  held  by  Grote  ; »  for  the  whole  cosmology 
of  the  Timaeus  implies  that  the  alternation  of  day  and  night 
is  due  to  the  diurnal  revolution  of  the  heavens «  The  fact 
that  the  earth  is  referred  to  a  little  later  as  “the  guardian  and 
artificer  of  night  and  day  ”  5  proves  nothing  to  the  contrary, 
since  night  is  in  any  case  the  conical  shadow  of  the  earth 
which  is  thus  the  cause  of  the  alternation  of  day  and  night! 
So  far,  Boeckh  and  his  followers  appear  to  be  in  the  right. 

1  The  various  possibilities  are  enumerated  by  Sir  T.  L  Heath  (Arist 
archus,  p.  103)  Only  two  are  worth  noting.  The  universe  as  a  whole 
might  share  in  the  rotation  of  the  dirXavts,  while  the  sun,  moon  and  planets 
had  independent  revolutions  in  addition  to  that  of  the  universe.  Or  the 
rotation  of  the  dwXavAs  might  be  so  slow  as  to  be  imperceptible,  in  which 
case  its  motion,  “  though  it  is  not  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes,  is  some¬ 
thing  very  like  it”  (Heath,  loc.  cit.). 

„  2  Anst'  De  cael0’  B'  T3-  293  b  5,  ivioi  8b  Kal  KupAvqv  iirl  toD  Kbvrpov  [t> 
77?p]  patrlv  aiiTT]v  tXXeadai  k al  Kiveiadai  irepl  rbv  Sid  Tcavrbs  rerapAvov  irbXov 
Cxyivep  iv  rip  Ti yiypawTai.  The  text  and  interpretation  of  this 
passage  are  guaranteed  by  the  reference  in  the  next  chapter  (296  a  25) 
ol  8’  brrl  rov  pAaov  fibres  tWeadai  Kal  Kireladai  <pa<n  irepl  rbv  xbXor  pAaov. 
All  attempts  to  show  that  this  refers  to  something  else  are  futile 
We  cannot,  therefore,  with  Alexander,  regard  Kal  KivAaBai  as  an  inter¬ 
polation  in  the  first  passage,  even  though  it  is  omitted  in  some  MSS 
there.  The  omission  is  probably  due  to  Alexander’s  authority  More¬ 
over,  when  read  in  its  context,  it  is  quite  clear  that  the  passage  gives 
one  of  two  alternative  theories  of  the  earth’s  motion,  and  that  this 
motion,  like  the  revolution  round  the  central  fire,  is  a  motion  of 
translation  ( tpopd ),  and  not  an  axial  rotation. 

8  Plato's  Doctrine  respecting  the  Rotation  of  the  Earth  (i860). 

4  Plato,  Tim.  39  C  I,  vi>t  pbv  oSv  Tjpbpa  re  ybyovev  ovtoj s  Kal  Slo. 
raura,  y  r?)s  pids  Kal  fpovipuTdr-qs  KVKXyaeuis  treploSoi.  This  refers  to 
the  revolution  of  the  “circle  of  the  Same,”  i.e.  the  equatorial  circle,  and  is 
quite  unambiguous. 

6  Plato,  Tim.  40  c  I  [ yrtv~\  <pv\aKa  Kal  Sijpiovpybv  vvkt8s  re  Kal  yptpas 
iprjxavpaaTo.  On  this  cf.  Heath,  Aristarchus,  p.  178. 


302 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


When,  however,  Boeckh  goes  on  to  argue  that  the  word 
iWo/xe vr]v  in  the  Timaeus  does  not  refer  to  motion  at  all, 
but  that  it  means  “  globed  ”  or  “  packed  ”  round,  it  is  quite 
impossible  for  me  to  follow  him.  Apart  from  all  philo¬ 
logical  considerations,  this  interpretation  makes  nonsense  of 
Aristotle’s  line  of  argument.  He  says  1  that,  if  the  earth 
is  in  motion,  whether  “  outside  the  centre  ”  or  “  at  the 
centre,”  that  cannot  be  a  “  natural  motion  ”  ;  for,  if  it 
were,,  it  would  be  shared  by  every  particle  of  earth,  and  we 
see  that  the  natural  motion  of  every  clod  of  earth  is  "  down,” 
i.e.  towards  the  centre.  He  also  says  that,  if  the  earth  is 
in  motion,  whether  “  outside  the  centre  ”  or  “  at  the  centre, ’’ 
it  must  have  two  motions  like  everything  else  but  the 
"  first  sphere,”  and  therefore  there  would  be  excursions  in 
latitude  (7 rdpoBot)  and  “  turnings  back  ”  ( rpo7ral )  of  the 
fixed  stars,  which  there  are  not.  It  is  clear,  then,  that 
Aristotle  regarded  the  second  theory  of  the  earth’s  move¬ 
ment  as  involving  a  motion  of  translation  equally  with  the 
first,  and  that  he  supposed  it  to  be  the  theory  of  Plato’s 
Timaeus.  It  is  impossible  to  believe  that  he  can  have 
been  mistaken  on  such  a  point.2 

When  we  turn  to  the  passage  in  the  Timaeus  itself,  we 
find  that,  when  the  text  is  correctly  established,  it  completely 
corroborates  Aristotle’s  statement  that  a  motion  of  transla¬ 
tion  is  involved,3  and  that  Boeckh’s  rendering  is  inadmissible 

1  Arist.  De  caelo,  B,  14.  296  a  29  sqq.  The  use  of  the  word  vTro\enrbp.eva 
of  the  apparent  motion  of  the  planets  from  west  to  east  is  an  interesting 
survival  of  the  old  Ionian  view  (p.  70).  The  idea  that  the  earth  must  have 
two  motions,  if  it  has  any,  is  based  on  nothing  more  than  the  analogy  of 
the  planets  (Heath,  Aristarchus,  p.  241). 

2  Aristotle  must  have  been  a  member  of  the  Academy  when  the 
Timaeus  was  published,  and  we  know  that  the  interpretation  of  that  dia¬ 
logue  was  one  of  the  chief  occupations  of  the  Academy  after  Plato’s  death. 
If  he  had  misrepresented  the  doctrine  by  introducing  a  motion  of  transla¬ 
tion,  Alexander  and  Simplicius  would  surely  have  been  able  to  appeal  to 
an  authoritative  protest  by  Krantor  or  another.  The  view  which  Boeckh 
finds  in  the  Timaeus  is  precisely  Aristotle’s  own,  and  it  is  impossible  to 
believe  that  he  could  have  failed  to  recognise  the  fact  or  that  he  should 
have  misrepresented  it  deliberately. 

3  The  best  attested  reading  in  Tim.  is  yijv  dt  rpcxpbv  ut v  rjprrepar , 
IWo/xb vt)v  5(i  t yv  wept  rbv  Sia  wavros  tt6\ov  Tcraplvov .  The  article  tt)v 


THE  PYTHAGOREANS 


303 

on  grammatical  and  lexicological  grounds.* 1  We  have  there¬ 
fore  to  ask  what  motion  of  translation  is  compatible  with  the 
statement  that  the  earth  is  “  at  the  centre/’  and  there  seems 
to  be  nothing  left  but  a  motion  up  and  down  (to  speak  loosely) 
on  the  axis  of  the  universe  itself.  Now  the  only  clearly 
attested  meaning  of  the  rare  word  oWofiat  is  just  that'  of 
motion  to  and  fro,  backwards  and  forwards.2  It  may  be 
added  that  a  motion  of  this  kind  was  familiar  to  the  Pytha¬ 
goreans,  if  we  may  judge  from  the  description  of  the  waters 
in  the  earth  given  by  Sokrates  in  the  Phaedo  on  the  authority 
of  some  unnamed  cosmologist.3 

What  was  this  motion  intended  to  explain  ?  It  is 
impossible  to  be  certain,  but  it  is  clear  that  the  motions  of 
the  circles  of  the  Same  and  the  Other,  i.e.  the  equator  and 
the  ecliptic,  are  inadequate  to  “  save  the  appearances.”  So 
far  as  they  go,  all  the  planets  should  either  move  in  the 

is  in  Par.  A  and  also  in  the  Palatine  excerpts,  and  it  is  difficult  to  suppose 
that  any  one  would  interpolate  it.  On  the  other  hand,  it  might  easily  be 
dropped,  as  its  meaning  is  not  at  once  obvious.  It  is  to  be  explained,  of 
course,  like  rqv  M  dd.vo.Tov  or  Xenophon's  TrpoeXqXvd&ros  .  .  .  rqv  wpds  rd 
<Ppoi'lpca,  and  implies  a  path  of  some  kind,  and  therefore  a  movement  of 
translation. 

1  In  the  first  place,  the  meaning  globatam,  "  packed,”  “  massed  ”  would 
have  to  be  expressed  by  a  perfect  participle  and  not  a  present,  and  we 
find  accordingly  that  Simplicius  is  obliged  to  paraphrase  it  by  the 
perfect  participle,  SeSep^vq  or  SeSeop.qp.evq.  Sir  T.  L.  Heath’s  “  wound  ” 
(Aristarchus,  p.  177)  ought  also  to  be  “  winding.”  In  the  second  place, 
though  Par.  A  has  elXXopdvqv,  the  weight  of  authority  distinctly  favours 
l\\ofj.evVv,  the  reading  of  Aristotle,  Proclus  and  others.  The  verbs  e'CXXw 
(etXXw),  ei\Q  and  tXXw  are  constantly  confused  in  MSS.  It  is  not,  I  think 
possible  to  regard  (XXo,  as  etymologically  connected  with  the  other  verbs! 
It  seems  rather  to  go  with  tXXbs  and  IWaLv to,  which  are  both  used  in 
Hippokrates.  For  its  meaning,  see  below,  n.  2. 

2  Cf.  Soph.  Ant.  340  l\\ofj.tva>v  dpirpoi v  fros  els  tros,  clearly  of  the 
ploughs  going  backwards  and  forwards  in  the  furrows.  Simplicius 
makes  a  point  of  the  fact  that  Apollonios  Rhodios  used  iXXbpevos  in  the 
sense  of  "shut  in,”  "bound,”  elpyopevos  (cf.  Heath,  Aristarchus,  p.  175 
n.6).  That,  however,  cannot  weigh  against  the  probability  that  the  scribes! 
or  even  Apollonios  himself,  merely  fell  into  the  common  confusion.  Unless 
we  can  get  rid  of  the  article  ttjv  and  the  testimony  of  Aristotle,  we  must 
have  a  verb  of  motion. 

3  Cf.  Plato,  Phaed.  1 1 1  e  4,  where  we  are  told  that  there  is  an  aUipa  in 
the  earth,  which  causes  the  waters  to  move  up  and  down  in  Tartaros 
which  is  a  chasm  extending  from  pole  to  pole.  See  my  notes  in  loc. 


304 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


ecliptic  or  remain  at  an  invariable  distance  from  it,  and  this 
is  far  from  being  the  case.  Some  explanation  is  required  of 
their  excursions  in  latitude,  i.e.  their  alternate  approaches 
to  the  ecliptic  and  departures  from  it.  We  have  seen  (p.  63) 
that  Anaximander  already  busied  himself  with  the  “  turnings 
back  ”  of  the  moon.  Moreover,  the  direct  and  retrograde 
movements  of  the  planets  are  clearly  referred  to  in  the 
Timaeus  a  few  lines  below.1  We  are  not  bound  to  show  in 
detail  that  a  motion  of  the  kind  suggested  would  account  for 
these  apparent  irregularities  ;  it  is  enough  if  it  can  be  made 
probable  that  the  fifth -century  Pythagoreans  thought  it 
could.  It  may  have  seemed  worth  while  to  them  to  explain 
the  phenomena  by  a  regular  motion  of  the  earth  rather  than 
by  any  waywardness  in  the  planets  ;  and,  if  so,  they  were  at 
least  on  the  right  track. 

To  avoid  misunderstanding,  I  would  add  that  I  do  not 
suppose  Plato  himself  was  satisfied  with  the  theory  which 
he  thought  it  appropriate  for  a  Pythagorean  of  an  earlier 
generation  to  propound.  The  idea  that  Plato  expounded  his 
own  personal  views  in  a  dialogue  obviously  supposed  to  take 
place  before  he  was  bom,  is  one  which,  to  me  at  least,  is  quite 
incredible.  We  know,  moreover,  from  the  unimpeachable 
authority  of  Theophrastos,  who  was  a  member  of  the  Academy 
in  Plato’s  later  years,  that  he  had  then  abandoned  the 
geocentric  hypothesis,  though  we  have  no  information  as  to 

1  Proclus,  in  his  commentary,  explains  the  irpoxup^a-en  and  iirava- 
KVK\-?i<reis  of  Tim.  20  c  as  equivalent  to  irpoiro8«r/j.ol  and  biroiroSLirfiol. 
In  a  corrigendum  prefixed  to  his  Aristarchus,  Sir  T.  L.  Heath  disputes  this 
interpretation,  and  compares  the  application  of  the  term  £tt(xv(xkvk\ovp£vov 
to  the  planet  Mars  in  Rep.  617  b,  which  he  understands  to  refer  merely  to 
its  “  circular  revolution  in  a  sense  contrary  to  that  of  the  fixed  stars.”  It 
is  to  be  observed,  however,  that  Theon  of  Smyrna  in  quoting  this  passage 
has  the  words  uci\tara  twv  &\\uv  after  4TravaKVK\ov/x6vov,  which  gives 
excellent  sense  if  retrogradation  is  meant.  In  fact  Mars  has  a  greater  arc 
of  retrogradation  than  the  other  planets  (Duhem,  Systime  du  monde,  vol.  i. 
p.  61).  As  I  failed  to  note  this  in  my  text  of  the  Republic,  I  should  like 
to  make  amends  by  giving  two  reasons  for  believing  that  Theon  has  pre¬ 
served  Plato’s  own  words.  In  the  first  place  he  is  apparently  quoting  from 
Derky Hides,  who  first  established  the  text  of  Plato  from  which  ours  is 
derived.  In  the  second  place  p-AXurra  tu>v  &\\uv  is  exactly  fifteen  letters, 
y.  the  normal  length  of  omissions  in  the  Platonic  text. 


THE  PYTHAGOREANS 


305 


what  he  supposed  to  be  in  the  centre  of  our  system.1  It 
seems  clear  too  from  the  Laws  that  he  must  have  attributed 
an  axial  rotation  to  the  earth.2 

151.  The  existence  of  the  antichthon  was  also  a  hypothesis 
intended  to  account  for  the  phenomena  of  eclipses.  In  one 
place,  indeed,  Aristotle  says  the  Pythagoreans  invented  it  in 
order  to  bring  the  number  of  revolving  bodies  up  to  ten  ; 3 
but  that  is  a  mere  sally,  and  Aristotle  really  knew  better. 
In  his  work  on  the  Pythagoreans,  he  said  that  eclipses  of  the 
moon  were  caused  sometimes  by  the  intervention  of  the  earth 
and  sometimes  by  that  of  the  antichthon  ;  and  the  same 
statement  was  made  by  Philip  of  Opous,  a  very  competent 
authority  on  the  matter.4  Indeed,  Aristotle  shows  in  another 
passage  how  the  theory  originated.  He  tells  us  that  some 
thought  there  might  be  a  considerable  number  of  bodies 
revolving  round  the  centre,  though  invisible  to  us  because  of 
the  intervention  of  the  earth,  and  that  they  accounted  in 
this  way  for  there  being  more  eclipses  of  the  moon  than  of 
the  sun.5  This  is  mentioned  in  close  connexion  with  the 
antichthon,  so  Aristotle  clearly  regarded  the  two  hypotheses 
as  of  the  same  nature.  The  history  of  the  theory  seems  to 
be  this.  Anaximenes  had  assumed  the  existence  of  dark 

1  Plut.  Plat,  quaest,  1006  c  (cf.  V.  Numae,  c.  11).  It  is  important  to 
remember  that  Theophrastos  was  a  member  of  the  Academy  in  Plato's 
last  years. 

2  In  the  passage  referred  to  (822  a  4  sqq.)  he  maintains  that  the  planets 
have  a  simple  circular  motion,  and  says  that  this  is  a  view  which  he  had  not 
heard  in  his  youth  nor  long  before.  That  must  imply  the  rotation  of  the 
earth  on  its  axis  in  twenty-four  hours,  since  it  is  a  denial  of  the  Pythagorean 
theory  that  the  planetary  motions  are  composite.  It  does  not  follow  that 
we  must  find  this  view  in  the  Timaeus,  which  only  professes  to  give  the 
opinions  of  a  fifth-century  Pythagorean. 

3  Arist.  Met.  A,  5.  986  a  3  (R.  P.  83  b). 

4  Aet.  ii.  29,  4,  tuv  II 06  ay  ope  low  Tints.  Kara  tt)v  ’  hpi<TTOTt\eiov  laroplav 
Kai  ri]v  4>i\lmrov  too  ’OitovvtIov  airbipaoiv  avTaoyelq.  Kai  avTi<pp&i;ei  Tort 

Trjs  yys,  Tort  St  ttjs  avTixdovos  (tKXelireiv  Tpo  cre\ pv-qv). 

5  Arist.  De  caelo,  B,  13.  293  b  21,  ivlois  St  Sokol  Kai  Tr\du>  oupaTa 
ToiauTa  ii>8txea'0aL  4>tpetjdai  trepl  tS  ptoov  ■qpiv  &Sq\a  Sia  Tpv  tviirpSadipaiv 
tt)S  yrjs.  SiS  Kai  t&s  tt)s  <je\'qv 77s  iK\ei\j/eis  7r\i:lois  7)  to. s  too  tj \ 1 0 11  ylyvejdal 
ipamo  •  tCiv  yap  <j>epop.ivoiv  tKaoTOV  avTicppdTTeiv  avr-qv,  aAA’  ou  pbvov  tt)V 
yqv 


The 

antichthon 


20 


3°6 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


planets  to  account  for  lunar  eclipses  (§  29),  and  Anaxagoras 
had  revived  that  view  (§  135)-  Certain  Pythagoreans1  had 
placed  these  dark  planets  between  the  earth  and  the  central 
fire  in  order  to  account  for  their  invisibility,  and  the  next 
stage  was  to  reduce  them  to  a  single  body.  Here  again  we 
see  how  the  Pythagoreans  tried  to  simplify  the  hypotheses  of 
their  predecessors. 

152.  We  have  seen  (§  54)  that  the  doctrine  commonly, 
but  incorrectly,  known  as  the  “  harmony  of  the  spheres  ” 
may  have  originated  with  Pythagoras,  but  its  elaboration 
must  belong  to  a  later  generation,  and  the  extraordinary 
vanations  in  our  accounts  of.it  must  be  due  to  the  conflicting 
theories  of  the  planetary  motions  which  were  rife  at  the  end 
of  the  fifth  and  the  beginning  of  the  fourth  centuries  b.c. 
We  have  the  express  testimony  of  Aristotle  that  the  Pytha¬ 
goreans  whose  doctrine  he  knew  believed  that  the  heavenly 
bodies  produced  musical  notes  in  their  courses.  Further, 
the  pitch  of  the  notes  was  determined  by  the  velocities  of 
these  bodies,  and  these  in  turn  by  their  distances,  which  were 
in  the  same  ratios  as  the  consonant  intervals  of  the  octave 
Aristotle  distinctly  implies  that  the  heaven  of  the  fixed  stars 
takes  part  in  the  celestial  symphony  ;  for  he  mentions  "  the 
sun,  the  moon,  and  the  stars,  so  great  in  magnitude  and  in 
number  as  they  are/’  a  phrase  which  cannot  refer  solely  or 
chiefly  to  the  five  planets.2  We  are  also  told  that  the  slower 
bodies  give  out  a  deep  note  and  the  swifter  a  high  note,  and 
the  prevailing  tradition  gives  the  high  note  of  the  octave  to 


to  sUpose  0soeXPSoSS2  fte,d  th7  ^  Pytha^ans,  but  it  is  natural 
25)_  PP  *  •  S°’  at  least'  A2exander  thought  (Simpl.  De  caelo,  p.  5i5> 

p.  ;Asr  ^ 

TO,  „pl  t6  ^ov  ^  Vi 

hardly  attribute  thTid^tihcafof 

Z  S 

Sun,  and  we  must  take  in  the  heaven  of  the  hTd”s“re  VdOC“y  “  *he 


THE  PYTHAGOREANS 


307 


the  heaven  of  the  fixed  stars,  which  revolves  in  twenty-four 
hours.  Saturn,  of  course,  comes  next ;  for,  though  it  has  a 
slow  motion  of  its  own  in  a  contrary  direction,  that  is 
“  mastered  ”  (/ cpaTelrat )  by  the  diurnal  revolution.  The 
other  view,  which  gives  the  highest  note  to  the  Moon  and 
the  lowest  to  the  fixed  stars,  is  probably  due  to  the  theory 
which  substituted  an  axial  rotation  of  the  earth  for  the 
diurnal  revolution  of  the  heavens.1 

I53-  We  have  still  to  consider  a  view,  which  Aristotle 
sometimes  attributes  to  the  Pythagoreans,  that  things  were 
"  like  numbers.”  He  does  not  appear  to  regard  this  as 
inconsistent  with  the  doctrine  that  things  are  numbers, 
though  it  is  hard  to  see  how  he  could  reconcile  the  two.2 
There  is  no  doubt,  however,  that  Aristoxenos  represented 
the  Pythagoreans  as  teaching  that  things  were  like  numbers,3 
and  there  are  other  traces  of  an  attempt  to  make  out  that 
this  was  the  original  doctrine.  A  letter  was  produced, 

1  For  the  various  systems,  see  Boeckh,  Kleine  Schriften,  vol.  iii.  pp. 
169  sqq.,  and  Carl  v.  Jan,  “  Die  Harmonie  der  Spharen  ”  ( Philol .  1893, 
pp.  13  sqq.).  There  is  a  sufficient  account  of  them  in  Heath’s  Aristarchus, 
pp.  107  sqq.,  where  the  distinction  between  absolute  and  relative  velocity 
is  clearly  stated,  a  distinction  which  is  not  appreciated  in  Adam's  note 
on  Rep.  617  b  (vol.  ii.  p.  452),  with  the  result  that,  while  the  heaven  of 
the  fixed  stars  is  rightly  regarded  as  the  utittj  (the  highest  note),  the  Moon 
comes  next  instead  of  Saturn — an  impossible  arrangement.  The  later 
view  is  represented  by  the  “  bass  of  Heaven’s  deep  Organ  ”  in  the  "  ninefold 
harmony  ”  of  Milton’s  Hymn  on  the  Nativity  (xiii.).  At  the  beginning  of 
the  Fifth  Act  of  the  Merchant  of  Venice,  Shakespeare  makes  Lorenzo  ex¬ 
pound  the  doctrine  in  a  truly  Pythagorean  fashion.  According  to  him, 
the  “  harmony  ”  in  the  soul  ought  to  correspond  with  that  of  the  heavenly 
bodies  (“such  harmony  is  in  immortal  souls"),  but  the  “muddy  vesture 
of  decay  ”  prevents  their  complete  correspondence.  The  Timaeus  states 
a  similar  view,  and  in  the  Book  of  Homage  to  Shakespeare  (pp.  58  sqq.)  I 
have  tried  to  show  how  the  theories  of  the  Timaeus  may  have  reached 
Shakespeare.  There  is  no  force  in  Martin’s  observation  that  the  sounding 
of  all  the  notes  of  an  octave  at  once  would  not  produce  a  harmony.  There 
is  no  question  of  harmony  in  the  modern  sense,  but  only  of  attunement 
(apfj.ovta)  to  a  perfect  scale. 

2  Cf.  especially  Met.  A,  6.  787,  b  10  (R.  P.  65  d).  It  is  not  quite  the 
same  thing  when  he  says,  as  in  A,  5.  985  t>  23  sqq.  (R.  P.  ib.),  that  they 
perceived  many  likenesses  in  things  to  numbers.  That  refers  to  the 
numerical  analogies  of  Justice,  Opportunity,  etc. 

3  Aristoxenos  ap.  Stob.  i.  pr.  6  (p.  20),  Uvdayhpas  .  .  .  Trdvra  ra 
t Tpa.yp.aTa.  aireiKdfuv  rots  dpidp-ois. 


Things 

likenesses 

of 

numbers. 


308 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


purporting  to  be  by  Theano,  the  wife  of  Pythagoras,  in 
which  she  says  that  she  hears  many  of  the  Hellenes  think 
Pythagoras  said  things  were  made  of  number,  whereas  he 
really  said  they  were  made  uccoyding  to  number.1 

When  this  view  is  uppermost  in  his  mind,  Aristotle  seems 
to  find  only  a  verbal  difference  between  Plato  and  the 
Pythagoreans.  The  metaphor  of  “participation”  was 
merely  substituted  for  that  of  ‘  imitation.”  This  is  not 
the  place  to  discuss  the  meaning  of  the  so-called  “  theory  of 
ideas  ”  ;  but  it  must  be  pointed  out  that  Aristotle’s  ascrip¬ 
tion  of  the  doctrine  of  imitation  ”  to  the  Pythagoreans  is 
abundantly  justified  by  the  Phaedo.  When  Simmias  is  asked 
whether  he  accepts  the  doctrine,  he  asks  for  no  explanation 
of  it,  but  replies  at  once  and  emphatically  that  he  does.  The 
view  that  the  equal  itself  is  alone  real,  and  that  what  we  call 
equal  things  are  imperfect  imitations  of  it,  is  quite  familiar 
to  him,'  and  he  is  finally  convinced  of  the  immortality  of  the 
soul  just  because  Sokrates  makes  him  see  that  the  theory  of 
forms  implies  it. 

It  is  also  to  be  observed  that  Sokrates  does  not  introduce 
the  theory  as  a  novelty.  The  reality  of  the  “  ideas  ”  is  the 
sort  of  reality  “  we  are  always  talking  about,”  and  they  are 
explained  in  a  peculiar  vocabulary  which  is  represented  as 
that  of  a  school.  The  technical  terms  are  introduced  by  such 
formulas  as  “  we  say.”  3  Whose  theory  is  it  ?  It  is  usually 
supposed  to  be  Plato’s  own,  though  some  call  it  his  “  early 
theory  of  ideas,”  and  say  that  he  modified  it  profoundly  in 
later  fife.  But  there  are  serious  difficulties  in  this  view. 


1  Stob.  Eel.  i.  p.  125,  19  (R.  p.  65  d). 

2  Plato,  Phaed.  74  a  sqq. 


3  Cf  especially  the  words  S  6pv\ov^v  del  (76  d  8).  The  phrases  avrb  8 
vL  ’  avrb  Ka0  a ut6,  and  the  like  are  assumed  to  be  familiar  “We'’ 
define  reahty  by  means  of  question  and  answer,  in  the  course  of  which  “we" 
give  an  account  of  its  being  ft,  Uyov  5i§0fxev  ToC  £j„atj  y8  d  1,  where 

th7f  •:  ’  '  J°UfT  15  e(fivalent  t0  rrjs  oMat).  When  we  have  done 
•  ’l  +  We  •  Sf  ?  seal  °r  stamP  of  avrd  8  t<mv  upon  it  (75  d  2)  Tech¬ 
nical  terminology  implies  a  school.  As  Diels  puts  it  [Elemental,  p  2o) 

1  is  in  a  school  that  the  simile  concentrates  into  a  metaphor,  and  the 
metaphor  condenses  into  a  term.” 


THE  PYTHAGOREANS 


309 

Plato  is  very  careful  to  tell  us  that  he  was  not  present  at  the 
conversation  recorded  in  the  Phaedo.  Did  any  philosopher 
ever  propound  a  new  theory  of  his  own  by  representing  it  as 
already  familiar  to  a  number  of  distinguished  living  con¬ 
temporaries  ?  1  It  is  not  easy  to  believe  that.  It  would  be 
rash,  on  the  other  hand,  to  ascribe  the  origin  of  the  theory 
to  Sokrates,  and  there  seems  nothing  for  it  but  to  suppose 
that  the  doctrine  of  “  forms  ”  {elBrj,  IBeai)  originally  took 
shape  in  Pythagorean  circles,  though  it  was  further  developed 
by  Sokrates.  There  is  nothing  startling  in  this.  It  is  a 
historical  fact  that  Simmias  and  Kebes  were  not  only  Pytha¬ 
goreans  but  disciples  of  Sokrates,  and  there  were,  no  doubt, 
more  “  friends  of  the  ideas  ”  2  than  we  generally  recognise. 
It  is  certain,  in  any  case,  that  the  use  of  the  words  etStj  and 
ISecu  to  express  ultimate  realities  is  pre-Platonic,  and  it 
seems  most  natural  to  regard  it  as  of  Pythagorean  origin. 

We  have  really  exceeded  the  limits  of  this  work  by  tracing 
the  history  of  Pythagoreanism  down  to  a  point  where  it 
becomes  practically  indistinguishable  from  the  theories  which 
Plato  puts  into  the  mouth  of  Sokrates  ;  but  it  was  necessary 
to  do  so  in  order  to  put  the  statements  of  our  authorities  in 
their  true  light.  Aristoxenos  is  not  likely  to  have  been 
mistaken  with  regard  to  the  opinions  of  the  men  he  had 
Known  personally,  and  Aristotle’s  statements  must  have  had 
some  foundation. 

1  In  the  Parmenides  Plato  makes  Sokrates  expound  the  theory  at  a  d^te 
which  is  carefully  marked  as  at  least  twenty  years  before  his  own  birth. 

2  Plato,  Soph.  248  a  4.  Proclus  says  (In  Parm.  iv.  p.  149,  Cousin) 
ty  fj.lv  yap  Kui  trapa  rois  Uvdayopelois  y  ire  pi  twv  elSCiv  deupla,  Kal  Sp\oi 
Kal  avrbs  iv  2 opuiTrj  tCjv  elSwv  <f>l\ovs  irpoaayopeirttiv  roils  iv  ’IraXtqi  aoipous, 
a\\’  8  yi  p.d\icrT a  7rpecr/3f8<ra s  Kal  SiappJiSTjv  uirodip-evos  rd  eCSrf  2 uiKparr/s 
iarlv.  This  is  not  in  itself  authoritative  ;  but  it  is  the  only  statement 
on  the  subject  that  has  come  down  to  us,  and  Proclus  (who  had  the  tradition 
of  the  Academy  at  his  command)  does  not  appear  to  have  heard  of  any 
other  interpretation  of  the  phrase.  In  a  later  passage  (v.  p.  4,  Cousin)  he 
says  it  was  natural  for  Parmenides  to  ask  Sokrates  whether  he  had  thought 
of  the  theory  for  himself,  since  he  might  have  heard  a  report  of  it. 


CHAPTER  VIII 


Relation 
to  pre¬ 
decessors. 


Life. 


THE  YOUNGER  ELEATICS 

154.  The  systems  we  have  just  been  studying  were  all  funda¬ 
mentally  pluralist,  and  they  were  so  because  Parmenides  had 
shown  that,  if  we  take  a  corporeal  monism  seriously,  we  must 
ascribe  to  reality  a  number  of  predicates  inconsistent  with 
our  experience  of  a  world  which  everywhere  displays  multi¬ 
plicity,  motion,  and  change  (§  97).  The  four  “  roots  ”  of 
Empedokles  and  the  innumerable  “  seeds  ”  of  Anaxagoras 
were  both  of  them  conscious  attempts  to  solve  the  problem 
Parmenides  had  raised  (§§  106,  127).  There  is  no  evidence 
indeed,  that  the  Pythagoreans  were  directly  influenced  by 
Parmenides,  but  it  has  been  shown  (§  147)  how  the  later  form 
of  their  system  was  based  on  the  theory  of  Empedokles. 
Now  it  was  just  this  prevailing  pluralism  that  Zeno  criticised 
from  the  Eleatic  standpoint ;  and  his  arguments  were 
especially  directed  against  Pythagoreanism.  Melissos,  too, 
criticises  Pythagoreanism  ;  but  he  tries  to  find  a  common 
ground  with  his  adversaries  by  maintaining  the  old  Ionian 
thesis  that  reality  is  infinite. 

I.  Zeno  of  Elea 

I55-  According  to  Apollodoros,1  Zeno  flourished  in 
01.  LXXIX.  (464-460  b.c.).  This  date  is  arrived  at  by 
making  him  forty  years  younger  than  Parmenides,  which  is 

Diog.  ix.  29  (R.  P.  130  a).  Apollodoros  is  not  expressly  referred  to 
for  Zeno  s  date  ;  but,  as  he  is  quoted  for  his  father’s  name  (ix.  25  ;  R.  P. 
130),  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  he  is  also  the  source  of  the  floruit. 

310 


THE  YOUNGER  ELEATICS  3n 

in  direct  conflict  with  the  testimony  of  Plato.  We  have 
seen  already  (§  84)  that  the  meeting  of  Parmenides  and  Zeno 
with  the  young  Sokrates  cannot  well  have  occurred  before 
449  B.C.,  and  Plato  tells  us  that  Zeno  was  at  that  time 
“  nearly  forty  years  old.”  1  He  must,  then,  have  been  bom 
about  489  b.c.,  some  twenty-five  years  after  Parmenides. 

He  was  the  son  of  Teleutagoras,  and  the  statement  of 
Apollodoros  that  he  had  been  adopted  by  Parmenides  is 
only  a  misunderstanding  of  an  expression  of  Plato's  Sophist .2 
He  was,  Plato  further  tells  us,3  tall  and  of  a  graceful 
appearance. 

Like  Parmenides,  Zeno  played  a  part  in  the  politics  of 
his  native  city.  Strabo,  no  doubt  on  the  authority  of 
Timaios,  ascribes  to  him  some  share  of  the  credit  for  the 
good  government  of  Elea,  and  says  that  he  was  a  Pytha¬ 
gorean.4  This  statement  can  easily  be  explained.  Par¬ 
menides,  we  have  seen,  was  originally  a  Pythagorean,  and 
the  school  of  Elea  was  naturally  regarded  as  a  mere  branch 
of  the  larger  society.  We  hear  also  that  Zeno  conspired 
against  a  tyrant,  whose  name  is  differently  given,  and  the 
story  of  his  courage  under  torture  is  often  repeated,  though 
with  varying  details.5 

156.  Diogenes  speaks  of  Zeno’s  "  books,”  and  Souidas  writings, 
gives  some  titles  which  probably  come  from  the  Alexandrian 
librarians  through  Hesychios  of  Miletos.6  In  the  Parmenides 
Plato  makes  Zeno  say  that  the  work  by  which  he  is  best 
known  was  written  in  his  youth  and  published  against  his 
will.7  As  he  is  supposed  to  be  forty  years  old  at  the  time  of 

1  Plato,  Parm.  127  b  (R.  P.  in  d).  The  visit  of  Zeno  to  Athens  is 
confirmed  by  Plut.  Per.  4  (R.  P.  130  e),  where  we  are  told  that  Perikles 
"  heard  "  him  as  well  as  Anaxagoras.  It  is  also  alluded  to  in  Ale.  1.  1x9  a, 
where  we  are  told  that  Pythodoros,  son  of  Isolochos,  and  Kallias,  son  of 
Kalliades,  each  paid  him  100  minae  for  instruction. 

1  Plato,  Soph.  241  d  (R.  P.  130  a). 

3  Plato,  Parm.,  loc.  cit.  «  Strabo,  vi.  p.  252  (R.  P.  in  c). 

6  Diog.  ix.  26,  27,  and  the  other  passages  referred  to  in  R.  P.  130  c. 

The  original  of  the  account  given  in  the  tenth  book  of  Diodoros  is  doubtless 
Timaios.  8  Diog.  ix.  26  (R.  P.  130)  ;  Souidas  s.v.  (R.  P.  130  d). 

7  Plato,  Parm.  128  d  6  (R.  P.  130  d). 


312 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


the  dialogue,  this  must  mean  that  the  book  was  written 
before  460  b.c.,  and  it  is  very  possible  that  he  wrote  others 
after  it.1  If  he  wrote  a  work  against  the  “  philosophers,”  as 
Souidas  says,  that  must  mean  the  Pythagoreans,  who,  as  we 
have  seen,  made  use  of  the  term  in  a  sense  of  their  own.2 
The  Disputations  (pEp&es)  and  the  Treatise  on  Nature  may, 
or  may  not,  be  the  same  as  .the  book  described  in  Plato’s 
Parmenides. 

It  is  not  likely  that  Zeno  wrote  dialogues,  though  certain 
references  in  Aristotle  have  been  supposed  to  imply  this.  In 
the  Physics  3  we  hear  of  an  argument  of  Zeno’s,  that  any 
part  of  a  heap  of  millet  makes  a  sound,  and  Simplicius  illus¬ 
trates  this  by  quoting  a  passage  from  a  dialogue  between 
Zeno  and  Protagoras.4  If  our  chronology  is  right,  it  is  quite 
possible  that  they  may  have  met ;  but  it  is  most  unlikely 
that  Zeno  should  have  made  himself  a  personage  in  a  dialogue 
of  his  own.  That  was  a  later  fashion.  In  another  place 
Aristotle  refers  to  a  passage  where  “  the  answerer  and  Zeno 
the  questioner  ”  occurred,5  a  reference  which  is  most  easily 
to  be  understood  in  the  same  way.  Alkidamas  seems  to  have 
written  a  dialogue  in  which  Gorgias  figured,6  and  the  exposi¬ 
tion  of  Zeno’s  arguments  in  dialogue  form  must  always  have 
been  a  tempting  exercise. 

Plato  gives  us  a  clear  idea  of  what  Zeno’s  youthful  work 
was  like.  It  contained  more  than  one  “  discourse,”  and 

1  The  most  remarkable  title  given  by  Souidas  is  ’E^^o-ts  tuv  ’E/ive- 
SoKXtous.  Of  course  Zeno  did  not  write  a  commentary  on  Empedokles 
but  Diels  points  out  (Beyl.  Sitzb.,  1884,  p.  359)  that  polemics  against  philo¬ 
sophers  were  sometimes  called  l^yhcets.  ■  Cf.  the  B^kUItov  e^o r«s  of 
Herakleides  Pontikos  and  especially  his  ripds  rbv  Akperov  ifyyfrecs  (Diog. 
v.  88). 

2  See  above,  p.  278,  n.  1.  It  hardly  seems  likely  that  a  later  writer 
would  make  Zeno  argue  irpbs  robs  4>i\o<r6<povs,  and  the  title  given  to  the 
book  at  Alexandria  must  be  based  on  something  contained  in  it. 

3  Arist.  Phys.  H,  5.  250  a  20  (R.  P.  131  a). 

*.  SimPL  Phys-  P-  IIo8>  18  (R-  P-  131)-  If  this  is  what  Aristotle  refers 
to,  it  is  hardly  safe  to  attribute  the  xeyxplnp  \6yos  to  Zeno  himself 
J  he  existence  of  this  dialogue  is  another  indication  of  Zeno’s  visit  to  Athens 
at  an  age  when  he  could  converse  with  Protagoras,  which  agrees  very  well 
with  Plato's  representation  of  the  matter. 

6  Arist.  Soph.  El.  170  b  22  (R.  P.  130  b).  •  Chap.  V.  p.  i99,  5. 


THE  YOUNGER  ELEATICS 


3i3 


these  discourses  were  subdivided  into  sections,  each  dealing 
with  some  one  presupposition  of  his  adversaries.1  We  owe 
the  preservation  of  Zeno’s  arguments  on  the  one  and  many 
to  Simplicius.2  Those  relating  to  motion  have  been  pre¬ 
served  by  Aristotle  ; 3  but  he  has  restated  them  in  his  own 
language. 

15 7-  Aristotle  in  his  Sophist 4  called  Zeno  the  inventor  Dialectic, 
of  dialectic,  and  that,  no  doubt,  is  substantially  true,  though 
the  beginnings  at  least  of  this  method  of  arguing  were  con¬ 
temporary  with  the  foundation  of  the  Eleatic  school.  Plato  5 
gives  us  a  spirited  account  of  the  style  and  purpose  of  Zeno’s 
book,  which  he  puts  into  his  own  mouth  : 

In  reality,  this  writing  is  a  sort  of  reinforcement  for  the 
argument  of  Parmenides  against  those  who  try  to  turn  it  into 
ridicule  on  the  ground  that,  if  reality  is  one,  the  argument  be¬ 
comes  involved  in  many  absurdities  and  contradictions.  This 
writing  argues  against  those  who  uphold  a  Many,  and  gives  them 
back  as  good  and  better  than  they  gave  ;  its  aim  is  to  show  that 
their  assumption  of  multiplicity  will  be  involved  in  still  more 
absurdities  than  the  assumption  of  unity,  if  it  is  sufficiently 
worked  out. 

The  method  of  Zeno  was,  in  fact,  to  take  one  of  his 
adversaries’  fundamental  postulates  and  deduce  from  it  two 
contradictory  conclusions.6  This  is  what  Aristotle  meant 

1  Plato,  Parm.  127  d.  Plato  speaks  of  the  first  inrod cms  of  the  first 
X670S,  which  shows  that  the  book  was  really  divided  into  separate  sections. 

Proclus  (in  loc.)  says  there  were  forty  of  these  AAyoi  altogether. 

2  Simplicius  expressly  says  in  one  place  (p.  140,  30  ;  R.  P.  133) 
that  he  is  quoting  kcltA.  \A£iv.  I  see  no  reason  to  doubt  this,  as  the 
Academy  would  certainly  have  a  copy  of  the  work.  In  that  case,  the  use 
of  the  Attic  dialect  by  Zeno  is  significant. 

3  Arist.  Phys.  Z,  g.  239  b  9  sqq.  *  Cf.  Diog.  ix.  25  (R.  P.  130). 

5  Plato,  Parm.  128  c  (R.  P.  130  d).  If  historians  of  philosophy  had 
started  from  this  careful  statement  of  Plato's,  instead  of  from  Aristotle’s 
loose  references,  they  would  not  have  failed  to  understand  his  arguments, 
as  they  all  did  before  Tannery. 

6  The  technical  terms  used  in  Plato's  Parmenides  seem  to  be  as  old  as 
Zeno  himself.  The  vwAdeais  is  the  provisional  assumption  of  the  truth  of 
a  certain  statement,  and,  takes  the  form  d  iroWa  ian  or  the  like.  The 
word  does  not  mean  the  assumption  of  something  as  a  foundation,  but  the 
setting  before  one’s  self  of  a  statement  as  a  problem  to  be  solved  (Ionic 


314 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


by  calling  him  the  inventor  of  dialectic,  which  is  just  the 
art  of  arguing,  not  from  true  premisses,  but  from  premisses 
admitted  by  the  other  side.  The  theory  of  Parmenides  had 
led  to  conclusions  which  contradicted  the  evidence  of  the 
senses,  and  Zeno’s  object  was  not  to  bring  fresh  proofs  of 
the  theory  itself,  but  simply  to  show  that  his  opponents’  view 
led  to  contradictions  of  a  precisely  similar  nature. 

Pytha“d  I58'  That  Zeno’s  dialectic  was  mainly  directed  against 

goreanism.  the  Pythagoreans  is  certainly  suggested  by  Plato’s  statement, 
that  it  was  addressed  to  the  adversaries  of  Parmenides,  who 
held  that  things  were  "  a  many.”  1  Zeller  holds,  indeed, 
that  it  was  merely  the  popular  form  of  the  belief  that  things 
are  many  that  Zeno  set  himself  to  confute  ;  2  but  it  is  surely 
not  true  that  ordinary  people  believe  things  to  be  ”  a  many  ” 
in  the  sense  required.  Plato  tells  us  that  the  premisses  of 
Zeno’s  arguments  were  the  beliefs  of  the  adversaries  of 
Parmenides,  and  the  postulate  from  which  all  his  contra¬ 
dictions  are  derived  is  the  view  that  space,  and  therefore 
body,  is  made  up  of  a  number  of  discrete  units,  which  is  just 
the  Pythagorean  doctrine.  We  know  from  Plato  that  Zeno’s 
book  was  the  work  of  his  youth.®  It  follows  that  he  must 
have  written  it  in  Italy,  and  the  Pythagoreans  are  the  only 
people  who  can  have  criticised  the  views  of  Parmenides  there 
and  at  that  date.4 


It  will  be  noted  how  much  clearer  the  historical  position 
of  Zeno  becomes  if  we  follow  Plato  in  assigning  him  to  a  later 
date  than  is  usual.  We  have  first  Parmenides,  then  the 


ZTdat-\  ATu  K  the  CO"ons  (rA 

-  destrovL  '  IT  pi  7  are  imP°sslble,  the  MO™  is 

,,  y.  (  '  Plato’  ReP‘  533  C  8,  ras  iixodiireis  Avcupova a).  The 

similar  seise116  ^  iaTPLK^  (c-  r)  knows  the  word  irUeaa.  in  a 

1  The  view  that  Zeno’s  arguments  were  directed  against  Pythagoreanism 
has  been  maintained  in  recent  times  by  Tannery  (Sciencehelline,Vp.24gsqq.) 
and  Bdumker  ( Das  Problem  der  Materie,  pp.  60  sqq.). 

I  ZeUer  p.  589  (Eng.  trans.  p.  612).  »  Parm.,  loc.  cit 

■  nr1  EmpedoUes  has  been  suggested.  He  was  about  the  same  age  as  Zeno 

eed  (§  98),  and  he  seems  to  criticise  Parmenides  (§  106),  but  the  argu- 
isstm  less  hketyaVe  ^  SP6dal  applicability  to  his  theories.  Anaxagoras 


THE  YOUNGER  ELEATICS 


315 

pluralists,  and  then  the  criticism  of  Zeno.  This,  at  any  rate, 
seems  to  have  been  the  view  Aristotle  took  of  the  historical 
development.1 

159.  The  polemic  of  Zeno  is  clearly  directed  in  the  first  what  is 
instance  against  a  certain  view  of  the  unit.  Eudemos,  in  his  the  unit  ? 
Physics ,2  quoted  from  him  the  saying  that  “  if  any  one  could 

tell  him  what  the  unit  was,  he  would  be  able  to  say  what 
things  are.”  The  commentary  of  Alexander  on  this,  pre¬ 
served  by  Simplicius,  is  quite  satisfactory.  “  As  Eudemos 
relates,”  he  says,  “  Zeno  the  disciple  of  Parmenides  tried  to 
show  that  it  was  impossible  that  things  could  be  a  many, 
seeing  that  there  was  no  unit  in  things,  whereas  '  many  ’ 
means  a  number  of  units.”  3  Here  we  have  a  clear  reference 
to  the  Pythagorean  view  that  everything  may  be  reduced  to 
a  sum  of  units,  which  is  what  Zeno  denied. 

160.  The  fragments  of  Zeno  himself  also  show  that  this  The 
was  his  line  of  argument.  I  give  them  according  to  the  ^fts 
arrangement  of  Diels. 


(!) 

If  what  is  had  no  magnitude,  it  would  not  even  be.  .  .  . 
But,  if  it  is,  each  one  must  have  a  certain  magnitude  and  a  certain 
thickness,  and  must  be  at  a  certain  distance  from  another,  and  the 
same  may  be  said  of  what  is  in  front  of  it ;  for  it,  too,  will  have 
magnitude,  and  something  will  be  in  front  of  it.4  It  is  all  the 
same  to  say  this  once  and  to  say  it  always  ;  for  no  such  part  of  it 


1  Arist.  Phys.  A,  3.  187  a  1  (R.  P.  134  b).  See  below,  §  173. 

2  Simpl.  Phys.  p.  138,  32  (R.  P.  134  a). 

3  Simpl.  Phys.  p.  99,  13,  d>s  yap  la-rope t,  ^ pTjch >  ('  AXiljavSpos),  E(j8r)p.os, 
z-qvuv  6  n appevLSov  yvilipipo s  iireLpa.ro  Seixvvvai  8n  pi)  otbv  re  ra  8vra  iroWa 
elvai  rip  pySiv  elvai  iv  roll  ofiauv  iv,  rd  Si  iroWa  ir\r}0os  elvai  ivdSojv. 
This  is  the  meaning  of  the  statement  that  Zeno  dvypei  rb  iv  which 
is  not  Alexander’s  (as  implied  in  R.  P.  134  a),  but  goes  back  to 
no  less  an  authority  than  Eudemos.  It  must  be  read  in  connexion 
with  the  words  rrjv  yap  anyprjv  tbs  ro  8v  \iyei  (Simpl.  Phys.  p.  99,  11). 

4  I  formerly  rendered  “  the  same  may  be  said  of  what  surpasses  it  in 
smallness  ;  for  it  too  will  have  magnitude,  and  something  will  surpass  it  in 
smallness.”  This  is  Tannery’s  rendering,  but  I  now  agree  with  Diels  in 
thinking  that  dirixw  refers  to  plyeBos  and  irpoix*LV  to  irdyos.  Zeno  is 
showing  that  the  Pythagorean  point  must  have  three  dimensions. 


3i6 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


The  unit. 


will  be  the  last,  nor  will  one  thing  not  be  as  compared  with 
another.1  So,  if  things  are  a  many,  they  must  be  both  small 
and  great,  so  small  as  not  to  have  any  magnitude  at  all,  and  so 
great  as  to  be  infinite.  R.  P.  134. 


(2) 

For  if  it  were  added  to  any  other  thing  it  would  not  make  it 
any  larger  ;  for  nothing  can  gain  in  magnitude  by  the  addition 
of  what  has  no  magnitude,  and  thus  it  follows  at  once  that  what 
was  added  was  nothing.2  But  if,  when  this  is  taken  away  from 
another  thing,  that  thing  is  no  less ;  and  again,  if,  when  it  is 
added  to  another  thing,  that  does  not  increase,  it  is  plain  that 
what  was  added  was  nothing,  and  what  was  taken  away  was 
nothing.  R.  P.  132. 

(3) 

If  things  are  a  many,  they  must  be  just  as  many  as  they  are, 
and  neither  more  nor  less.  Now,  if  they  are  as  many  as  'they 
are,  they  will  be  finite  in  number. 

If  things  are  a  many,  they  will  be  infinite  in  number ; 
for  there  will  always  be  other  things  between  them,  and  others 
again  between  these.  And  so  things  are  infinite  in  number. 
R.  P.  133.3 


161.  If  we  hold  that  the  unit  has  no  magnitude — and 
this  is  required  by  what  Aristotle  calls  the  argument  from 
dichotomy ,4  then  everything  must  be  infinitely  small. 
Nothing  made  up  of  units  without  magnitude  can  itself  have 
any  magnitude.  On  the  other  hand,  if  we  insist  that  the 
units  of  which  things  are  built  up  are  something  and  not 
nothing,  we  must  hold  that  everything  is  infinitely  great. 


*  Reading,  with  Diek  and  the  MSS.,  otfrc  (rtpw  ^  frepo,  o6k  ft™. 
Gomperz  s  conjecture  (adopted  in  R.  P.)  seems  to  me  arbitrary. 

.,  2  Zeder  mark3  a  lacuna  here.  Zeno  must  certainly  have  shown  that 
the  subtraction  of  a  point  does  not  make  a  thing  less  ;  but  he  may  have 
done  so  before  the  beginmng  of  our  present  fragment. 

3  This  is  what  Aristotle  calls  “  the  argument  from  dichotomy  ”  (Phvs 

t’  I'hWn  *  ;  R'  134  b)-  ”  a  Une  I®  made  UP  °f  P°ints-  ^  Ought  to 
be  able  to  answer  the  question,  How.many  points  are  there  in  a  given 

in+e  '  the  other  hand’  y°u  can  always  divide  a  line  or  any  part  of  it 

into  two  halves  ;  so  that,  if  a  line  is  made  up  of  points,  there  will  always 
be  more  of  them  than  any  number  you  assign.  *  gee  last  note 


THE  YOUNGER  ELEATICS  3I? 

The  line  is  infinitely  divisible  ;  and,  according  to  this  view, 
it  will  be  made  up  of  an  infinite  number  of  units,  each  of 
which  has  some  magnitude. 

That  this  argument  refers  to  points  is  proved  by  an 

instructive  passage  from  Aristotle's  Metaphysics A  We  read 
there — 

If  the  unit  is  indivisible,  it  will,  according  to  the  proposition 
of  Zeno,  be  nothing.  That  which  neither  makes  anything  larger 
by  its  addition  to  it,  nor  smaller  by  its  subtraction  from  it,  is  not, 
he  says,  a  real  thing  at  all ;  for  clearly  what  is  real  must  be  a 
magnitude.  And,  if  it  is  a  magnitude,  it  is  corporeal ;  for  that 
is  corporeal  which  is  in  every  dimension.  The  other  things, 
i.e.  the  plane  and  the  line,  if  added  in  one  way  will  make  things 
larger,  added  in  another  they  will  produce  no  effect ;  but  the 
point  and  the  unit  cannot  make  things  larger  in  any  way. 

From  all  this  it  seems  impossible  to  draw  any  other 
conclusion  than  that  the  “  one  ”  against  which  Zeno  argued 
vas  the  “  one  ”  of  which  a  number  constitute  a  “  many,” 
and  that  is  just  the  Pythagorean  unit. 

162.  Aristotle  refers  to  an  argument  which  seems  to  be  Space, 
directed  against  the  Pythagorean  doctrine  of  space,2  and 
Simplicius  quotes  it  in  this  form  : 3 

If  there  is  space,  it  will  be  in  something  ;  for  all  that  is  is  in 
something,  and  what  is  in  something  is  in  space.  So  space  will 
be  in  space,  and  this  goes  on  ad  infinitum,  therefore  there  is  no 
space.  R.  P.  135. 

What  Zeno  is  really  arguing  against  here  is  the  attempt 
to  distinguish  space  from  the  body  that  occupies  it.  If  we 
insist  that  body  must  be  in  space,  then  we  must  go  on  to  ask 
what  space  itself  is  in.  This  is  a  “  reinforcement  ”  of  the 
Parmenidean  denial  of  the  void.  Possibly  the  argument  that 

1  Arist.  Met.  B,  4.  1001  b  7. 

2  Arist.  Phys.  A,  1.  209  a  23  ;  3.  210  b  22  (R.  P.  135  a). 

2  Simpl.  Phys.  p.  562,  3  (R.  P.  i35).  The  version  of  Eudemos  is 
given  in  Simpl.  Phys.  p.  563,  26,  dpo?  yip  wav  to  bv  wou  elvai  ■  el  §<?  6 
rbiros  twv  6vrwV,  ttou  etr, ;  oiKotv  iv  &\\v  t6tV  kAk.Iuos  Mi  iv  (L\\v  Kai 
Ol'tTUS  els  t6  TTpOOOJ. 


Motion. 


318  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 

everything  must  be  “  in  ”  something,  or  must  have  something 
beyond  it,  had  been  used  against  the  Parmenidean  theory  of 
a  finite  sphere  with  nothing  outside  it. 

163.  Zeno’s  arguments  on  the  subject  of  motion  have 
been  preserved  by  Aristotle  himself.  The  system  of  Par¬ 
menides  made  all  motion  impossible,  and  his  successors  had 
been  driven  to  abandon  the  monistic  hypothesis  in  order  to 
avoid  this  very  consequence.  Zeno  does  not  bring  any  fresh 
proofs  of  the  impossibility  of  motion  ;  all  he  does  is  to  show 
that  a  pluralist  theory,  such  as  the  Pythagorean,  is  just  as 
unable  to  explain  it  as  was  that  of  Parmenides.  Looked  at 
in  this  way,  Zeno’s  arguments  are  no  mere  quibbles,  but  mark 
a  great  advance  in  the  conception  of  quantity.  They  are  as 
follows  : 

(1)  You  cannot  cross  a  race-course.1  You  cannot  traverse 
an  infinite  number  of  points  in  a  finite  time.  You  must  traverse 
the  half  of  any  given  distance  before  you  traverse  the  whole,  and 
the  half  of  that  again  before  you  can  traverse  it.  This  goes  on 
ad  infinitum,  so  that  there  are  an  infinite  number  of  points  in 
any  given  space,  afid  you  cannot  touch  an  infinite  number  one  by 
one  in  a  finite  time.2 

(2)  Achilles  will  never  overtake  the  tortoise.  He  must  first 
reach  the  place  from  which  the  tortoise  started.  By  that  time 
the  tortoise  will  have  got  some  way  ahead.  Achilles  must  then 
make  up  that,  and  again  the  tortoise  will  be  ahead.  He  is 
always  coming  nearer,  but  he  never  makes  up  to  it.3 

The  “  hypothesis  ”  of  the  second  argument  is  the  same 
as  that  of  the  first,  namely,  that  the  line  is  a  series  of  points  ; 
but  the  reasoning  is  complicated  by  the  introduction  of 
another  moving  object.  The  difference,  accordingly,  is  not 
a  half  every  time,  but  diminishes  in  a  constant  ratio.  Again, 
the  first  argument  shows  that,  on  this  hypothesis,  no  moving 
object  can  ever  traverse  any  distance  at  all,  however  fast  it 

1  Arist.  Top.  0,  8.  160  b  8,  ZtJj'uwos  (X670S),  bn  ovk  ivdtx^Tai  Kivelcrdcu 
otibi  to  araSiov  Sie\6eiv. 

2  Arist.  Phys.  Z,  9,  239  b  11  (R.  P.  136).  Cf.  Z,  2.  233  a  11  ; 

(R.  P.  136  a). 

3  Arist.  Phys.  Z,  9.  239  b  14  (R.  P.  137). 


a  21 


THE  YOUNGER  ELEATICS  3Ig 

may  move  ;  the  second  emphasises  the  fact  that,  however 
slowly  it  moves,  it  will  traverse  an  infinite  distance.1 

(3)  The  arrow  in  flight  is  at  rest.  For,  if  everything  is  at 
rest  when  it  occupies  a  space  equal  to  itself,  and  what  is  in  flight 

at  any  given  moment  always  occupies  a  space  equal  to  itself  it 
cannot  move.2 

Here  a  further  complication  is  introduced.  The  moving 
object  itself  has  length,  and  its  successive  positions  are  not 
points  but  fines.  The  first  two  arguments  are  intended  to 
destroy  the  hypothesis  that  a  fine  consists  of  an  infinite 
number  of  indivisibles  ;  this  argument  and  the  next  deal 
with  the  hypothesis  that  it  consists  of  a  finite  3  number  of 
indivisibles. 


(4)  Half  the  time  may  be  equal  to  double  the  time.  Let 
us  suppose  three  rows  of  bodies,4  one  of  which  (A)  is  at 
rest  while  the  other  two  (B,  C)  are  moving  with  equal 
velocity  in  opposite  directions  (Fig.  1).  By  the  time  they 
are  all  in  the  same  part  of  the  course,  B  will  have  passed 
twice  as  many  of  the  bodies  in  C  as  in  A  (Fig.  2). 

FIG.  2. 

•  •  A  $  *  ©  # 

"*■  B  «  «  #  ® 

••••  C  «  «  «  # 

Therefore  the  time  which  it  takes  to  pass  C  is  twice  as  long  as 
the  time  it  takes  to  pass  A.  But  the  time  which  B  and  C  take 


1  As  Mr.  Jourdain  puts  it  (Mind,  1916,  p.  42),  "the  first  argument 
shows  that  motion  can  never  begin  ;  the  second  argument  shows  that  the 
siower  moves  as  fast  as  the  faster/’  on  the  hypothesis  that  a  fine  is  infinity 
divisible  into  its  constituent  points. 

■  Phys.  Z,  9,  239  b  30  (R.  P.  138)  ;  ib.  239  b  5  (R.  P.  138  a).  The 
latter  passage  is  corrupt,  though  the  meaning  is  plain.  I  have  translated 
Zellers  version  of  it:  el  yap,  <pv<jlv,  rjpepd  xav  Srav  rj  Kara  rb  taov,  tan  S’ 
ad  rb  <j>tpbp.tvov  iv  rip  vvv  Kara  rb  taov,  Advprov  k.t.X.  Of  course  Ad 
means  “  at  any  time,”  not  "  always,”  and  Ka rd  rb  taov  is,  literally  "  on 
a  level  with  a  space  equal  (to  itself).”  For  other  readings,  see  Zeller, 
p.  598,  n.  3  ;  and  Diels,  Vors.  19  a  27. 

3  See  Jourdain  (loc.  cit .). 

4  The  word  is  67koc  ;  cf.  Chap.  VII.  p.  291,  n.  3.  The  name  is  very 
appropriate  for  the  Pythagorean  units,  which  Zeno  had  shown  to  have 
length,  breadth,  and  thickness  (fr.  1). 


fig.  1. 

A  •  • 

B  •  •  •  • 

C  ■<- 


320 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


to  reach  the  position  of  A  is  the  same.  Therefore  double  the 
time  is  equal  to  the  half.1 

According  to  Aristotle,  the  paralogism  here  depends  on 
the  assumption  that  an  equal  magnitude  moving  with  equal 
velocity  must  move  for  an  equal  time,  whether  the  magni¬ 
tude  with  which  it  is  equal  is  at  rest  or  in  motion.  That  is 
certainly  so,  but  we  are  not  to  suppose  that  this  assumption 
is  Zeno’s  own.  The  fourth  argument  is,  in  fact,  related  to 
the  third  just  as  the  second  is  to  the  first.  The  Achilles  adds 
a  second  moving  point  to  the  single  moving  point  of  the  first 
argument ;  this  argument  adds  a  second  moving  line  to  the 
single  moving  line  of  the  arrow  in  flight.  The  lines,  however, 
are  represented  as  a  series  of  units,  which  is  just  how  the 
Pythagoreans  represented  them  ;  and  it  is  quite  true  that,  if 
lines  are  a  sum  of  discrete  units,  and  time  is  similarly  a  series 
of  discrete  moments,  there  is  no  other  measure  of  motion 
possible  than  the  number  of  units  which  each  unit  passes. 

This  argument,  like  the  others,  is  intended  to  bring  out 
the  absurd  conclusions  which  follow  from  the  assumption 
that  all  quantity  is  discrete,  and  what  Zeno  has  really  done 
is  to  establish  the  conception  of  continuous  quantity  by  a 
reductio  ad  absurdum  of  the  other  hypothesis.  If  we  re¬ 
member  that  Parmenides  had  asserted  the  one  to  be  con¬ 
tinuous  (fr.  8,  25),  we  shall  see  how  accurate  is  the  account  of 
Zeno’s  method  which  Plato  puts  into  the  mouth  of  Sokrates. 

II.  Melissos  of  Samos 

164.  In  his  Life  of  Perikles,  Plutarch  tells  us,  on  the 
authority  of  Aristotle,  that  the  philosopher  Melissos,  son  of 
Ithagenes,  was  the  Samian  general  who  defeated  the  Athenian 

1  Arist.  Phys.  Z,  g.  239  b  33  (R.  P.  139).  I  have  had  to  express  the 
argument  in  my  own  way,  as  it  is  not  fully  given  by  any  of  the  authorities. 
The  figure  is  practically  Alexander’s  (Simpl.  Phys.  p.  1016,  14),  except 
that  he  represents  the  Syxoi  by  letters  instead  of  dots.  The  conclusion  is 
plainly  stated  by  Aristotle  ( loc .  cit.),  <rv fx.j3a.lv eiv  otercu  Uov  that  xpbvov 
Tip  onrXaaUp  rbv  rpxiavv,  and,  however  we  explain  the  reasoning,  it  must 
be  so  represented  as  to  lead  to  the  conclusion  that,  as  Mr.  Jourdain  puts 
it  {loc.  cit.),  "  a  body  travels  twice  as  fast  as  it  does.” 


THE  YOUNGER  ELEATICS  321 

fleet  in  441/0  B-C.  j  1  and  it  was  no  doubt  for  this  reason  that 
Apollodoros  fixed  his  floruit  in  01.  LXXXIV.  (444-41  b.c.).2 
Beyond  this,  we  really  know  nothing  about  his  life.  He  is 
said  to  have  been,  like  Zeno,  a  disciple  of  Parmenides  ; 3  but, 
as  he  was  a  Samian,  it  is  possible  that  he  was  originally  a 
member  of  the  Ionic  school,  and  we  shall  see  that  certain 
features  of  his  doctrine  tend  to  bear  out  this  view.  On 
the  other  hand,  he  was  certainly  convinced  by  the  Eleatic 
dialectic,  and  renounced  the  Ionic  doctrine  in  so  far  as  it 
was  inconsistent  with  that.  We  note  here  the  effect  of 
the  increased  facility  of  intercourse  between  East  and 
West,  which  was  secured  by  the  supremacy  of  Athens. 

165.  The  fragments  which  we  have  come  from  Simplicius, 
and  are  given,  with  the  exception  of  the  first,  from  the  text 
of  Diels.4 

(10)  If  nothing  is,  what  can  be  said  of  it  as  of  something 
real  ?  5 

(1)  What  was  was  ever,  and  ever  shall  be.  For,  if  it  had 
come  into  being,  it  needs  must  have  been  nothing  before  it  came 


1  Plut.  Per.  26  (R.  P.  141  b),  from  Aristotle’s  2a iroXire/a. 

2  Diog.  ix.  24  (R.  P.  14 1).  It  is  possible,  of  course,  that  Apollodoros 
meant  the  first  and  not  the  fourth  year  of  the  Olympiad.  That  is  his 
usual  era,  the  foundation  of  Thourioi.  But,  on  the  whole,  it  is  more 
likely  that  he  meant  the  fourth  ;  for  the  date  of  the  vavapxia  would  be 
given  with  precision.  See  Jacoby,  p.  270. 

3  Diog.  ix.  24  (R.  P.  141). 

4  It  is  no  longer  necessary  to  discuss  the  passages  which  used  to  appear 
as  frs.  r -5  of  Melissos,  as  it  has  been  proved  by  A.  Pabst  that  they  are 
merely  a  paraphrase  of  the  genuine  fragments  (De  Melissi  Samii  fragmentis, 
Bonn,  1889).  Almost  simultaneously  I  had  independently  come  to  the 
same  conclusion  (see  the  first  edition,  §  138).  Zeller  and  Diels  have  both 
accepted  Pabst’s  demonstration,  and  the  supposed  fragments  have  been 
relegated  to  the  notes  in  the  last  edition  of  R.  P.  I  still  believe,  however, 
that  the  fragment  which  I  have  numbered  1  a  is  genuine.  See  next 
note. 

5  This  fragment  is  from  the  beginning  of  the  paraphrase  which  was 
so  long  mistaken  for  the  words  of  Melissos  (Simpl.  Phys.  p.  103,  18  ;  R.  P. 
142  a),  and  Diels  has  removed  it  along  with  the  rest.  I  believe  it  to 
be  genuine  because  Simplicius,  who  had  access  to  the  original,  introduces 
it  by  the  words  dpxfral  roD  crvyypafj./j.a.Tos  oUtojs,  and  because  it  is  thoroughly 
Eleatic  in  character.  It  is  quite  natural  that  the  first  words  of  the  book 
should  be  prefixed  to  the  paraphrase. 

21 


The  Frag¬ 
ments. 


322 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


into  being.  Now,  if  it  were  nothing,  in  no  wise  could  anything 
have  arisen  out  of  nothing.  R.  P.  142. 

(2)  Since,  then,  it  has  not  come  into  being,  and  since  it  is, 
was  ever,  and  ever  shall  be,  it  has  no  beginning  or  end,  but  is 
without  limit.  For,  if  it  had  come  into  being,  it  would  have  had 
a  beginning  (for  it  would  have  begun  to  come  into  being  at 
some  time  or  other)  and  an  end  (for  it  would  have  ceased  to 
come  into  being  at  some  time  or  other)  ;  but,  if  it  neither  began 
nor  ended,  and  ever  was  and  ever  shall  be,  it  has  no  beginning 

or  end  ;  for  it  is  not  possible  for  anything  to  be  ever  without  all 
being.  R.  P.  143. 

(3)  Further,  just  as  it  ever  is,  so  it  must  ever  be  infinite  in 
magnitude.  R.  P.  143. 

(4)  But  nothing  which  has  a  beginning  or  end  is  either  eternal 
or  infinite.  R.  P.  143. 

(5)  If  it  were  not  one,  it  would  be  bounded  by  something 
else.  R.  P.  144  a. 


(6)  For  if  it  is  (infinite),  it  must  be  one  ;  for  if  it  were  two,  it 

could  not  be  infinite  ;  for  then  they  would  be  bounded  by  one 
another.1  R.  P.  144.  J 

(6a)  (And,  since  it  is  one,  it  is  alike  throughout ;  for  if  it  were 
unlike,  it  would  be  many  and  not  one.)  2 

(7)  So  then  it  is  eternal  and  infinite  and  one  and  all  alike, 
n  it  cannot  perish  nor  become  greater,  nor  does  it  suffer  pain 

or  grief  For,  if  any  of  these  things  happened  to  it,  it  would  no 

Jonger  be  one.  For  if  it  is  altered,  then  the  real  must  needs  not  be 

alike,  but  what  was  before  must  pass  away,  and  what  was  not 

must  come  into  being.  Now,  if  it  changed  by  so  much  as  a  single 

air  in  ten  thousand  years,  it  would  all  perish  in  the  whole  of 
time. 


Further  it  is  not  possible  either  that  its  order  should  be 
changed  ;  for  the  order  which  it  had  before  does  not  perish  nor 
does  that  which  was  not  come  into  being.  But,  sh^ce  nolSng" 
ther  added  to  it  or  passes  away  or  is  altered,  how  can  any  r§eal 


1  This  fragment  is  quoted  by  Simpl.  De  caelo  p  „7  r6  m  p  , 
The  insertion  of  the  word  “  infinite  "  is  justified  k  PI,557’  6  R'  P'  44^ 
144  a)  and  by  M  X  G  07a  a  m  -  by  the  ParaPhrase  (R.  P. 

*  <*>  -  *  «• 

quoted, "and  d”?7  uVrZt  ^ 

■45  a)  and  in  M.X.G.  974  ,  ,,  (R.  ““  P““P*““  <E.  P. 


THE  YOUNGER  ELEATICS 


323 

thing  have  had  its  order  changed  ?  For  if  anything  became 
different,  that  would  amount  to  a  change  in  its  order. 

Nor  does  it  suffer  pain  ;  for  a  thing  in  pain  could  not  all  be. 
For  a  thing  in  pain  could  not  be  ever,  nor  has  it  the  same  power 
as  what  is  whole.  Nor  would  it  be  alike,  if  it  were  in  pain  ;  for  it 
is  only  from  the  addition  or  subtraction  of  something  that  it 
could  feel  pain,  and  then  it  would  no  longer  be  alike.  Nor  could 
what  is  whole  feel  pain  ;  for  then  what  was  whole  and  what 
was  real  would  pass  away,  and  what  was  not  would  come 
into  being.  And  the  same  argument  applies  to  grief  as  to 
pain. 

Nor  is  anything  empty.  For  what  is  empty  is  nothing.  What 
is  nothing  cannot  be. 

Nor  does  it  move  ;  for  it  has  nowhere  to  betake  itself  to,  but 
is  full.  For  if  there  were  aught  empty,  it  would  betake  itself 
to  the  empty.  But,  since  there  is  naught  empty,  it  has  nowhere 
to  betake  itself  to. 

And  it  cannot  be  dense  and  rare  ;  for  it  is  not  possible  for 
what  is  rare  to  be  as  full  as  what  is  dense,  but  what  is  rare  is  at 
once  emptier  than  what  is  dense. 

This  is  the  way  in  which  we  must  distinguish  between  what 
is  full  and  what  is  not  full.  If  a  thing  has  room  for  anything 
else,  and  takes  it  in,  it  is  not  full ;  but  if  it  has  no  room  for  any¬ 
thing  and  does  not  take  it  in,  it  is  full. 

Now,  it  must  needs  be  full  if  there  is  naught  empty,  and  if  it 
is  full,  it  does  not  move.  R.  P.  145. 

(8)  This  argument,  then,  is  the  greatest  proof  that  it  is  one 
alone ;  but  the  following  are  proofs  of  it  also.  If  there  were  a 
many,  these  would  have  to  be  of  the  same  kind  as  I  say  that  the 
one  is.  For  if  there  is  earth  and  water,  and  air  and  iron,  and  gold 
and  fire,  and  if  one  thing  is  living  and  another  dead,  and  if  things 
are  black  and  white  and  all  that  men  say  they  really  are, — if  that 
is  so,  and  if  we  see  and  hear  aright,  each  one  of  these  must  be 
such  as  we  first  decided,  and  they  cannot  be  changed  or  altered, 
but  each  must  be  just  as  it  is.  But,  as  it  is,  we  say  that  we  see 
and  hear  and  understand  aright,  and  yet  we  believe  that  what  is 
warm  becomes  cold,  and  what  is  cold  warm  ;  that  what  is  hard 
turns  soft,  and  what  is  soft  hard  ;  that  what  is  living  dies,  and 
that  things  are  bom  from  what  lives  not ;  and  that  all  those 
things  are  changed,  and  that  what  they  were  and  what  they  are 
now  axe  in  no  way  alike.  We  think  that  iron,  which  is  hard,  is 


324  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


rubbed  away  by  contact  with  the  finger  ; 1  and  so  with  gold  and 
stone  and  everything  which  we  fancy  to  be  strong,  and  that 
earth  and  stone  are  made  out  of  water  ;  so  that  it  turns  out  that 
we  neither  see  nor  know  realities.  Now  these  things  do  not  agree 
with  one  another.  We  said  that  there  were  many  things  that 
were  eternal  and  had  forms  and  strength  of  their  own,  and  yet  we 
fancy  that  they  all  suffer  alteration,  and  that  they  change  from 
what  we  see  each  time.  It  is  clear,  then,  that  we  did  not  see 
aright  after  all,  nor  are  we  right  in  believing  that  all  these  things 
are  many.  They  would  not  change  if  they  were  real,  but  each 
thing  would  be  just  what  we  believed  it  to  be ;  for  nothing  is 
stronger  than  true  reality.  But  if  it  has  changed,  what  was  has 
passed  away,  and  what  was  not  is  come  into  being.  So  then  if 
there  were  many  things,  they  would  have  to  be  just  of  the  same 
nature  as  the  one.  R.  P.  147. 

(9)  Now,  if  it  were  to  exist,  it  must  needs  be  one  ;  but  if  it 
is  one,  it  cannot  have  body ;  for,  if  it  had  body  it  would  have 
parts,  and  would  no  longer  be  one.  R.  P.  146.2 

(10)  If  what  is  real  is  divided,  it  moves ;  but  if  it  moves  it 
cannot  be.  R.  P.  144  a.3 


SeiTt^°f  l66‘  rt.  haS  been  P°inted  out  that  Melissos  was  not 
perhaps  originally  a  member  of  the  Eleatic  school ;  but  he 
certainly  adopted  all  the  views  of  Parmenides  as  to  the  true 
nature  of  reality  with  one  remarkable  exception.  He  appears 
to  have  opened  his  treatise  with  a  reassertion  of  the  Par- 
menidean  "  Nothing  is  not  ”  (fr.  1  a),  and  the  arguments  by 
which  he  supported  this  view  are  those  with  which  we  are 
already  familiar  (fr.  1).  Reality,  as  with  Parmenides,  is 
eternal,  a  point  which  Melissos  expressed  in  a  way  of  his  own. 
He  argued  that  since  everything  that  has  come  into  being 
has  a  beginning  and  an  end,  everything  that  has  not  come 
into  being  has  no  beginning  or  end.  Aristotle  is  very  hard 
on  him  for  this  simple  conversion  of  a  universal  affirmative 


z.euer 


,n  ftlI?eadmg  With  BerSk-  Diels  keeps  the  MS.  pfW 

(p.  613,  n.  1)  conjectures  vir’  iov  ptuv.  p 

*  1  r,ef,d  d  °Sv  (!v  With  E  F  for  the  ei  ah  h  eh  of  D  The  ’A 
p-  is  a 

to  ““  With  E  the  S-  -  F’  “0  tod-  the  word 


THE  YOUNGER  ELEATICS  325 

proposition  ; 1  but,  of  course,  his  belief  was  not  founded  on 
that.  His  whole  conception  of  reality  made  it  necessary  for 
him  to  regard  it  as  eternal.2  It  would  be  more  serious  if 
Aristotle  were  right  in  believing,  as  he  seems  to  have  done, 
that  Melissos  inferred  that  what  is  must  be  infinite  in  space, 
because  it  had  neither  beginning  nor  end  in  time.3  As, 
however,  we  have  the  fragment  which  Aristotle  interprets  in 
this  way  (fr.  2),  we  are  quite  entitled  to  understand  it  for 
ourselves,  and  I  cannot  see  anything  to  justify  Aristotle’s 
assumption  that  the  expression  “  without  limit  ”  means 
without  limit  in  space.4 

167.  Melissos  did  indeed  differ  from  Parmenides  in  hold¬ 
ing  that  reality  was  spatially  as  well  as  temporally  infinite  ; 
but  he  gave  an  excellent  reason  for  this  belief,  and  had  no 
need  to  support  it  by  such  an  extraordinary  argument.  What 
he  said  was  that,  if  it  were  limited,  it  would  be  limited  by 
empty  space.  This  we  know  from  Aristotle  himself,5 6  and 
it  marks  a  real  advance  upon  Parmenides.  He  had  thought 
it  possible  to  regard  reality  as  a  finite  sphere,  but  it  would 
have  been  difficult  for  him  to  work  out  this  view  in  detail. 
He  would  have  had  to  say  there  was  nothing  outside  the 
sphere  ;  but  no  one  knew  better  than  he  that  there  is  no 

1  Arist.  Phys.  A,  3.  186  a  7  (R.  P.  143  a).  The  false  conversion  is  also 
mentioned  in  Soph.  El.  168  b  35  (R.  P.  ib.).  So  Eudemos  ap.  Simpl. 
Phys.  p.  105,  24,  oh  y dp,  el  rd  yevopevov  apxty  <?xel>  P-V  yevbpevov  apxvv 
ovk  ^xeL!  paWov  St  to  pi)  txov  &PXVV  owe  eytvero. 

2  The  real  reason  is  given  in  the  paraphrase  in  Simpl.  Phys.  p.  103,  21 
(R.  P.  142  a),  ouyxupetTai  y Ap  «al  toSto  otto  tQv  PvolkGv,  though  Melissos 
himself  would  not  have  put  it  in  that  way.  He  regarded  himself  as  a 
< pvoiKos  like  the  rest ;  but,  from  the  time  of  Aristotle,  it  was  a  common¬ 
place  that  the  Eleatics  were  not  pvoutol,  since  they  denied  motion. 

8  Cf.  especially  Soph.  El.  168  b  39>  &p.tp(0  toutS,  SvTarip  dpxi)v  Tire 

ye-yovbs  xal  to  Tteirepo.op.lvov.  The  same  point  is  made  in  167  b  13  and  181  a  27. 

4  The  words  dX\’  &iretp6v  eon  mean  simply  "  but  it  is  without  limit,” 

and  this  is  simply  a  repetition  of  the  statement  that  it  has  no  beginning  or 
end.  The  nature  of  the  limit  can  only  be  determined  by  the  context,  and 
accordingly,  when  Melissos  does  introduce  the  subject  of  spatial  infinity, 
he  is  careful  to  say  to  ptyedos  dveepov  (fr.  3). 

6  Arist.  Gen.  Corr.  A,  8.  325  a  14,  tv  Kai  A.kIvt)tov  rb  itav  elvaL  <paot  vai 
diteipov  Hvioi  •  TO  yap  it l pas  irepaiveLV  av  itpbs  to  nevov.  T.,at  this  refers 
to  Melissos  has  been  shown  by  Zeller  (p.  612,  n.  2). 


Kealitv 

spatially 

infinite. 


326  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 

such  thing  as  nothing.  Melissos  saw  that  you  cannot  imagine 
a  finite  sphere  without  regarding  it  as  surrounded  by  an 
infinite  empty  space  ;  1  and  as,  in  common  with  the  rest  of 
the  school,  he  denied  the  void  (fr.  7),  he  was  forced  to  say 
reality  was  spatially  infinite  (fr.  3) .  It  is  possible  that  he  was 
influenced  in  this  by  his  association  with  the  Ionic  school. 

From  the  infinity  of  reality,  it  follows  that  it  must  be 
one ;  for,  if  it  were  not  one,  it  would  be  bounded  by  some- 
thing  else  (fr.  5)-  And,  being  one,  it  must  be  homogeneous 
throughout  (fr.  6 a),  for  that  is  what  we  mean  by  one.  Reality, 
then,  is  a  single,  homogeneous,  corporeal  plenum,  stretching 
out  to  infinity  in  space,  and  going  backwards  and  forwards 
to  infinity  in  time. 

Opposi-  168.  Eleaticism  was  always  critical,  and  we  are  not 

Iordans.  withont  indications  of  the  attitude  taken  up  by  Melissos 
towards  contemporary  systems.  The  flaw  which  he  found 
in  the  Ionian  theories  was  that  they  all  assumed  some  want 
of  homogeneity  in  the  One,  which  was  a  real  inconsistency. 
Further,  they  all  allowed  the  possibility  of  change  ;  but,  if 
all  things  are  one,  change  must  be  a  form  of  coming  into 
being  and  passing  away.  If  you  admit  that  a  thing  can 
change,  you  cannot  maintain  that  it  is  eternal.  Nor  can  the 
arrangement  of  the  parts  of  reality  alter,  as  Anaximander, 
foi  instance,  had  held  ;  any  such  change  necessarily  involves 
a  coming  into  being  and  passing  away. 

The  next  point  made  by  Melissos  is  somewhat  peculiar. 
Reality,  he  says,  cannot  feel  sorrow  or  pain  ;  for  that  is 
always  due  to  the  addition  or  subtraction  of  something, 
which  is  impossible.  It  is  not  easy  to  be  sure  what  this 
refers  to.  Perhaps  it  is  to  the  theory  by  which  Anax¬ 
agoras  explained  perception.2 


1  Note  the  disagreement  with  Zeno  (§  162). 

.  *  fe.e  P;  27 3 :  .  **  ls  clear  that  Anaxagoras  made  considerable  use  of 
pain  (irivos),  and  it  is  possible  that  his  doctrine,  summed  up  in  the  words 
del  novel  r6  fro?  (Anst.  Eth.  Nic.  H,  15.  1154  b  7)  had  a  wider  application 

I  pointofThe  hlShremainS-  Aristotle  caelo,  B,  1.  284  a  15)  makes 
a  point  of  the  ovpav6s  being  tiirovos. 


THE  YOUNGER  ELEATICS 


327 

Motion  in  general 1  and  rarefaction  and  condensation 
in  particular  are  impossible  ‘  for  both  imply  the  existence 
of  empty  space.  Divisibility  is  excluded  for  the  same 
reason.  These  are  the  same  arguments  as  Parmenides 
employed. 

169.  In  nearly  all  accounts  of  the  system  of  Melissos,  we 
find  it  stated  that  he  denied  the  corporeality  of  what  is  real, 
— an  opinion  which  is  supported  by  a  reference  to  fr.  9,  which 
is  certainly  quoted  by  Simplicius  to  prove  this  very  point.2 
If,  however,  our  general  view  as  to  the  character  of  early 
Greek  philosophy  is  correct,  the  statement  must  seem  in¬ 
credible.  And  it  will  seem  even  more  surprising  when  we 
find  that  in  the  Metaphysics  Aristotle  says  that,  while  the 
unity  of  Parmenides  seemed  to  be  ideal,  that  of  Melissos  was 
material.3  Now  the  fragment,  as  it  stands  in  the  MSS.  of 
Simplicius,4  puts  a  purely  hypothetical  case,  and  would  most 
naturally  be  understood  as  a  disproof  of  the  existence  of 
something  on  the  ground  that,  if  it  existed,  it  would  have  to 
be  both  corporeal  and  one.  This  cannot  refer  to  the  Eleatic 
One,  in  which  Melissos  himself  believed  ;  and,  as  the  argu¬ 
ment  is  almost  verbally  the  same  as  one  of  Zeno’s,5  it  is 
natural  to  suppose  that  it  also  was  directed  against  the 
Pythagorean  assumption  of  ultimate  units.  The  only 
possible  objection  is  that  Simplicius,  who  twice  quotes  the 


1  The  view  of  Baumker  that  Melissos  admitted  avTureplaTao-is  or  motion 
in  pleno  ( Jahrb.f .  kl.  Phil.,  1886,  p.  541  ;  Das  Problem  der  Materie,  p.  59) 
depends  upon  some  words  of  Simplicius  ( Phys .  p.  104,  13),  oux  M  Svrardr 
Slcl  TrXrjpovs  Kireiadat,  u>s  ewl  tGiv  awpAroir  A 6yo/xer  kt\.  These  words  were 
formerly  turned  into  Ionic  and  passed  off  as  a  fragment  of  Melissos.  They 
are,  however,  part  of  Simplicius’s  own  argument  against  Alexander,  and 
have  nothing  to  do  with  Melissos  at  all. 

2  See,  however,  Baumker,  Das  Problem  der  Materie,  pp.  57  sqq.,  who 
remarks  that  ior  (or  Sr)  in  fr.  9  must  be  the  predicate,  as  it  has  no  article. 
In  his  fifth  edition  (p.  61 1,  n.  2)  Zeller  adopted  the  view  here  taken. 
He  rightly  observes  that  the  hypothetical  form  el  p.er  dr  ely  speaks  for  it, 
and  that  the  subject  to  el-q  must  be  eKaaror  rQr  ttoWui r,  as  with  Zeno. 

8  Met.  A,  5.  986  b  18  (R.  P.  101). 

4  Brandis  changed  the  el-q  to  tan,  but  there  is  no  warrant  for  this. 

6  Cf.  Zeno,  fr.  1,  especially  the  words  el  SI  Sanr,  6i.r6.yKT)  tramor 
ixiyedds  ti  txecv  ’’■“X05- 


Opposi¬ 
tion  to 
Pytha¬ 
goreans. 


328  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 

fragment,  certainly  took  it  in  the  sense  usually  given  to 
it.  But  it  was  very  natural  for  him  to  make  this  mistake. 
“  The  One  ”  was  an  expression  that  had  two  senses  in  the 
middle  of  the  fifth  century  b.c.  ;  it  meant  either  the  whole 
of  reality  or  the  point  as  a  spatial  unit.  To  maintain  it  in 
the  first  sense,  the  Eleatics  were  obliged  to  disprove  it  in  the 
second  ;  and  so  it  sometimes  seemed  that  they  were  speaking 
of  their  own  “  One  ”  when  they  really  meant  the  other.  We 
have  seen  that  the  very  same  difficulty  was  felt  about  Zeno’s 
denial  of  the  “  one.”  2 

Sonto'  I7°'  The  most  ^markable  fragment  of  Melissos  is, 

agoras.  perhaps’  the  last  (fr-  8)-  It  seems  to  be  directed  against 
Anaxagoras  ;  at  least  the  language  seems  more  applicable 
to  him  than  an}/  one  else.  Anaxagoras  had  admitted 
(§  137 >  fin)  that,  so  far  as  our  perceptions  go,  they  do  not 
agree  with  his  theory,  though  he  held  this  was  due  solely 
to  their  weakness.  Melissos,  taking  advantage  of  this 
admission,  urges  that,  if  we  give  up  the  senses  as  the  test 
of  reality,  we  are  not  entitled  to  reject  the  Eleatic  theory. 
With  wonderful  penetration  he  points  out  that  if  we  are  to 
say,  with  Anaxagoras,  that  things  are  a  many,  we  are  bound 
also  to  say  that  each  one  of  them  is  such  as  the  .  Eleatics 
declared  the  One  to  be.  In  other  words,  the  only  consistent 
pluralism  is  the  atomic  theory. 

Melissos  has  been  unduly  depreciated  owing  to  the 
criticisms  of  Aristotle ;  but  these,  we  have  seen,  are  based 
mainly  on  a  somewhat  pedantic  objection  to  the  false  con¬ 
version  m  the  early  part  of  the  argument.  Melissos  knew 
nothing  about  the  rules  of  conversion  ;  and  he  could  easily 

have  made  his  reasoning  formally  correct  without  modifying 

his  system.  His  greatness  consisted  in  this,  that  not  only 
was  he  the  real  systematiser  of  Eleaticism,  but  he  was  also 
able  to  see,  before  the  pluralists  saw  it  themselves,  the  only 
way  in  which  the  theory  that  things  are  a  many  could  be 

Simpl.  Phys.  pp.  87,  6,  and  no,  1. 

2  See  above,  §  i59,  p.  3I5>  3. 


THE  YOUNGER  ELEATICS  32g 

consistently  worked  out.1  It  is  significant  that  Polybos,  the 
nephew  of  Hippokrates,  reproaches  those  “  sophists  ”  who 
taught  there  was  only  one  primary  substance  with  “  putting 
the  doctrine  of  Melissos  on  its  feet.”  2 

1  Ballmer,  op.  cit.  p.  58,  n.  3  :  "  That  Melissos  was  a  weakling  is 
a  fable  convenue  that  people  repeat  after  Aristotle,  who  was  unable  to 
appreciate  the  Eleatics  in  general,  and  in  particular  misunderstood  Melissos 
not  inconsiderably.” 

,  2  UePl  avdpiirrov,  C.  I,  dXA’  ?p.oiye  toKeowiv  ol  rotovroi  &?0pu7 rot 

aiToi  ewvTous  Kara/3d\\uv  ev  rolaiv  dv6p.aun  rur  \6yiov  avrCov  virb  aawctrlps, 
TOP  Se  MeXlfftrov  \6y0v  6p0ovv.  The  metaphors  are  taken  from  wrestling! 
and  were  current  at  this  date  (cf.  the  KarapaWovres  of  Protagoras).  Plato 
implies  a  more  generous  appreciation  of  Melissos  than  Aristotle’s.  In 
Theaet.  180  e  2,  he  refers  to  the  Eleatics  as  MA <W  re  Kai  llapneviSai, 
and  in  183  e  4  he  almost  apologises  for  giving  the  pre-eminence  to 
Parmenides. 


CHAPTER  IX 


LEUKIPPOS  OF  MILETOS 


Leukippos  171.  WE  have  seen  (§§  31,  122)  that  the  school  of  Miletos 
Demo-  did  not  come  to  an  end  with  Anaximenes,  and  it  is  a  striking 
fact  that  the  man  who  gave  the  most  complete  answer  to  the 
question  first  asked  by  Thales  was  a  Milesian.1  It  is  true 
that  the  very  existence  of  Leukippos  has  been  called  in 
question.  Epicurus  is  reported  to  have  said  there  never  was 
such  a  philosopher,  and  the  same  thing  has  been  maintained 
in  quite  recent  times.2  On  the  other  hand,  Aristotle  and 
Theophrastos  certainly  made  him  the  originator  of  the  atomic 
theory,  and  they  can  hardly  have  been  mistaken  on  such  a 
point.  Aristotle  was  specially  interested  in  Demokritos,  and 
his  native  Stageiros  is  not  very  far  from  Abdera,  the  seat  of 
the  Atomist  school. 


1  Theophrastos  said  he  was  an  Eleate  or  a  Milesian  (R.  P.  185)  while 
?hefenT  IX'  30  SayS  he  Was  an  Eleate  °r’  according  to  some,  an  Abderite. 

PvtWorea!T  1S  JUSt  ^  discrePancies  about  the  native  cities  of 
Pythagoreans  already  noted  (Chap.  VII.  p.  2s3,  M.  l}.  Diogenes  adds 

fu?onCCAetog  r  “PP08  was  a  Melian,  which  is  a  common  con- 

Demnk  7'Z\  CaUs  Diagoras  of  Melos  a  Milesian  (cf.  Dox.  p.  14). 

Demolmtos  was  called  by  some  a  Milesian  (Diog.  ix.  34;  R.  P  186 

r  the  same  reason  that  Leukippos  is  called  an  Eleate.  We  may  also 
Ts^  a^tulr  t0  Wh6ther  Her°d0t0S  ^  “  a  Halikar- 

*  R  lS5  b).  dXV  0*»  Aetj/cunriv  n,a  yeyeu^al  ^ 

Z  (SC'  E7rU°Vp0s)  o^PWXos.  This  led  E.  Rohde  to  mSn- 
tain  that  Leukippos  never  existed  ( Kl .  Schr.  i.  20s)  but  this  is  to  mai™ 

som“tMl0flieChraCteriStiC-yPiCUrean  ^  1  SUgg'St  that  Epicurus  said 

Gmek  for  “  I  ™  1  r  ^  °Ua’  which  would  be  idiomatic 

fCffi  /  nPm  (?}  ^  y  lgn°re  him’”  "I  decline  to  discuss  him.” 
(Cf.  e.g.  Dem.  De  cor.  §  7o  Z{ppiov  U  Kal  Aopi(JKOp  ^  n 

ir6pdVacV  .  .  .  ovS  d  ytyovev  olSa.)  That  would  be  just  like  Epicurus. 

330 


LEUKIPPOS  OF  MILETOS  33i 

The  question  is  intimately  bound  up  with  that  of  the 
date  of  Demokritos,  who  said  that  he  himself  was  a  young 
man  in  the  old  age  of  Anaxagoras,  a  statement  which  makes 
it  unhkely  that  he  founded  his  school  at  Abdera  much  before 
420  b.c.,  the  date  given  by  Apollodoros  for  his  floruit.1  Now 
Theophrastos  stated  that  Diogenes  of  Apollonia  borrowed 
some  of  his  views  from  Anaxagoras  and  some  fromLeukippos,2 
which  must  mean  that  there  were  traces  of  the  atomic  theory 
m  his  work.  Further,  Diogenes  is  parodied  in  the  Clouds  of 
Aristophanes,  which  was  produced  in  423  b.c.,  from  which  it 
follows  that  the  work  of  Leukippos  must  have  become  known 
before  that  date.  What  that  work  was,  Theophrastos  also 
tells  us.  It  was  the  Great  Diakosmos  usually  attributed  to 
Demokritos.3  This  means  further  that  what  were  known 
later  as  the  works  of  Demokritos  were  really  the  writings  of 
the  school  of  Abdera,  and  included,  as  was  natural,  the  works 
of  its  founder.  They  formed,  in  fact,  a  corpus  like  that  which 
has  come  down  to  us  under  the  name  of  Hippokrates,  and 
it  was  no  more  possible  to  distinguish  the  authors  of  the 
different  treatises  in  the  one  case  than  it  is  in  the  other. 

Theophrastos  found  Leukippos  described  as  an  Eleate 
in  some  authorities,  and,  if  we  may  trust  analogy,  that  means 
he  had  settled  at  Elea.4  It  is  possible  that  his  emigration 

1  Diog.  ix.  41  (R.  P.  187).  As  Diels  says,  the  statement  suggests  that 
Anaxagoras  was  dead  when  Demokritos  wrote.  It  is  probable,  too,  that 
this  is  what  made  Apollodoros  fix  his  floruit  just  forty  years  after  that  of 
Anaxagoras  (Jacoby,  p.  290).  We  cannot  make  much  of  the  statement 
of  Demokritos  that  he  wrote  the  Mi/cpAs  81 droapos  750  years  after  the 
fall  of  Troy  ;  for  we  cannot  tell  what  era  he  used  (Jacoby,  p.  292). 

2  Theophr.  ap.  Simpl.  Phys.  p.  25,  1  (R.  P.  206  a). 

3  This  was  stated  by  Thrasylos  in  his  list  of  the  tetralogies  in  which  he 
arranged  the  works  of  Demokritos,  as  he  did  those  of  Plato.  He  gives 
Tetr.  iii.  thus  :  (1)  M^yas  Sidroapo  s  (8i>  ol  ire  pi  0  edippaarov  Aevidirirov 
(paa'tv  elvai)  ;  (2)  Mi/cpOs  Sidroapos  ;  (3)  Koapoy pafii)  ;  (4)  Ilepi  tuv 
ir'Kavrp-aiv.  The  two  8i6.Koa-p.or  would  only  be  distinguished  as  ply  as  and 
piKpds  when  they  came  to  be  included  in  the  same  corpus.  A  quotation 
from  the  n epl  rod  of  Leukippos  is  preserved  in  Stob.  i.  160.  The  phrase 
iv  tols  A eiiKhrirov  KaXovfUvois  X 6701s  in  M.X.G.  980  a  8  seems  to  refer 
to  Anst.  De  gen.  corr.  A,  8.  325  a  24,  AeiAt7riros  8'  txeiv  VV^V  X6yoos  kt\. 
CL  Chap.  II.  p.  126,  n.  1. 

*  See  above,  p.  330,  n.  1. 


332 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


was  connected  with  the  revolution  at  Miletos  in  450—49  b.c.1 
In  any  case,  Theophrastos  says  distinctly  that  he  had  been 
a  member  of  the  school  of  Parmenides,  and  his  words  suggest 
that  the  founder  of  that  school  was  then  still  at  its  head.2 
He  may  quite  well  have  been  so,  if  we  accept  Plato’s 
chronology.3  Theophrastos  also  appears  to  have  said  that 
I.eukippos  “  heard  ”  Zeno,  which  is  very  credible.  We  shall 
see,  at  any  rate,  that  the  influence  of  Zeno  on  his  thinking  is 
unmistakable.4 

The  relations  of  Leukippos  to  Empedokles  and  Anax- 
agoras  are  more  difficult  to  determine.  It  has  become  part 
of  the  case  for  the  historical  reality  of  Leukippos  to  say  that 
there  are  traces  of  atomism  in  the  systems  of  these  men  ; 
but  the  case  is  strong  enough  without  that  assumption.  The 
chief  argument  for  the  view  that  Leukippos  influenced 
Empedokles  is  that  drawn  from  the  doctrine  of  “  pores  ”  ■ 
but  we  have  seen  that  this  originated  with  Alkmaion,  and 
it  is  therefore  more  probable  that  Leukippos  derived  it  from 
Empedokles.5  Nor  is  it  at  all  probable  that  Anaxagoras 
knew  anything  of  the  theory  of  Leukippos.  It  is  true  that 
he  denied  the  existence  of  the  void ;  but  it  does  not  follow 
that  any  one  had  already  maintained  that  doctrine  in  the 
atomist  sense.  The  early  Pythagoreans  had  spoken  of  a 
void  too,  though  they  had  confused  it  with  atmospheric  air  ; 
and  the  experiments  of  Anaxagoras  with  the  klepsydra  and 
the  inflated  skins  would  only  have  had  any  point  if  they  were 
directed  against  the  Pythagorean  theory.5  If  he  had  really 


!  Cf.  [Xen.]  ’Aff.  xoA.  3,  n.  The  date  is  fixed  by  C.I.A.  i.  22  a. 

ence  of  case' in^'  7'  P'  ^  4  (R‘  R  l85>-  Note  the  differ' 

e  ce  01  case  in  Kolv «r*ra,  llap^iSr,  r ijs  and  Koivwqrras  rm 

Anaxaeoras  t  7*  ™'  7  ^  the  phrase  used  bT  Theophrastos  3 

ship  §It  is  ouite53’  h  2  '  -Krhe  datlve  seems  to  a  personal  relation- 

t  H  b  e  t0  render  “  was  famliar  Wlth  doctrine  of 

13  d0Qe  m  G°mperZ’  Greek  T h™kers,  vol.  i.  p.  345. 

‘-"T  /X'  3°'  °5r0S  (R.  P.  185  b);  and  Hipp. 

•'  ’  '  *■'«"* os  .  .  .  Z qviovos  eratpos 

6  See  above.  Chap.  V.  p.  i94,  „  3 

*  See  above<  Cbap.  VI.  §  131  ;  and  Chap.  VII.  §  r45. 


LEUKIPPOS  OF  MILETOS  333 

wished  to  refute  Leukippos,  he  would  have  had  to  use 
arguments  of  a  very  different  kind. 

172.  Theophrastos  wrote  of  Leukippos  as  follows  in  the 
First  Book  of  his  Opinions  : 

Leukippos  of  Elea  or  Miletos  (for  both  accounts  are  given 
of  him)  had  associated  with  Parmenides  in  philosophy.  He  did 
not,  however,  follow  the  same  path  in  his  explanation  of  things 
as  Parmenides  and  Xenophanes  did,  but,  to  all  appearance,  the 
very  opposite  (R.  P.  185).  They  made  the  All  one,  immovable, 
uncreated,  and  finite,  and  did  not  even  permit  us  to  search  for 
what  is  not ;  he  assumed  innumerable  and  ever-moving  elements, 
namely,  the  atoms.  And  he  made  their  forms  infinite  in  number, 
since  there  was  no  reason  why  they  should  be  of  one  kind  rather 
than  another,  and  because  he  saw  that  there  was  unceasing 
becoming  and  change  in  things.  He  held,  further,  that  what  is 
is  no  more  real  than  what  is  not,  and  that  both  are  alike  causes 
of  the  things  that  come  into  being  ;  for  he  laid  down  that  the 
substance  of  the  atoms  was  compact  and  full,  and  he  called  them 
what  is,  while  they  moved  in  the  void  which  he  called  what  is  not, 
but  affirmed  to  be  just  as  real  as  what  is.  R.  P.  194. 

173.  It  will  be  observed  that  Theophrastos,  while  noting  Leukippos 
the  affiliation  of  Leukippos  to  the  Eleatic  school,  points  out  mVuL 
that  his  theory  is,  prima  facie }  just  the  opposite  of  that 
maintained  by  Parmenides.  Some  have  been  led  by  this  to 
deny  the  Eleaticism  of  Leukippos  altogether  ;  but  this  denial 
is  really  based  on  the  view  that  the  system  of  Parmenides 
was  “  metaphysical,”  coupled  with  a  great  reluctance  to 
admit  that  so  scientific  a  hypothesis  as  the  atomic  theory 
can  have  had  a  “  metaphysical  ”  origin.  This  is  merely  a 
prejudice,  and  we  must  not  suppose  Theophrastos  himself 
believed  the  two  theories  to  be  so  far  apart  as  they 

1  The  words  ws  Sorec  do  not  imply  assent  to  the  view  introduced  by 
them  ;  indeed  they  are  constantly  used  in  reference  to  beliefs  which  the 
writer  does  not  accept.  The  translation  “  methinks  ”  in  Gomperz,  Greek 
Thinkers,  vol.  i.  p.  345,  is  therefore  most  misleading,  and  there'  is  no 
justification  for  Brieger’s  statement  ( Hermes ,  xxxvi.  p.  165)  that  Theo¬ 
phrastos  dissents  from  Aristotle’s  view  as  given  in  the  passage  about  to 
be  quoted. 


Theo¬ 
phrastos 
on  the 
atomic 
theory. 


334 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


seem.1  As  this  is  really  the  most  important  point  in  the 
history  of  early  Greek  philosophy,  and  as,  rightly  under¬ 
stood,  it  furnishes  the  key  to  the  whole  development, 
it  is  worth  while  to  transcribe  a  passage  of  Aristotle  2 
which  explains  the  historical  connexion  in  a  way  that 
leaves  nothing  to  be  desired. 

Leukippos  and  Demokritos  have  decided  about  all  things 
practically  by  the  same  method  and  on  the  same  theory,  taking 
as  their  starting-point  what  naturally  comes  first.  Some  of  the 
ancients  had  held  that  the  real  must  necessarily  be  one  and 
immovable  ;  for,  said  they,  empty  space  is  not  real,  and  motion 
would  be  impossible  without  empty  space  separated  from 
matter ;  nor,  further,  could  reality  be  a  many,  if  there  were 
nothing  to  separate  things.  And  it  makes  no  difference  if  any 
one  holds  that  the  All  is  not  continuous,  but  discrete,  with  its 
parts  in  contact  {the  Pythagorean  view),  instead  of  holding  that 

reality  is  many,  not  one,  and  that  there  is  empty  space.  For, 
if  it  is  divisible  at  every  point  there  is  no  one,  and  therefore  no 
many,  and  the  Whole  is  empty  {Zeno)  ;  while,  if  we  say  it  is 
divisible  in  one  place  and  not  in  another,  this  looks  like  an 
arbitrary  fiction  ;  for  up  to  what  point  and  for  what  reason  will 
part  of  the  Whole  be  in  this  state  and  be  full,  while  the  rest  is 
discrete  ?  And,  on  the  same  grounds,  they  further  say  that 
there  can  be  no  motion.  In  consequence  of  these  reasonings, 
then,  going  beyond  perception  and  overlooking  it  in  the  belief 
that  we  ought  to  follow  the  argument,  they  say  that  the  All  is 
one  and  immovable  ( Parmenides ),  and  some  of  them  that  it  is 
infinite  {Melissos) ,  lor  any  limit  would  be  bounded  by  empty 
space.  This,  then,  is  the  opinion  they  expressed  about  the  truth, 
and  these  are  the  reasons  which  led  them  to  do  so.  Now,  so  far 
as  arguments  go,  this  conclusion  does  seem  to  follow ;  but,  if 
we  appeal  to  facts,  to  hold  such  a  view  looks  like  madness.  No 
one  who  is  mad  is  so  far  out  of  his  senses  that  fire  and  ice  appear 
to  him  to  be  one  ;  it  is  only  things  that  are  right,  and  things  that 

1  This  prejudice  is  apparent  all  through  Gomperz's  Greek  Thinkers,  and 

seriously  impairs  the  value  of  that  fascinating,  though  somewhat  imagina¬ 
tive  work.  It  is  amusing  to  notice  that  Brieger,  from  the  same  point  of 
view,  regards  the  custom  of  making  Anaxagoras  the  last  of  the  Presocratics 
as  due  to  theological  prepossessions  ( Henries ,  xxxvi.  p.  185). 

2  Arist.  De  gen.  corr.  A,  8.  324  b  35  (R.  P.  193). 


LEUKIPPOS  OF  MILETOS  335 

appear  right  from  habit,  in  which  madness  makes  some  people 
see  no  difference, 

Leukippos,  however,  thought  he  had  a  theory  which  was  in 
armony  with  sense,  and  did  not  do  away  with  coming  into  being 
and  passing  away,  nor  motion,  nor  the  multiplicity  of  things.  He 
conceded  this  to  experience,  while  he  conceded,  on  the  other 
hand,  to  those  who  invented  the  One  that  motion  was  impossible 
without  the  void,  that  the  void  was  not  real,  and  that  nothing  of 
what  was  real  was  not  real.  “  For,”  said  he,  “  that  which  is 
strictly  speaking  real  is  an  absolute  plenum ;  but  the  plenum  is 
not  one.  On  the  contrary,  there  are  an  infinite  number  of  them, 
and  they  are  invisible  owing  to  the  smallness  of  their  bulk.  They 
move  in  the  void  (for  there  is  a  void)  ;  and  by  their  coming 
together  they  effect  coming  into  being;  by  their  separation, 
passing  away.” 

In  this  passage  Zeno  and  Melissos  are  not  named,  but 
the  reference  to  them  is  unmistakable.  The  argument  of 
Zeno  against  the  Pythagoreans  is  clearly  given  ;  and  Melissos 
was  the  only  Eleatic  who  made  reality  infinite,  a  point  which 
is  distinctly  mentioned.  We  are  therefore  justified  by 
Aristotle’s  words  in  explaining  the  genesis  of  Atomism  and 
its  relation  to  Eleaticism  as  follows.  Zeno  had  shown  that 
all  pluralist  systems  yet  known,  and  especially  Pytha- 
goreanism,  were  unable  to  stand  before  the  arguments  from 
infinite  divisibility  which  he  adduced.  Melissos  had  used 
the  same  argument  against  Anaxagoras,  and  had  added,  as 
a  reductio  ad  absurdum,  that,  if  there  were  many  things,  each 
one  of  them  must  be  such  as  the  Eleatics  held  the  One  to  be. 
To  this  Leukippos  answers,  “  Why  not  ?  ”  He  admitted  the 
force  of  Zeno’s  arguments  by  setting  a  limit  to  divisibility, 
and  to  each  of  the  “  atoms  ”  which  he  thus  arrived  at  he 
ascribed  all  the  predicates  of  the  Eleatic  One  ;  for  Par¬ 
menides  had  shown  that  if  it  is,  it  must  have  these  predicates 
somehow.  The  same  view  is  implied  in  a  passage  of  Aris¬ 
totle  s  Physics.1  Some,  we  are  there  told,  “  surrendered 
to  both  arguments,  to  the  first,  the  argument  that  all  things 

1  Arist.  Phys.  A,  3.  187  a  1  (R.  P.  134  b). 


336 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Atoms. 


are  one,  if  the  word  is  is  used  in  one  sense  only  (Parmenides) , 
by  affirming  the  reality  of  what  is  not ;  to  the  second,  that 
based  on  dichotomy  (Zeno),  by  introducing  indivisible  magni¬ 
tudes.”  Finally,  it  is  only  by  regarding  the  matter  in  this 
way  that  we  can  attach  any  meaning  to  another  statement 
of  Aristotle’s  that  Leukippos  and  Demokritos,  as  well  as  the 
Pythagoreans,  virtually  make  all  things  out  of  numbers.1 
Leukippos,  in  fact,  gave  the  Pythagorean  monads  the 
character  of  the  Parmenidean  One. 

174.  We  must  observe  that  the  atom  is  not  mathe¬ 
matically  indivisible,  for  it  has  magnitude  ;  it  is,  however, 
physically  indivisible,  because,  like  the  One  of  Parmenides, 
it  contains  no  empty  space.2  Each  atom  has  extension,  and 
all  atoms  are  exactly  alike  in  substance.3  Therefore  all 
differences  in  things  must  be  accounted  for  either  by  the 
shape  of  the  atoms  or  by  their  arrangement.  It  seems 
probable  that  the  three  ways  in  which  differences  arise, 
namely,  shape,  position,  and  arrangement,  were  already 
distinguished  by  Leukippos  ;  for  Aristotle  mentions  his  name 
in  connexion  with  them.4  This  explains,  too,  why  the  atoms 
are  called  “  forms  ”  or  "  figures,”  a  way  of  speaking  which  is 
clearly  of  Pythagorean  origin.5  That  they  are  also  called 

1  Arist.  De  caelo,  T,  4.  303  a  8,  rpbirop  yap  riva  /cat  oSrot  (AeijKLTnros 
/cat  Ar/pbicpiTos)  irdpTQ.  ra  opto,  ttoioucip  bpiOp.otrs  /cat  dptdpup.  This  also 
serves  to  explain  the  statement  of  Herakleides  attributing  the  theory 
of  corporeal  67/cot  to  the  Pythagorean  Ekphantos  of  Syracuse  (above, 
p.  291,  n.  3). 

2  The  Epicureans  misunderstood  this  point,  or  misrepresented  it  in 
order  to  magnify  their  own  originality  (see  Zeller,  p.  857,  n.  3). 

Anst.  De  caelo,  A,  7*  275  h  32,  ttjp  5b  (pbaip  etpai  tpa&ip  a vtQp  p.[av. 
Here  0 iW  can  only  have  one  meaning.  Cf.  Phys.  T,  4.  203  a  34,  avrtp 
(An]p.oKplrcp)  t5  koivov  orQfia  irdvruv  bcrrlp  apyp. 

4  Arist.  Met.  A,  4.  985  b  13  (R.  P.  192) ;  cf.  De  gen.  corn.  A,  2.  315  b  6. 
As  Diels  suggests,  the  illustration  from  letters  is  probably  due  to  Demo¬ 
kritos.  It  shows,  in  any  case,  how  the  word  aToixeiov  came  to  be  used  for 
“  element.”  We  must  read,  with  Wilamowitz,  to  8b  Z  rov  H  dtaei  for 
rb  8b  Z  TOO  N  dbarei,  the  older  form  of  the  letter  Z  being  just  an  H  laid 
upon  its  side  (Diels,  Elementum,  p.  13,  n.  1). 

5  Demokritos  wrote  a  work,  Ilepl  ISeup  (Sext.  Math.  vii.  137  ;  R.  p. 
204),  which  Diels  identifies  with  the  ITepl  tup  8  1  a <p op 6 v t u p  pvapiup  of 
Thrasylos,  Tetr.  v.  3.  Theophrastos  refers  to  Demokritos,  iv  robs  xepi 
tup  el8wp  (De  sensibus,  §  51).  Plut.  Adv.  Col.  mi  a,  dpai  8b  wdpTa  rds 


LEUKIPPOS  OF  MILETOS 


337 

1  is  quite  intelligible  if  we  remember  what  was  said  of 
that  word  in  the  Introduction  (§  VII.).  The  differences  in 
shape,  order,  and  position  just  referred  to  account  for  the 
“  opposites,”  the  “  elements  ”  being  regarded  rather  as 
a?Srega'tes  of  these  ( Travcnrep/iLai, ),  as  by  Anaxagoras.* 1 2 

I75-  Leukippos  affirmed  the  existence  both  of  the  Full  The  void, 
and  the  Empty,  terms  which  he  may  have  borrowed  from 
Melissos.3  He  had  to  assume  empty  space,  which  the 
Eleatics  had  denied,  in  order  to  make  his  explanation  of  the 
nature  of  body  possible.  Here  again  he  is  developing  a 
Pythagorean  view.  The  Pythagoreans  had  spoken  of  the 
void,  which  kept  the  units  apart ;  but  they  had  not  dis¬ 
tinguished  it  from  atmospheric  air  (§  53),  which  Empedokles 
had  shown  to  be  a  corporeal  substance  (§  107).  Parmenides, 
indeed,  had  formed  a  clearer  conception  of  space,  but  only  to 
deny  its  reality  Leukippos  started  from  this.  He  admitted, 
indeed,  that  space  was  not  real,  that  is  to  say,  corporeal ; 
but  he  maintained  that  it  existed  all  the  same.  He  hardly, 
it  is  true,  had  words  to  express  his  discovery  in  ;  for  the  verb 
“  to  be  ”  had  hitherto  been  used  by  philosophers  only  of 
body.  But  he  did  his  best  to  make  his  meaning  clear  by 
saying  that  “  what  is  not  ”  (in  the  old  corporealist  sense) 

”  is  ”  (in  another  sense)  just  as  much  as  “  what  is.”  The 
void  is  as  real  as  body. 

176.  It  might  seem  a  hopeless  task  to  disentangle  the  Cosmo- 
cosmology  of  Leukippos  from  that  of  Demokritos,  with  l0gy' 
which  it  is  generally  identified ;  but  that  very  fact  affords 
a  valuable  clue.  No  one  later  than  Theophrastos  was  able 
to  distinguish  their  doctrines,  and  it  follows  that  all  definite 

At6/j.ovs,  Ibias  vir’  o.vtou  KaXov/xivas  (so  the  MSS.  :  tdlws,  Wyttenbach  ;  <?)> 
ld£as,  Diels).  Herodian  has  lo£a  ...  to  eXi ixL,TT0V  crQ/xa  (Diels,  Vors. 

55  b  141).  So  Arist.  Phys.  T,  4.  203  a  21,  (A £k  rrj s  navorirepfila s 
rCiv  oxvP-Atlov  (dirtipa  Troiel  ra  OTOtp^eta) .  Cf.  De  gen.  corr.  A,  2.  315  b  7 
(R.  P.  196). 

1  Arist.  Phys.  0,  9.  265  b  25  ;  Simpl.  Phys.  p.  1318,  33,  raCra  y&p 
(to.  Uto/ao.  aii/xara)  iicelvoi  <pvmv  (kAXovv. 

2  Simpl.  Phys.  p.  36,  1  (Diels,  Vors.  54  A  14),  arid  R.  P.  196  a. 

3  Arist.  Met.  A,  4.  985  b  4  (R.  P.  192).  Cl.  Melissos,  fr.  7  sub  fin. 

22 


33» 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


statements  about  Leukippos  in  later  writers  must,  in  the  long 
run,  go  back  to  him.  If  we  follow  this  up,  we  shall  be  able 
to  give  a  fairly  clear  account  of  the  system,  and  we  shall  even 
come  across  some  views  which  are  peculiar  to  Leukippos  and 
were  not  adopted  by  Demokritos.1 

The  fuller  of  the  doxographies  in  Diogenes,  which  comes 
from  an  epitome  of  Theophrastos,2  is  as  follows  : 


He  says  that  the  All  is  infinite,  and  that  it  is  part  full,  and 
part  empty.  These  (the  full  and  the  empty),  he  says,  are  the 
elements.  From  them  arise  innumerable  worlds  and  are  resolved 
mto  them.  The  worlds  come  into  being  thus.  There  were 
borne  along  by  "  abscission  from  the  infinite  ”  many  bodies  of  ah 
sorts  of  figures  into  a  mighty  void,’'  and  they  being  gathered 
together  produce  a  single  vortex.  In  it,  as  they  came  into 
collision  with  one  another  and  were  whirled  round  in  all  manner 
of  ways,  those  which  were  alike  were  separated  apart  and  came 
to  their  likes.  But,  as  they  were  no  longer  able  to  revolve  in 
equilibrium  owing  to  their  multitude,  those  of  them  that  were 
fine  went  out  to  the  external  void,  as  if  passed  through  a  sieve  ; 
the  rest  stayed  together,  and  becoming  entangled  with  one 
another,  ran  down  together,  and  made  a  first  spherical  structure. 
This  was  in  substance  like  a  membrane  or  skin  containing  in 
itself  all  kinds  of  bodies.  And,  as  these  bodies  were  borne  round 
m  a  vortex,  in  virtue  of  the  resistance  of  the  middle,  the  surround¬ 
ing  membrane  became  thin,  as  the  contiguous  bodies  kept 
flowing  together  from  contact  with  the  vortex.  And  in  this  wav 
the  earth  came  into  being,  those  things  which  had  been  borne 
towards  the  middle  abiding  there.  Moreover,  the  containing 
membrane  was  increased  by  the  further  separating  out  of  bodies 
from  outside ;  and,  being  itself  carried  round  in  a  vortex  it 
further  got  possession  of  all  with  which  it  had  come  in  contact. 
Some  of  these  becoming  entangled,  produced  a  structure,  which 
was  at  first  moist  and  muddy ;  but,  when  they  had  been  dried 
and  were  revolving  along  with  the  vortex  of  the  whole,  they  were 
then  ignited  and  produced  the  substance  of  the  heavenly  bodies. 

'  S*  Zeller,  “  Zu  Leukippos  "  Arch.  xv.  p.  138).  _ 

Diog.  ix.  31  sqq.  (R.  p.  i97,  197  c).  This  passage  deals  expresslv  with 
Leukippos,  not  with  Demokritos  or  even  -  r  I,  1  ■  8  ueai^  expressly  with 

For  the  distinction  between  the  °  s„”  a  "  ^"^“  ^DMokritos.- 

in  Diogenes,  see  Note  on  Sources,  §  15.  ^  etailed  doxographies 


LEUKIPPOS  OF  MILETOS 


339 


The  circle  of  the  sun  is  the  outermost,  that  of  the  moon  is  nearest 
to  the  earth,  and  those  of  the  others  are  between  these.  And  all 
the  heavenly  bodies  are  ignited  because  of  the  swiftness  of  their 
motion  ;  while  the  sun  is  also  ignited  by  the  stars.  But  the 
moon  only  receives  a  small  portion  of  fire.  The  sun  and  the 
moon  are  eclipsed  .  .  .  (And  the  obliquity  of  the  zodiac  is  pro¬ 
duced)  by  the  earth  being  inclined  towards  the  south  ;  and  the 
northern  parts  of  it  have  constant  snow  and  are  cold  and  frozen. 
And  the  sun  is  eclipsed  rarely,  and  the  moon  continually,  because 
their  circles  are  unequal.  And  just  as  there  are  comings  into 
being  of  the  world,  so  there  are  growths  and  decays  and  passings 
away  in  virtue  of  a  certain  necessity,  of  the  nature  of  which  he 
gives  no  clear  account. 

As  it  comes  substantially  from  Theophrastos,  this  passage 
is  good  evidence  for  the  cosmology  of  Leukippos,  and  it  is 
confirmed  by  certain  Epicurean  extracts  from  the  Great  Dia- 
kosmos.1  These,  however,  give  a  specially  Epicurean  turn  to 
some  of  the  doctrines,  and  must  therefore  be  used  with  caution. 

1 77.  The  general  impression  we  get  from  the  cosmology 
of  Leukippos  is  that  he  either  ignored  or  had  never  heard  of 
the  great  advance  in  the  general  view  of  the  world  which  was 
due  to  the  later  Pythagoreans.  He  is  as  reactionary  in  his 
detailed  cosmology  as  he  was  daring  in  his  general  physical 
theory.  We  seem  to  be  reading  once  more  of  the  specula¬ 
tions  of  Anaximenes  or  Anaximander,  though  there  are  traces 
of  Empedokles  and  Anaxagoras  too.  The  explanation  is  not 
hard  to  see.  Leukippos  would  not  learn  a  cosmology  from 
his  Eleatic  teachers  ;  and,  even  when  he  found  it  possible  to 
construct  one  without  giving  up  the  Parmenidean  view  of 
reality,  he  was  thrown  back  upon  the  older  systems  of  Ionia. 
The  result  was  unfortunate.  The  astronomy  of  Demokritos 
was  still  of  this  childish  character.  He  believed  the  earth 
was  flat  and  rested  on  the  air. 

This  is  what  gives  plausibility  to  Gomperz’s  statement 
that  Atomism  was  “  the  ripe  fruit  on  the  tree  of  the  old  Ionic 

1  See  Aet.  i.  4  (Dox.  p.  289  ;  Vors.  54  a  24  ;  Usener,  Epicurea,  fr.  308). 
Epicurus  himself  in  the  second  epistle  (Diog.  x.  88  ;  Usener,  p.  37,  7)  quotes 
the  phrase  atroTop-^v  #xovcra  r*Tr°  ro']  antipov. 


Relation 
to  Ionic 
cosmo¬ 
logy. 


340 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


doctrine  of  matter  which  had  been  tended  by  the  Ionian 
physiologists.  1  The  detailed  cosmology  was  certainly  such 
a  fruit,  and  it  was  possibly  over-ripe  ;  but  the  atomic  theory 
proper,  in  which  the  real  greatness  of  Leukippos  comes  out, 
was  wholly  Eleatic  in  its  origin.  Nevertheless,  it  will  repay 
us  to  examine  the  cosmology  too  ;  for  such  an  examination 
will  serve  to  bring  out  the  true  nature  of  the  historical 
development  of  which  it  was  the  outcome. 

Iternai  I?8'  LeukiPPos  represented  the  atoms  as  having  been 

motion,  always  in  motion.  Aristotle  puts  this  in  his  own  way.  The 
atomists,  he  says,  “  indolently  ”  left  it  unexplained  what 
was  the  source  of  motion,  and  did  not  say  what  sort  of  motion 
it  was.  In  other  words,  they  did  not  decide  whether  it  was 
a  “natural  motion”  or  impressed  on  them  “contrary  to 
their  nature.”  2  He  even  said  that  they  made  it  “  spon¬ 
taneous,”  a  remark  which  has  given  rise  to  the  erroneous 
view  that  they  held  it  was  due  to  chance.3  Aristotle  does 
not  say  that,  however ;  but  only  that  the  atomists  did  not 
explain  the  motion  of  the  atoms  in  any  of  the  ways  in  which 
he  himself  explained  the  motion  of  the  elements.  They 
neither  ascribed  to  them  a  natural  motion  like  the  circular 
motion  of  the  heavens  and  the  rectilinear  motion  of  the  four 
elements  in  the  sublunary  region,  nor  did  they  give  them  a 
forced  motion  contrary  to  their  own  nature,  like  the  upward 
motion  that  may  be  given  to  the  heavy  elements  and  the 
downward  that  may  be  given  to  the  light.  The  only  frag¬ 
ment  of  Leukippos  which  has  survived  is  an  express  denial 
of  chance.  “  Naught  happens  for  nothing,”  he  said,  “  but 
everything  from  a  ground  and  of  necessity.”  4 


1  Gomperz,  Greek  Thinkers,  vol  i  p  323 

m  195  •» ;  *  r-  *  ~  0 8  <*•  * 

*-'**%■  -  2M  “tt  k66 

concourse  ”  (concurrere=avvrP4xeiv).  P  fortuitous 

,  /  Aet-  i-  25’  4  (Box.  p.  321),  AevKLTTTOi  TTdrra  Kar ’  drdyKvu  V  ■  * 
virapxw  tipa.pp.iryv.  \4yet  ydp  iv  ™  IW  vov-  <M84v  v  ^  V  1  5  aVTr]v 

dWd  irdvra  4k  \byov  re  sal  inr'  ardysys.  XPVda  pdryv  ylyverai, 


LEUKIPPOS  OF  MILETOS 


34i 


Speaking  historically,  all  this  means  that  Leukippos  did 
not,  like  Empedokles  and  Anaxagoras,  find  it  necessary  to 
assume  a  force  to  originate  motion.  He  had  no  need  of 
Love  and  Strife  or  Mind,  and  the  reason  is  clear.  Though 
Empedokles  and  Anaxagoras  had  tried  to  explain  multi¬ 
plicity  and  motion,  they  had  not  broken  so  radically  as 
Leukippos  with  the  Parmenidean  One.  Both  started  with 
a  condition  of  matter  in  which  the  “  roots  ”  or  “  seeds  ” 
were  mixed  so  as  to  be  “  all  together,”  and  they  therefore 
required  something  to  break  up  this  unity.  Leukippos, 
who  started  with  an  infinite  number  of  Parmenidean  "  Ones,” 
so  to  speak,  required  no  external  agency  to  separate  them. 

What  he  had  to  do  was  just  the  opposite.  He  had  to  account 
for  their  coming  together,  and  there  was  nothing  so  far  to 
prevent  his  return  to  the  old  idea  that  motion  does  not 
require  any  explanation  at  all.1 

This,  then,  is  what  seems  to  follow  from  the  criticisms 
of  Aristotle  and  from  the  nature  of  the  case  ;  but  it  is  not 
consistent  with  Zeller’s  opinion  that  the  original  motion  of 
the  atoms  is  a  fall  through  infinite  space,  as  in  the  system  of 
Epicurus.  This  view  depends,  of  course,  on  the  further 
belief  that  the  atoms  have  weight,  and  that  wreight  is 
the  tendency  of  bodies  to  fall,  so  we  must  now  consider 
whether  and  in  what  sense  weight  is .  a  property  of  the 
atoms. 

179.  As  is  well  known,  Epicurus  held  that  the  atoms  The 
were  naturally  heavy,  and  therefore  fell  continually  in  the  the  atoms, 
infinite  void.  The  school  tradition  is,  however,  that  the 
“  natural  weight  ”  of  the  atoms  wras  an  addition  made  by 
Epicurus  himself  to  the  original  atomic  system.  Demokritos, 
we  are  told,  assigned  two  properties  to  atoms,  magnitude  and 
form,  to  which  Epicurus  added  a  third,  weight.2  On  the 

1  Introd.  §  VIII. 

2  Aet.  i.  3,  18  (of  Epicurus),  ou^e^Kbai  dd  rots  atb/xacri  rpta  raura, 
crx%«i,  [ityedos ,  jSapos.  A  rj/j-oKpiros  fx  h  yixp  i\eye  duo,  /aiyedos  ts  Kal 
trxvfxa,  6  8d  ’ Ewiicovpos  toutois  Kal  tp'itov  fiapos  Trpoat8r)Kev  •  avdyKr/  y&p,  y^crt, 

KLveladai  ra  auip-ara  rp  rod  fi&povs  irX-qyfi  •  direl  (“or  else")  ou  KwridTioeTai', 


342 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


other  hand,  Aristotle  distinctly  says  that  Demokritos  held 
the  atoms  were  heavier  “  in  proportion  to  their  excess,”  and 
this  seems  to  be  explained  by  the  statement  of  Theophrastos 
that,  according  to  him,  weight  depended  on  magnitude.1 
Even  so,  however,  it  is  not  represented  as  a  primary  property 
of  the  atoms  in  the  same  sense  as  magnitude. 

It  is  impossible  to  solve  this  apparent  contradiction 
without  referring  briefly  to  the  history  of  Greek  ideas  about 
weight.  It  is  clear  that  lightness  and  weight  would  be  among 
the  very  first  properties  of  body  to  be  distinctly  recognised 
as  such.  The  necessity  of  lifting  burdens  must  very  soon 
have  led  men  to  distinguish  them,  though  no  doubt  in  a 
crude  form.  Both  weight  and  lightness  would  be  thought 
of  as  things  that  were  in  bodies.  Now  it  is  a  remarkable 
feature  of  early  Greek  philosophy  that  from  the  first  it  was 
able  to  shake  itself  free  from  this  idea.  Weight  is  never 
called  a  “  thing  ”  as,  for  instance,  warmth  and  cold  are  ; 
and,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  not  one  of  the  thinkers  we  have 
studied  hitherto  thought  it  necessary  to  give  any  explanation 
of  it  at  all,  or  even  to  say  anything  about  it.2  The  motions 
and  resistances  which  popular  theory  ascribes  to  weight  are 


l  ■  12,  6,  AypiKpiros  rk  rrp&rd  (pTjui  0-c ip.ara,  ravra  5’  fjp  rk  petard,  Bdpos 
T  .  «  Kar’  a\\-r]\oTVirlav  ip  r$  direlpy.  Cic.  De  fato 

2°’  V1™  motus  habebant  (atomi)  a  Democrito  impulsionis  quam 

plagam  llle  appellat,  a  te,  Epicure,  gravitatis  et  ponderis.”  These 
passages  represent  the  Epicurean  school  tradition,  which  would  hardly 
misrepresent  Demokritos  on  so  important  a  point.  His  works  were  still 
accessible.  It  is  confirmed  by  the  Academic  tradition  in  De  fin.  i.  17  that 
Demokritos  taught  the  atoms  moved  “  in  infinito  inani,  in  quo  nihil  nec 
summum  nec  infimum  nec  medium  nec  extremum  sit."  This  doctrine 
we  are  quite  rightly  told,  was  “  depraved  ”  by  Epicurus 

1  Arist.  De  gen.  corr.  A,  8.  326  a  9,  Kalrot  fiapvrepip  ye  Kark  r^p  irrepo^p 
<py)(XiP  elpai  Arip.iKpi.Tos  'iKaarop  rS>p  iitcupirwp.  I  cannot  believe  this 
means  anything  else  than  what  Theophrastos  says  in  his  fragment  on 

1“ §  61  (R- p  I99)'  **  *  *  - 


3  In  Aet  1  12,  where  the  placita  regarding  the  heavy  and  light  are 

ffrV7  Z  sPn  kSOPfe+rneafer  Hat0  iS  r6ferred  to‘  Parmenides 

(fr.  8.  59)  speaks  of  the  dark  element  as  ippptdh.  Empedokles  (fr  17) 

uses  the  word  drdXaPTop.  I  do  not  think  that  there  is  any  other 

p^osoplS.  w'‘eht  is  ev“  me”*i0”d  in  th'  fragm“ts  0<  the 


LEUKIPPOS  OF  MILETOS 


343 

all  explained  in  some  other  way.  Aristotle  distinctly  declares 
that  none  of  his  predecessors  had  said  anything  of  absolute 
weight  and  lightness.  They  had  only  treated  of  the  relatively 
light  and  heavy.1 

This  way  of  regarding  the  notions  of  weight  and 
lightness  is  clearly  formulated  for  the  first  time  in 
Plato  s  Timaeus.2,  There  is  no  such  thing  in  the  world, 
we  are  told  there,  as  “up”  or  “down.”  The  middle 
of  the  world  is  not  “  down  ”  but  “  just  in  the  middle,” 
and  there  is  no  reason  why  any  point  in  the  circum¬ 
ference  should  be  said  to  be  “  above  ”  or  “  below  ” 
another.  It  is  really  the  tendency  of  bodies  towards  their 
kin  that  makes  us  call  a  falling  body  heavy  and  the 
place  to  which  it  falls  “  below.”  Here  Plato  is  really 
giving  the  view  taken  more  or  less  consciously  by  his  pre¬ 
decessors,  and  it  is  not  till  the  time  of  Aristotle  that  it  is 
questioned.3  For  reasons  which  do  not  concern  us  here, 
Aristotle  identified  the  circumference  of  the  heavens  with 
“  up  ”  and  the  middle  of  the  world  with  “  down,”  and 
equipped  the  elements  with  natural  weight  and  lightness 
that  they  might  perform  their  rectilinear  motions  between 
them.  As,  however,  Aristotle  believed  there  was  only  one 
world,  and  did  not  ascribe  weight  to  the  heavens  proper,  the 
effect  of  this  reactionary  theory  on  his  cosmical  system  was 
not  great ;  it  was  only  when  Epicurus  tried  to  combine  it 
with  the  infinite  void  that  its  true  character  emerged.  It 
seems  to  me  that  the  nightmare  of  Epicurean  atomism  can 
only  be  explained  on  the  assumption  that  an  Aristotelian 
doctrine  was  violently  adapted  to  a  theory  which  really 

1  Anst.  De  caelo,  A,  I.  308  a  9,  irepl  ptkv  odv  tS>v  anXCbs  Xey optvwv  (fia.pt ojv 
Kai  Kotxpuv)  ovSkv  dp-prat  irapa  tup  Tpdrepop. 

2  Plato,  Tim.  61  c  3  sqq. 

3  Zeller  says  (p.  876)  that  in  antiquity  no  one  ever  understood  by  weight 
anything  else  than  the  property  of  bodies  in  virtue  of  which  they  move 
downwards ;  except  that  in  such  systems  as  represent  all  forms  of  matter 
as  contained  in  a  sphere,  "  above  ”  is  identified  with  the  circumference  and 
“  below  "  with  the  centre.  As  to  that,  I  can  only  say  that  no  such  theory 
of  weight  is  to  be  found  in  the  fragments  of  the  early  philosophers  or  is 
anywhere  ascribed  to  them,  while  Plato  expressly  denies  it. 


344  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


excluded  it.1  It  is  totally  unlike  anything  we  meet  with  in 
earlier  days. 

This  suggests  at  once  that  it  is  only  in  the  vortex  that 
the  atoms  acquire  weight  and  lightness,2  which  are,  after  all, 
only  popular  names  for  facts  which  can  be  further  analysed. 
We  are  told  that  Leukippos  held  one  effect  of  the  vortex  to 
be  that  like  atoms  were  brought  together  with  their  likes.3 
Here  we  seem  to  see  the  influence  of  Empedokles,  though  the 
likeness  is  of  another  kind.  It  is  the  finer  atoms  that 
are  forced  to  the  circumference,  while  the  larger  tend  to  the 
centre.  We  may  express  that  by  saying  that  the  larger  are 
heavy  and  the  smaller  fight,  and  this  will  amply  account  for 
everything  Aristotle  and  Theophrastos  say ;  for  there  is  no 
passage  where  the  atoms  outside  the  vortex  are  distinctly 
said  to  be  heavy  or  light.4 

There  is  a  striking  confirmation  of  this  view  in  the 
atomist  cosmology  quoted  above.6  We  are  told  there  that 
the  separation  of  the  larger  and  smaller  atoms  was  due  to 
the  fact  that  they  were  “  no  longer  able  to  revolve  in  equi¬ 
librium  owing  to  their  number,”  which  implies  that  they  had 
previously  been  in  a  state  of  “  equilibrium  ”  or  “  equipoise.” 
Now  the  word  iaoppom-La  has  no  necessary  implication  of 


as  r  CntlC1Sms  whlch  may  have  affected  Epicurus  are  such 

as  we  find  in  Decaelo,  A,  7.  275  b  29  sqq.  Aristotle  there  argues  that  as 
Leukippos  and  Demokntos  made  the  of  the  atoms  one,  they  were 

ArS  U°'  gWe  a  SiDgle  m0ti0n'  That  is  iust  what  Epicurus  dfd  but 
ThnnlhV  imphes  that  LeukiPPos  apd  Demokritos  did  not 

tot^fv,  gtw  atTS  Wdght-  even  EPicurus  could  not  accept  Aris¬ 
totle  s  view  that  some  bodies  are  naturally  light.  The  appearance  nf 

Cf  fTednldeS'  Aristotle  exPressly  makes  this  distinction. 

^”,7  .B’  3’  PCCially  295  a  32  sqq.,  where  he  points  out  that 

Empedokles  does  not  account  for  the  weight  of  bodies  on  the  earth  („*  y(Lp 

vortex  Sose  S  Tl  77, 7  thC  Wdght  °f  bodies  before  the 

vurxex  arose  (7r pip  yevta Scurfy  8Lmjp). 

8  Diog.  loc.  cit.  (p.  338). 

(i899)Tpp  3eiT/0thouihIhh  Ti"  Vi6W  °f  Dyroff'  Demokritstudien 
Vioyy;  pp.  31  Sqq.,  though  I  should  not  say  that  lightness  and  ^  1 

arose  in  connexion  with  the  atoms  of  the  earth  (v  ,\  Tf  Weight  ™ly 
“  world  **  for  **  **  1  ill  35)-  we  substitute 

worm  tor  earth,  we  shall  be  nearer  the  truth. 

bee  above,  p.  338. 


LEUKIPPOS  OF  MILETOS 


345 

weight  in  Greek.  A  poirri  is  a  mere  leaning  or  inclination  in 
a  certain  direction,  which  is  the  cause  rather  than  the  effect 
of  weight.  The  state  of  Icroppcnria  is  therefore  that  in  which 
the  tendency  in  one  direction  is  exactly  equal  to  the  tendency 
in  any  other,  and  such  a  state  is  more  naturally  described  as 
the  absence  of  weight  than  as  the  presence  of  opposite  weights 
neutralising  one  another. 

Now,  if  we  no  longer  regard  the  "eternal  motion"  of  the 
premundane  and  extramundane  atoms  as  due  to  their  weight, 
there  is  no  reason  for  describing  it  as  a  fall.  None  of  our 
authorities  do  as  a  matter  of  fact  so  describe  it,  nor  do  they 
tell  us  in  any  way  what  it  was.  It  is  safest  to  say  that  it  is 
simply  a  confused  motion  this  way  and  that.1  It  is  possible 
that  the  comparison  of  the  motion  of  the  atoms  of  the  soul 
to  that  of  the  motes  in  a  sunbeam  coming  through  a  window, 
which  Aristotle  attributes  to  Demokritos,2  is  really  intended 
as  an  illustration  of  the  original  motion  of  the  atoms  still 
surviving  in  the  soul.  The  fact  that  it  is  also  a  Pythagorean 
comparison  3  so  far  confirms  this  ;  for  we  have  seen  that 
there  is  a  real  connexion  between  the  Pythagorean  monads 
and  the  atoms.  It  is  also  significant  that  the  point  of  the 
comparison  appears  to  have  been  the  fact  that  the  motes  in 
the  sunbeam  move  even  when  there  is  no  wind,  so  that  it 
would  be  a  very  apt  illustration  indeed  of  the  motion  inherent 


1  This  view  was  independently  advocated  by  Brieger  (Die  Urbewegung 
der  A  tome  und  die  Weltentstehung  bei  Leucipp  und  Demokrit,  1884)  and 

Liepmann  ( Die  Mechanik  der  Leucipp-Demokritschen  Atome,  1885),  both 
of  whom  unnecessarily  weakened  their  position  by  admitting  that  weight 
is  an  original  property  of  the  atoms.  On  the  other  hand,  Brieger  denies 
that  the  weight  of  the  atoms  is  the  cause  of  their  original  motion,  while 
Liepmann  says  that  before  and  outside  the  vortex  there  is  only  a  latent 
weight,  a  Pseudo sckwere,  which  only  comes  into  operation  in  the  world. 
It  is  surely  simpler  to  say  that  this  weight,  since  it  produces  no  effect,  does 
not  yet  exist.  Zeller  rightly  argues  against  Brieger  and  Liepmann  that, 
if  the  atoms  have  weight,  they  must  fall ;  but,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  nothing 
he  says  tells  against  their  theory  as  I  have  restated  it.  Gomperz  adopts 
the  Brieger- Liepmann  explanation.  See  also  Lortzing,  Bursians  Jahresber., 
1903,  PP-  136  sqq. 

3  Arist.  De  an.  A,  2.  403  b  28  sqq.  (R.  P.  200). 

3  Ibid.  A,  2,  404  a  17  (R.  P.  86  a). 


346 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


The 

vortex. 


in  the  atoms  apart  from  the  secondary  motions  produced  by 
impact  and  collision. 

180.  But  what  are  we  to  say  of  the  vortex  itself  which 
produces  these  effects  ?  Gomperz  observes  that  they  seem 
to  be  “  the  precise  contrary  of  what  they  should  have  been 
by  the  laws  of  physics  ”  ;  for,  “  as  every  centrifugal  machine 
would  show,  it  is  the  heaviest  substances  which  are  hurled 
to  the  greatest  distance.”  1  Are  we  to  suppose  that  Leu- 
kippos  was  ignorant  of  this  fact,  which  was  known  to  Empe- 
dokles  and  Anaxagoras  ? 2  We  know  from  Aristotle  that  all 
those  who  accounted  for  the  earth  being  in  the  centre  of  the 
world  by  means  of  a  vortex  appealed  to  the  analogy  of  eddies 
in  wind  or  water,3  and  Gomperz  supposes  that  the  whole 
theory  was  an  erroneous  generalisation  of  this  observation. 
If  we  look  at  the  matter  more  closely,  we  can  see,  I  think, 
that  there  is  no  error  at  all. 

We  must  remember  that  all  the  parts  of  the  vortex  are 
in  contact,  and  that  it  is  just  this  contact  (eVtyauo-t?)  by 
which  the  motion  of  the  outermost  parts  is  communicated 
to  those  within  them.  The  larger  bodies  are  more  able  to 
resist  this  communicated  motion  than  the  smaller,  and  in 
this  way  they  make  their  way  to  the  centre  where  the  motion 
is  least,  and  force  the  smaller  bodies  out.  This  resistance  is 
surely  just  the  avrepeicns  t ov  fieaov  which  is  mentioned  in 
the  doxography  of  Leukippos,4  and  it  is  quite  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  this  that,  on  the  atomist  theory,  the  nearer  a 
heavenly  body  is  to  the  centre,  the  slower  is  its  revolution.5 
That  is  just  the  point  which,  as  we  have  seen,6  Anaxi¬ 
mander  would  seem  not  to  have  observed.  There  is 

1  Gomperz,  Greek  Thinkers,  i.  p.  339. 

p  ^ For  Empedokles,  see  Chap.  V.  p.  237;  Anaxagoras,  see  Chap.  VI. 

3  ^rist'  De  caelo<  B>  I3-  295  a  10,  rairpv  yap  tt)v  alrlav  (sc.  ttjx 
,  V<TlV>  7r“"res  4k  twv  4v  rocs  vypoh  Kal  7 repl  rbv  6.4 pa,  avp.pa.LvbvTW  ■ 

6v  tovtolj  ybpad  <p4p<rai  ra  Kal  ra  fiapdrepa  rrpbs  rb  p,iaov  rrjs  Slvr, 

Diog.  ix.  32.  Cf.  especially  the  phrases  dr  Kara  rpv  rov  p.4aov 
avrijmaiv  vepiSivov/Uvuv,  cvp.p.tubvTW  ad  tup  avreX6>r  Kar  iMawir  rfis  Slrvs 
and  rrappevivTuv  rGiv  4vex04uT<a v  M  rb  pAtxov. 

Cf.  Lucr.  v.  621  sqq.  e  gee  p_ 


LEUKIPPOS  OF  MILETOS 


347 

no  question  of  “  centrifugal  force  ”  at  all,  and  the  analogy 

of  eddies  in  air  and  water  is  in  reality  quite  satis¬ 
factory. 

181.  When  we  come  to  details,  the  reactionary  character  The  earth 
of  the  atomist  cosmology  is  very  manifest.  The  earth  was 
shaped  like  a  tambourine,  and  floated  on  the  air.1  It  was  bodies- 
inclined  towards  the  south  because  the  heat  of  that  region 

made  the  air  thinner,  while  the  ice  and  cold  of  the  north 
made  it  denser  and  more  able  to  support  the  earth.2  This 
accounts  for  the  obliquity  of  the  zodiac.  Like  Anaximander 
(§  *9)>  Leukippos  held  that  the  sun  was  farther  away  than 
the  stars,  though  he  also  held  that  these  were  farther  away 
than  the  moon.3  By  this  time  the  occultation  of  the  planets 
by  the  moon  must  have  been  observed.  There  seems  to 
be  no  very  clear  distinction  between  the  planets  and 
the  fixed  stars.  Leukippos  appears  to  have  known  the 
theory  of  eclipses  as  given  by  Anaxagoras.4  Such  other 
pieces  of  information  as  have  come  down  to  us  are  mainly  of 
interest  as*  showing  that,  in  some  important  respects,  the 
doctrine  of  Leukippos  was  not  the  same  as  that  taught 
afterwards  by  Demokritos.5 

182.  Aetios  expressly  attributes  to  Leukippos  the  Percep- 
doctrine  that  the  objects  of  sense-perception  exist  “  by  tl0n' 
law  and  not  by  nature.6  This  must  come  from  Theo- 

1  Aet.  iii.  3,  10,  quoted  above,  p.  79,  n.  1. 

Aet.  iii.  12,  I,  Aed/amros  irapeKrreo'e'ip  TL]P  yrjp  e/s  ra  p.0(j'qu3invci  uc  tip 
6ta  tt)v  bp  ro?s  p.€(T7)p.f3p(.voLS  CLpaLorpra,  dre  8rj  rreTrrjybrwp  twp  ftopeiup  81a  rb 
Karnf/uxOcu  rots  Kpvpois,  twp  8b  dvridtruv  irewvpwpbpwp. 

Dl°g ■  1^*  33.  EU' cu  8b  TOP  TOU  7 )\loV  k6k\oP  b  b  LOT  CLT OP,  TOP  8b  T7]S  '7 e X Tj P 7) S 
irpoixyeibrarop,  (robs  8e)>  tOjp  dWwp  lletlil;  i’  to Otlop . 

4  From  Diog.  loc.  cit.  (supra,  p.  339),  it  appears  that  he  dealt  with  the 
question  of  the  greater  frequency  of  lunar  as  compared  with  solar  eclipses. 

6  Diels  pointed  out  that  Leukippos’s  explanation  of  thunder 
(rrvpbs  bparro\r)<pdbpTos  pbpoui  tt ayur 6,t oir  bKirroorip  IfTxvpap  fbpoprrjp  diroToXecp 
curopatrcTai,  Aet.  iii.  3,  10)  is  quite  different  from  that  of  Demokritos 
(fipoPT7)y  .  .  ,  bi c  crvyKplp.a.TO's  dpuopaKou  rb  rrepiei\r)<f>bs  avrb  vbcpos  rrpbs  tt)p 
kA.tw  <f>opar  bKpta^op.bpov,  ib.  11).  The  explanation  given  by  Leukippos 
is  derived  from  that  of  Anaximander,  while  Demokritos  is  influenced  by 
Anaxagoras.  See  Diels,  35  Philol.-Vers.  97,  7. 

6  Aet.  iv.  9,  8,  ol  p,bp  dSXXoi  <pvaei  to,  aicrdr)Td,  Aevtamros  8b  Ar)p.bKpiTOS 
Kal  Aioybprjs  pbfj-ip.  See  Zeller,  Arch.  v.  p.  444. 


348 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


phrastos  ;  for,  as  we  have  seen,  all  later  writers  quote 
Demokritos  only.  A  further  proof  of  the  correctness  of  the 
statement  is  that  we  also  find  it  attributed  to  Diogenes  of 
Apollonia,  who,  as  Theophrastos  tells  us,  derived  some  of 
his  views  from  Leukippos.  There  is  nothing  surprising  in 
this.  Parmenides  had  already  declared  the  senses  to  be 
deceitful,  and  said  that  colour  and  the  like  were  only 
names,  1  and  Empedokles  had  also  spoken  of  coming  into 
being  and  passing  away  as  only  a  name.2  It  is  not  likely 
that  Leukippos  went  much  further  than  this.  It  would 
probably  be  wrong  to  credit  him  with  Demokritos’s  clear 
distinction  between  true-born  ”  and  “  bastard  ”  know¬ 
ledge,  or  that  between  the  primary  and  secondary  qualities 
of  matter.3  These  distinctions  imply  a  definite  theory  of 
knowledge,  and  all  we  are  entitled  to  say  is  that  the  germs 
of  it  were  already  to  be  found  in  the  writings  of  Leukippos 
and  his  predecessors.  Of  course,  these  do  not  make  Leu¬ 
kippos  a  sceptic  any  more  than  Empedokles  or  Anaxagoras, 
whose  remark  on  this  subject  (fr.  21a)  Demokritos  is  said  to 
have  quoted  with  approval.4 

There  appear  to  be  sufficient  grounds  for  ascribing  the 
theory  of  perception  by  means  of  simulacra  or  eiSwXa,  which 
played  such  a  part  in  the  systems  of  Demokritos  and 
Epicurus,  to  Leukippos.5  It  is  a  natural  development  of 
the  Empedoklean  theory  of  “  effluences  "  (§  118).  It  hardly 
seems  likely,  however,  that  he  went  into  detail  on  the  subject, 

and  it  is  safer  to  credit  Demokritos  with  the  elaboration  of 
the  theory. 


1  Chap.  IV.  p.  1 76.  The  remarkable  parallel  quoted  bv  Gomnerz 

furTcl  fr0mGalileo-to  the  effect  that  tastes,  smells,  and  colours  non  sieno 
aUro  che  pun  norm  should,  therefore,  have  been  cited  to  illustrate  Par¬ 
menides  rather  than  Demokritos. 

*  fee,P‘  2°6’  fr'  9'  3  For  these  see  Sext.  Math.  vii.  135  (R.  p  204) 

.  7  I4°’  “7"  yhp  Td  6*  fr,™  ’A rataySpal, 

ov  (tri  Toitruj  Ar/fj.ciKpiTos  ijraiveZ  '  " 

attribuTed^nv’  '7  7UklPP°S  ”  {ArCh-  XV-  p-  I38)-  The  doctrine  is 

PP  24  14  and  7  7 , 1V'  13tJ  (D0X-  P‘  4°3) :  and  Alexander,  De  sensu, 
P  .  F  ‘  /  5  A10’  also  mentions  his  name  in  connexion  with  it.  This 
must  come  from  Theophrastos. 


349 


LEUKIPPOS  OF  MILETOS 

183.  We  have  seen  incidentally  that  there  is  a  wide 
divergence  of  opinion  among  recent  writers  as  to  the  place 
of  Atomism  in  Greek  thought.  The  question  at  issue  is 
really  whether  Leukippos  reached  his  theory  on  what  are 
called  “metaphysical  grounds/'  that  is,  from  a  considera¬ 
tion  of  the  Eleatic  theory  of  reality,  or  whether,  on  the 
contrary,  it  was  a  pure  development  of  Ionian  science.  The 
foregoing  exposition  will  suggest  the  true  answer.  So  far 
as  his  general  theor}?  of  the  physical  constitution  of  the  world 
is  concerned,  it  has  been  shown,  I  think,  that  it  was  derived 
entirely  from  Eleatic  and  Pythagorean  sources,  while  the 
detailed  cosmology  was  in  the  main  a  more  or  less  successful 
attempt  to  make  the  older  Ionian  beliefs  fit  into  this  new 
physical  theory.  In  any  case,  his  greatness  consisted  in  his 
having  been  the  first  to  see  how  body  must  be  regarded  if 
we  take  it  to  be  ultimate  reality.  The  old  Milesian  theory 
had  found  its  most  adequate  expression  in  the  system  of 
Anaximenes  (§  31),  but  of  course  rarefaction  and  condensa¬ 
tion  cannot  be  clearly  represented  except  on  the  hypothesis 
of  molecules  or  atoms  coming  closer  together  or  going  farther 
apart  in  space.  Parmenides  had  seen  that  very  clearly 
(fr.  2),  and  it  was  the  Eleatic  criticism  which  forced  Leu¬ 
kippos  to  formulate  his  system  as  he  did.  Even  Anaxagoras 
took  account  of  Zeno’s  arguments  about  divisibility  (§  128), 
but  his  system  of  qualitatively  different  “  seeds,”  though 
in  some  respects  it  goes  deeper,  lacks  that  simplicity  which 
has  always  beeii  the  chief  attraction  of  atomism. 


Import¬ 
ance  of 
Leukippos. 


CHAPTER  X 


ECLECTICISM  AND  REACTION 


“bank-  ^ITH  Leukippos  our  story  should  come  to  an  end ; 

ruptcy  of  for  he  had  answered  the  question  first  asked  by  Thales.  We 
have  seen,  however,  that,  though  his  theory  of  matter  was 
of  a  most  original  and  daring  kind,  he  was  not  equally 
successful  in  his  attempt  to  construct  a  cosmology,  and  this 
seems  to  have  prevented  the  recognition  of  the  atomic  theory 
for  what  it  really  was.  We  have  noted  the  growing  influence 
of  medicine,  and  the  consequent  substitution  of  an  interest 
in  detailed  investigation  for  the  larger  cosmological  views  of 
an  earlier  time,  and  there  are  several  treatises  in  the  Hippo- 
kratean  corpus  which  give  us  a  clear  idea  of  the  interest 
which  now  prevailed.1  Leukippos  had  shown  that  “  the 
doctrine  of  Melissos,”  2  which  seemed  to  make  all  science 
impossible,  was  not  the  only  conclusion  that  could  be  drawn 
from  the  Eleatic  premisses,  and  he  had  gone  on  to  give  a 
cosmology  which  was  substantially  of  the  old  Ionic  type. 
The  result  at  first  was  simply  that  all  the  old  schools  revived 
and  had  a  short  period  of  renewed  activity,  while  at  the  same 
time  some  new  schools  arose  which  sought  to  accommodate 
the  older  views  to  those  of  Leukippos,  or  to  make  them  more 
available  for  scientific  purposes  by  combining  them  in  an 
eclectic  fashion.  None  of  these  attempts  had  any  lasting 
importance  or  influence,  and  what  we  have  to  consider  in 


The"  nt  ’It"  'S1  “  C^ap‘  IV-  P-  J50.  «•  2,  of  the  TlePl  SMirV, 

i^nap.  viii.  p.  329,  n.  2. 


350 


ECLECTICISM  AND  REACTION  351 

this  chapter  is  really  one  of  the  periodical  “  bankruptcies  of 
science  ”  which  mark  the  close  of  one  chapter  in  its  history 
and  announce  the  beginning  of  a  new  one. 


I.  Hippon  of  Samos 

185.  Hippon  of  Samos  or  Kroton  or  Rhegion  belonged  to 
the  Italian  school  of  medicine.1  We  know  very  little  indeed 
of  him  except  that  he  was  a  contemporary  of  Perikles.  From 
a  scholiast  on  Aristophanes  2 3  we  learn  that  Kratinos  satirised 
him  in  his  Panoptai ;  and  Aristotle  mentions  him  in  the 
enumeration  of  early  philosophers  given  in  the  First  Book  of 
the  Metaphysics?  though  only  to  say  that  the  inferiority  of 
his  intellect  deprives  him  of  all  claim  to  be  reckoned  among- 
them. 

With  regard  to  his  views,  the  most  precise  statement  is  Moisture, 
that  of  Alexander,  who  doubtless  follows  Theophrastos.  It 
is  to  the  effect  that  he  held  the  primary  substance  to  be 
Moisture,  without  deciding  whether  it  was  Water  or  Air.4 
We  have  the  authority  of  Aristotle 5  and  Theophrastos, 
represented  by  Hippolytos,6  for  saying  that  this  theory  was 
supported  by  physiological  arguments  of  the  kind  common 
at  the  time,  and  the  arguments  tentatively  ascribed  to 
Thales  by  Aristotle  are  of  this  kind  (§  10).  His  other 
views  belong  to  the  history  of  Medicine. 

Till  quite  recently  no  fragment  of  Hippon  was  known 
to  exist,  but  a  single  one  has  now  been  recovered  from  the 

1  Aristoxenos  said  he  was  a  Samian  (R.  P.  219  a).  In  Menon’s  Iatrika 
he  is  called  a  Krotoniate,  while  others  assign  him  to  Rhegion  (Hipp.  Ref.  i. 
r6)  or  Metapontion  (Censorinus,  De  die  nat.  5,  2).  This  variation  implies 
that  he  belonged  originally  to  the  Pythagorean  school.  The  evidence  of 
Aristoxenos  is,  in  that  case,  all  the  more  valuable.  Hippon  is  mentioned 
along  with  Melissos  as  a  Samian  in  Iamblichos’s  Catalogue  of  Pythagoreans 
(F.  Pyth.  267). 

2  Schol.  on  Clouds,  94  sqq. 

3  Arist.  Met.  A,  3.  984  a  3  (R.  P.  219  a). 

4  Alexander  in  Met.  p.  26,  21  (R.  P.  219). 

6  Arist.  De  an.  A,  2.  405  b  2  (R.  P.  220). 

8  Hipp.  Ref.  i.  16  (R.  P.  221). 


352 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Date. 


Geneva  Scholia  on  Homer.1  It  is  directed  against  the  old 
assumption  that  the  “  waters  under  the  earth  ”  are  an 
independent  source  of  moisture,  and  runs  thus  : 

The  waters  we  drink  are  all  from  the  sea  ;  for  if  wells  were 
deeper  than  the  sea,  then  it  would  not,  doubtless,  be  from  the 
sea  that  we  drink,  for  then  the  water  would  not  be  from  the  sea, 
but  from  some  other  source.  But  as  it  is,  the  sea  is  deeper  than 
the  waters,  so  all  the  waters  that  are  above  the  sea  come  from 
it.  R.  P.  219  b. 

We  observe  here  the  universal  assumption  that  water 
tends  to  rise  from  the  earth,  not  to  sink  into  it. 

Along  with  Hippon,  Idaios  of  Himera  may  just  be  men¬ 
tioned.  We  know  nothing  of  him  except  from  Sextus,2  who 
says  he  held  air  to  be  the  primary  substance.  The  fact  that 
he  was  a  Sicilian  is,  however,  suggestive. 


II.  Diogenes  of  Apollonia  3 

186.  After  discussing  the  three  great  representatives  of 
the  Milesian  school,  Theophrastos  went  on  to  say  : 

And  Diogenes  of  Apollonia,  too,  who  was  almost  the  latest 
of  those  who  gave  themselves  up  to  these  studies,  wrote  most  of 
his  work  in  an  eclectic  fashion,  agreeing  in  some  points  with 
Anaxagoras  and  ir  others  with  Leukippos.  He,  too,  says  that 
the  primary  substance  of  the  universe  is  Air  infinite  and  eternal, 
from  which  by  condensation,  rarefaction,  and  change  of  state, 
the  form  of  everything  else  arises.  R.  P.  206  a.4 

1  Schol.  Genav.  p.  197,  19.  Cf.  Diels  in  Arch.  iv.  p.  653.  The  extract 
comes  from  the  'OwptKd  of  Krates  of  Mallos. 

2  Sext.  Adv.  Math.  ix.  360. 

3  Stephanos  of  Byzantion  s.v.  ’AttoXX uvla  says  this  was  Apollonia  in 
Crete,  but  that  seems  improbable.  Zeller  doubted  it  on  the  ground  that 
Diogenes  wrote  in  Ionic,  but  Ionic  was  the  regular  dialect  for  scientific 
works,  and  we  cannot  found  on  that.  On  the  other  hand,  it  seems  much 
more  likely  in  itself  that  he  came  from  Apollonia  on  the  Pontos,  a  Milesian 
colony  which  regarded  Anaximander  as  its  founder  (p.  52,  n.  1).  Aelian 
( V.  H.  ii.  31)  calls  him  Aioy^s  6  4>/>u£,  which  shows  that  he  took  this  view. 

4  On  this  passage  see  Diels,  “  Leukippos  und  Diogenes  von  Apollonia  ” 
{Rhein.  Mus.  xlii.  pp.  1  sqq.).  Natorp’s  view  that  the  words  are  merely 
those  of  Simplicius  {ih.  pp.  349  $qq -)  can  hardly  be  maintained. 


ECLECTICISM  AND  REACTION  353 

This  passage  shows  that  the  Apolloniate  was  somewhat 
later  in  date  than  the  statement  in  Laertios  Diogenes  1  that 
he  was  contemporary  with  Anaxagoras  would  lead  us  to 
suppose,  and  the  fact  that  his  views  are  satirised  in  the  Clouds 
of  Aristophanes  points  in  the  same  direction.2 

187.  Simplicius  affirms  that  Diogenes  wrote  several  works,  Writings, 
though  he  allows  that  only  one  survived  till  his  own  day, 
namely,  the  Ilepl  (pvaeoos .3  This  statement  is  based  upon 
references  in  the  surviving  work  itself,  and  is  not  to  be  lightly 
rejected.  In  particular,  it  is  very  credible  that  he  wrote  a 

tract  Against  the  Sophists,  that  is  to  say,  the  pluralist  cos- 
mologists  of  the  day.4  That  he  wrote  a  Meteorology  and  a 
book  called  The  Nature  of  Man  is  also  quite  probable.  This 
would  be  a  physiological  or  medical  treatise,  and  perhaps  the 
famous  fragment  about  the  veins  comes  from  it.5 6 

188.  The  work  of  Diogenes  seems  to  have  been  preserved  The 
in  the  Academy ;  practically  all  the  fairly  extensive  frag-  cent's, 
ments  which  we  still  have  are  derived  from  Simplicius.  I 
give  them  as  they  are  arranged  by  Diels  : 

(1)  In  the  beginning  any  discourse,  it  seems  to  me  that  one 
should  make  one’s  starting-point  something  indisputable,  and 
one’s  expression  simple  and  dignified.  R.  P.  207. 

(2)  My  view  is,  to  sum  it  all  up,  that  all  things  are  differentia¬ 
tions  of  the  same  thing,  and  are  the  same  thing.  And  this  is 
obvious ;  for,  if  the  things  which  are  now  in  this  world — earth, 
and  water,  and  air  and  fire,  and  the  other  things  which  we  see 

1  Di°g-  ix.  57  (R.  P.  206).  The  statement  of  Antisthenes,  the  writer 
of  Successions,  that  he  had  “  heard  ”  Anaximenes  is  due  to  the  usual 
confusion.  He  was  doubtless,  like  Anaxagoras,  “  an  associate  of  the 
philosophy  of  Anaximenes.”  Cf.  Chap.  VI.  §  122. 

2  Aristoph.  Clouds,  227  sqq.,  where  Sokrates  speaks  of  "  mixing  his 
subtle  thought  with  the  kindred  air,"  and  especially  the  words  0  yrt 
ply.  |  HXkcl  irpbs  avryv  ttjv  UpASa  rfjs  (ppovrlSos.  For  the  Up. As,  see  Beare, 

P-  259. 

3  Simpl.  Phys.  p.  15 1,  24  (R.  P.  207  a). 

1  Simplicius  says  IIpoj  rpv<noX6yovs,  but  he  adds  that  Diogenes  called 

them  a-ocfncrTal,  which  is  the  older  word.  This  is,  so  far,  in  favour  of  the 
genuineness  of  the  work. 

6  Diels  gives  this  as  fr.  6  (Vors.  51  b  6).  I  have  omitted  it,  as  it  really 
belongs  to  the  history  of  Medicine. 


23 


354 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


existing  in  this  world — if  any  one  of  these  things,  I  say,  were 
different  from  any  other,  different,  that  is,  by  having  a  substance 
peculiar  to  itself  ;  and  if  it  were  not  the  same  thing  that  is  often 
changed  and  differentiated,  then  things  could  not  in  any  way 
mix  with  one  another,  nor  could-  they  do  one  another  good  or 
harm.  Neither  could  a  plant  grow  out  of  the  earth,  nor  any 
animal  nor  anything  else  come  into  being  unless  things  were 
composed  in  such  a  way  as  to  be  the  same.  But  all  these  things 
arise  from  the  same  thing;  they  are  differentiated  and  take 
different  forms  at  different  times,  and  return  again  to  the  same 
thing.  R.  P.  208. 

(3)  For  it  would  not  be  possible  for  it  without  intelligence  to 
be  so  divided,  as  to  keep  the  measures  of  all  things,  of  winter 
and  summer,  of  day  and  night,  of  rains  and  winds  and  fair 
weather.  And  any  one  who  cares  to  reflect  will  find  that  every¬ 
thing  else  is  disposed  in  the  best  possible  manner.  R.  P.  210. 

(4)  And,  further,  there  are  still  the  following  great  proofs. 
Men  and  all  other  animals  live  upon  air  by  breathing  it,  and  this 
is  their  soul  and  their  intelligence,  as  will  be  clearly  shown  in  this 
work  ;  while,  when  this  is  taken  away,  they  die,  and  their  intelli¬ 
gence  fails.  R.  P.  210. 


(5)  And  my  view  is,  that  that  which  has  intelligence  is  what 
men  call  air,  and  that  all  things  have  their  course  steered  by  it, 
and  that  it  has  power  over  all  things.  For  this  very  thing  I  hold 
to  be  a  god,  and  to  reach  everywhere,  and  to  dispose  everything 
and  to  be  in  everything ;  and  there  is  not  anything  which  does 
not  partake  in  it.  Yet  no  single  thing  partakes  in  it  just  in  the 
same  way  as  another ;  but  there  are  many  modes  both  of  air 
and  of  intelligence.  For  it  undergoes  many  transformations, 
warmer  and  colder,  drier  and  moister,  more  stable  and  in  swifter 
motion,  and  it  has  many  other  differentiations  in  it,  and  an 
infinite  number  of  colours  and  savours.  And  the  soul  of  all 
living  things  is  the  same,  namely,  air  warmer  than  that  outside 
us  and  m  which  we  are,  but  much  colder  than  that  near  the  sun. 
And  this  warmth  is  not  alike  in  any  two  kinds  of  living  creatures, 


ECLECTICISM  AND  REACTION 


355 

nor,  for  the  matter  of  that,  in  any  two  men ;  but  it  does  not 
differ  much,  only  so  far  as  is  compatible  with  their  being  alike. 

At  the  same  time,  it  is  not  possible  for  any  of  the  things  which 
are  differentiated  to  be  exactly  like  one  another  till  they  all  once 
more  become  the  same. 

(6)  Since,  then,  differentiation  is  multiform,  living  creatures 
are  multiform  and  many,  and  they  are  like  one  another  neither 
in  appearance  nor  in  intelligence,  because  of  the  multitude  of 
differentiations.  At  the  same  time,  they  all  live,  and  see,  and 
hear  by  the  same  thing,  and  they  all  have  their  intelligence  from 
the  same  source.  R.  P.  211. 

(7)  And  this  itself  is  an  eternal  and  undying  body,  but  of 
those  things 1  some  come  into  being  and  some  pass  away. 

(8)  But  this,  too,  appears  to  me  to  be  obvious,  that  it  is  both 
great,  and  mighty,  and  eternal,  and  undying,  and  of  great 
knowledge.  R.  P.  209. 

That  the  chief  interest  of  Diogenes  was  a  physiological 
one,  is  clear  from  his  elaborate  account  of  the  veins,  pre¬ 
served  by  Aristotle.2  It  is  noticeable,  too,  that  one  of  his 
arguments  for  the  underlying  unity  of  all  substances  is  that 
without  this  it  would  be  impossible  to  understand  how  one 
thing  could  do  good  or  harm  to  another  (fr.  2).  In  fact,  the 
writing  of  Diogenes  is  essentially  of  the  same  character  as  a 
good  deal  of  the  pseudo-Hippokratean  literature,  and  there 
is  much  to  be  said  for  the  view  that  the  writers  of  these 
curious  tracts  made  use  of  him  very  much  as  they  did  of 
Anaxagoras  and  Herakleitos.3 

189.  Like  Anaximenes,  Diogenes  regarded  Air  as  the  Cos- 
primary  substance  ;  but  we  see  from  his  arguments  that  he  mology- 
lived  at  a  time  when  other  views  had  become  prevalent. 

1  The- MSS.  of  Simplicius  have  t<£  58,  but  surely  the  Aldine  tup  58  is 
right.  2  Arist.  Hist.  An.  r,  2.  511  b  30. 

3  See  Weygoldt,  "  Zu  Diogenes  von  Apollonia  ”  [Arch.  i.  pp.  161  sqq.). 
Hippokrates  himself  represented  just  the  opposite  tendency  to  that  of  those 
writers.  His  great  achievement  was  the  separation  of  medicine  from 
philosophy,  a  separation  most  beneficial  to  both  (Celsus,  i.  pr.).  This  is 
why  the  Hippokratean  corpus  contains  some  works  in  which  the  "  sophists  ” 
are  denounced  and  others  in  which  their  writings  are  pillaged.  To  the 
latter  class  belong  the  IT epl  8uxLtt]s  and  the  1 1  epl  ovltuv  ;  to  the  former, 
especially  the  Ile/si  apxairls  iarpiicijs. 


356 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


He  speaks  clearly  of  the  four  Empedoklean  elements  (fr.  2), 
and  he  is  careful  to  attribute  to  Air  the  attributes  of  Nous 
as  taught  by  Anaxagoras  (fr.  4).  The  doxographical  tradi¬ 
tion  as  to  his  cosmological  views  is  fairly  preserved  : 

Diogenes  of  Apollonia  makes  air  the  element,  and  holds  that 
all  things  are  in  motion,  and  that  there  are  innumerable  worlds. 
And  he  describes  the  origin  of  the  world  thus.  When  the  All 
moves  and  becomes  rare  in  one  place  and  dense  in  another,  where 
the  dense  met  together  it  formed  a  mass,  and  then  the  other 
things  arose  in  the  same  way,  the  lightest  parts  occupying  the 
highest  position  and  producing  the  sun.  rPlut.]  Strom  fr  12 
(R.  P-  215). 

Nothing  arises  from  what  is  not  nor  passes  away  into  what 
is  not.  The  earth  is  round,  poised  in  the  middle,  having  received 
its  shape  through  the  revolution  proceeding  from  the  warm  and 
its  solidification  from  the  cold.  Diog.  ix.  5 7  (R.  P.  215). 

The  heavenly  bodies  were  like  pumice-stone.  He  thinks 
they  are  the  breathing-holes  of  the  world,  and  that  they  are 
red-hot.  Aet.  ii.  13,  5  =  Stob.  i.  508  (R.  P.  215). 

The  sun  was  like  pumice-stone,  and  into  it  the  rays  from  the 
aether  fix  themselves.  Aet.  ii.  20,  10.  The  moon  was  a  pumice¬ 
like  conflagration.  Ib.  ii.  25,  10. 

Along  with  the  visible  heavenly  bodies  revolve  invisible 
stones,  which  for  that  very  reason  are  nameless  ;  but  they  often 
fall  and  are  extinguished  on  the  earth  like  the  stone  star  which 
fell  down  flaming  at  Aigospotamos.1  Ib.  ii.  13,  9. 

We  have  here  nothing  more  than  the  old  Ionian  doctrine 
with  a  few  additions  from  more  recent  sources.  Rarefaction 
and  condensation  still  hold  their  place  in  the  explanation  of 
the  opposites,  warm  and  cold,  dry  and  moist,  stable  and 
mobile  (fr.  5).  The  differentiations  into  opposites  which  Air 
may  undergo  are,  as  Anaxagoras  had  taught,  infinite  in 
number ;  but  all  may  be  reduced  to  the  primary  opposition 
of  rare  and  dense.  We  may  gather,  too,  from  Censorinus  2 
that  Diogenes  did  not,  like  Anaximenes,  speak  of  earth  and 
water  as  arising  from  Air  by  condensation,  but  rather  of  blood, 

1  See  Chap.  VI.  p.  252,  n.  6. 

2  Censorinus,  de  die  natali,  6,  1  {Box.  p.  190). 


ECLECTICISM  AND  REACTION  357 

flesh,  and  bones.  In  this  he  followed  Anaxagoras  (§  130), 
as  it  was  natural  that  he  should.  That  portion  of  Air,  on 
the  other  hand,  which  was  rarefied  became  fiery,  and  pro¬ 
duced  the  sun  and  heavenly  bodies.  The  circular  motion  of 
the  world  is  due  to  the  intelligence  of  the  Air,  as  is  also  the 
division  of  all  things  into  different  forms  of  body  and  the 
observance  of  the  “  measures  ”  by  these  forms.1 

Like  Anaximander  (§  20),  Diogenes  regarded  the  sea  as 
the  remainder  of  the  original  moist  state,  which  had  been 
partially  evaporated  by  the  sun,  so  as  to  separate  out  the 
remaining  earth.2  The  earth  itself  is  round,  that  is  to 
say,  it  is  a  disc  :  for  the  language  of  the  doxographers 
does  not  point  to  the  spherical  form.3  Its  solidification 
by  the  cold  is  due  to  the  fact  that  cold  is  a  form  of 
condensation. 

Diogenes  did  not  hold  with  the  earlier  cosmologists  that 
the  heavenly  bodies  were  made  of  air  or  fire,  nor  yet  with 
Anaxagoras,  that  they  were  stones.  They  were,  he  said, 
pumice-like,  a  view  in  which  we  may  trace  the  influence  of 
Leukippos.  They  were  earthy,  indeed,  but  not  solid,  and 
the  celestial  fire  permeated  their  pores.  And  this  explains 
why  we  do  not  see  the  dark  bodies  which,  in  common  with 
Anaxagoras,  he  held  to  revolve  along  with  the  stars.  They 
really  are  solid  stones,  and  therefore  cannot  be  penetrated 
by  the  fire.  It  was  one  of  these  that  fell  into  the  Aigos- 
potamos.  Like  Anaxagoras,  Diogenes  affirmed  that  the 
inclination  of  the  earth  happened  subsequently  to  the  rise 
of  animals.4 

We  are  prepared  to  find  that  Diogenes  held  the  doctrine 
of  innumerable  worlds ;  for  it  was  the  old  Milesian  belief, 
and  had  just  been  revived  by  Anaxagoras  and  Leukippos. 
He  is  mentioned  with  the  rest  in  th ePlacita;  and  if  Simplicius 
classes  him  and  Anaximenes  with  Herakleitos  as  holding  the 
Stoic  doctrine  of  successive  formations  and  destructions  of 

1  On  the  "  measures  ”  see  Chap.  III.  §  72. 

2  Theophr.  ap.  Alex,  in  Meteor,  p.  67,  1  ( Dox .  p.  494). 

2  Diog.  ix.  57  (R.  P.  215).  4  Aet.  jj.  8>  x  (R.  p  2I5) 


358 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


a  single  world,  he  has  probably  been  misled  by  the 
“  accommodators.”  1 

Animals  190.  Living  creatures  arose  from  the  earth,  doubtless 

plants,  under  the  influence  of  heat.  Their  souls,  of  course,  were 
air,  and  their  differences  were  due  to  the  various  degrees 
in  which  it  was  rarefied  or  condensed  (fr.  5).  No  special 
seat,  such  as  the  heart  or  the  brain,  was  assigned  to  the  soul ; 

it  was  simply  the  warm  air  circulating  with  the  blood  in  the 
veins. 

The  views  of  Diogenes  as  to  generation,  respiration,  and 
the  blood,  belong  to  the  history  of  Medicine  ;  2  his  theory  of 
sensation  too,  as  it  is  described  by  Theophrastos,3  need  only 
be  mentioned  in  passing.  Briefly  stated,  it  amounts  to  this, 
that  all  sensation  is  due  to  the  action  of  air  upon  the  brain 
and  other  organs,  while  pleasure  is  aeration  of  the  blood. 
But  the  details  of  the  theory  can  only  be  studied  properly  in 
connexion  with  the  Hippokratean  writings;  for  Diogenes 
does  not  really  represent  the  old  cosmological  tradition,  but 
a  fresh  development  of  reactionary  philosophical  views 
combined  with  an  entirely  new  enthusiasm  for  detailed 
investigation  and  accumulation  of  facts. 


III.  Archelaos  of  Athens 

Anaxa-  191.  The  last  of  the  early  cosmologists  was  Archelaos  of 
goreaas.  Athens,  wh0  was  a  disciple  of  Anaxagoras.4  He  is  also  said, 
by  Anstoxenos  and  Theophrastos,  to  have  been  the  teacher 
of  Sokrates,  and  there  is  not  the  slightest  reason  for 
doubting  it.5  There  is  no  reason  either  to  doubt  the  tradition 

1  Simpl.  Phys.  p.  1121,  12.  See  Chap.  I.  p.  59. 

2  See  Censorinus,  quoted  in  Dox.  p.  191  Sq. 

3  Theophr.  de  Sens.  39  sqq.  (R.  P.  213,  214).  For  a  full  account,  see 

^eare,  pp.  41  105,  140,  169,  209,  258.  As  Prof.  Beare  remarked 

D logenes  is  one  of  the  most  interesting  of  the  pre-Platonic  psychologists  ” 

P'  1  Di°S-  “•  16  ( R •  p-  2x6). 

See  Chiappelh  in  Arch.  iv.  pp.  369  sqq.  Ion  of  Chios  said  that  Sokrates 
accompanied- Archelaos  to  Samos  (fr.  73  Kopke).  If  this  refers  to  the  siege 
of  Samos,  it  is  interesting  to  think  of  the  youthful  Sokrates  serving  against 
a  force  commanded  by  Melissos. 


ECLECTICISM  AND  REACTION 


359 


that  Archelaos  succeeded  Anaxagoras  in  the  school  at  Lamp- 
sakos.1  We  certainly  hear  of  Anaxagoreans,2  though  their 
fame  was  soon  obscured  by  the  rise  of  the  Sophists,  as  we 
call  them. 

192.  On  the  cosmology  of  Archelaos,  Hippolytos 3 
writes  as  follows  : 

Archelaos  was  by  birth  an  Athenian,  and  the  son  of  Apollo- 
doros.  He  spoke  of  the  mixture  of  matter  in  a  similar  way  to 
Anaxagoras,  and  of  the  first  principles  likewise.  He  held, 
however,  that  there  was  a  certain  mixture  immanent  even  in 
Nous.  And  he  held  that  there  were  two  efficient  causes  which 
were  separated  off  from  one  another,  namely,  the  warm  and  the 
cold.  The  former  was  in  motion,  the  latter  at  rest.  When  the 
water  was  liquefied  it  flowed  to  the  centre,  and  there  being  burnt 
up  it  turned  to  earth  and  air,  the  latter  of  which  was  borne 
upwards,  while  the  former  took  up  its  position  below.  These, 
then,  are  the  reasons  why  the  earth  is  at  rest,  and  why  it  came 
into  being.  It  lies  in  the  centre,  being  practically  no  appreciable 
part  of  the  universe.  (But  the  air  rules  over  all  things),4  being 
produced  by  the  burning  of  the  fire,  and  from  its  original  com¬ 
bustion  comes  the  substance  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  Of  these  the 
sun  is  the  largest,  and  the  moon  second  ;  the  rest  are  of  various 
sizes.  He  says  that  the  heavens  were  inclined,  and  that  then 
the  sun  made  light  upon  the  earth,  made  the  air  transparent, 
and  the  earth  dry ;  for  it  was  originally  a  pond,  being  high  at 
the  circumference  and  hollow  in  the  centre.  He  adduces  as  a 
proof  of  this  hollowness  that  the  sun  does  not  rise  and  set  at  the 
same  time  for  all  peoples,  as  it  ought  to  do  if  the  earth  were  level. 
As  to  animals,  he  says  that  when  the  earth  was  first  being  warmed 
in  the  lower  part  where  the  warm  and  the  cold  were  mingled 
together,  many  living  creatures  appeared,  and  especially  men,  all 
having  the  same  manner  of  life,  and  deriving  their  sustenance 

1  Euseb.  P.  E.  p.  504,  C  3,  d  ’A pxtbaos  tv  Aa/xfiicip  SteSt^aro  rrjv 

GXo\r]v  too  ’  Ava£ay6pov. 

3  ’A va^ayopecoi.  are  mentioned  by  Plato  (Crat.  409  b  6),  and  in  the  A« Tirol 
\dyoi  (cf.  p.  29,  n.  3).  It  is  also  to  be  noted  that  Plato  ( Pavm .  126  a,  b) 
represents  certain  <pi.A6<ro<poi  from  Klazomenai  as  coming  to  Athens  after 
the  death  of  Sokrates  for  the  purpose  of  getting  an  accurate  account  of  the 
famous  conversation  between  Parmenides  and  the  young  Sokrates  (§  84). 

3  Hipp.  Ref.  i.  9  (R.  P.  218). 

1  Inserting  rbv  S'  at  pa  tcparelv  rod  wavrds,  as  suggested  by  Roeper. 


Cos¬ 

mology. 


360 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 

from  the  slime  ;  they  did  not  live  long,  and  later  on  generation 
from  one  another  began.  And  men  were  distinguished  from  the 
rest,  and  set  up  leaders,  and  laws,  and  arts,  and  cities,  and  so 
forth.  And  he  says  that  Nous  is  implanted  in  all  animals  alike  ; 
for  each  of  the  animals,  as  well  as  man,  makes  use  of  Nous,  but 
some  quicker  and  some  slower. 


Con¬ 

clusion. 


It  is  clear  from  this  that,  just  as  Diogenes  had  tried  to 
introduce  certain  Anaxagorean  ideas  into  the  philosophy  of 
Anaximenes,  so  Archelaos  sought  to  bring  Anaxagoreanism 
nearer  to  the  old  Ionic  views  by  supplementing  it  with  the 
opposition  of  warm  and  cold,  rare  and  dense,  and  by  stripping 
Nous  of  that  simplicity  which  had  marked  it  off  from  the 
other  things  in  his  master's  system.  It  was  probably 
for  this  reason,  too,  that  Nous  was  no  longer  regarded  as 
the  maker  of  the  world.1  Leukippos  had  made  such  a  force 


unnecessary.  It  may  be  added  that  this  twofold  relation 
of  Archelaos  to  his  predecessors  makes  it  very  credible  that, 
as  Aetios  tells  us,2  he  believed  in  innumerable  worlds  ;  both 
Anaxagoras  and  the  older  Ionians  upheld  that  doctrine. 

193-  The  cosmology  of  Archelaos,  like  that  of  Diogenes, 
has  all  the  characteristics  of  the  age  to  which  it  belonged— 
an  age  of  reaction,  eclecticism,  and  investigation  of  detail  3 
Hippon  of  Samos  and  Idaios  of  Himera  represent  nothing 
more  than  the  feeling  that  philosophy  had  run  into  a  blind 
alleyjrom  which  it  could  only  escape  by  trying  to  get  back. 

he  Herakleiteans  at  Ephesos,  impenetrably  wrapped  up  as 
they  were  m  their  own  system,  did  little  but  exaggerate  its 
paradoxes  and  develop  its  more  fanciful  side.*  It  was  not 
enough  for  Kratylos  to  say  with  Herakleitos  (fr.  84)  that 
you  cannot  step  twice  into  the  same  river ;  you  could  not  do 


Aet.  i.  7,  i4=Stob.  i.  56  (R.  P.  2Iy  a).  i  Aet.  ii  i  , 

b  h  ,,infflband’  $  25‘  The  Period  is  well  described  by  Fredrich 
kratische  Untersuchungen.  pp.  I3o  sqq.  It  can  only  be  Seated  fnit  in 
connexion  with  the  Sophists.  tea  tuUy  m 

rJZ01  aD.  arTin®  Pkture  °f  4116  ^rakleiteans  see  Plato,  The  aet  I7o  e 
TTie  new  interest  in  language,  which  the  study  of  rhetoric  had  called 

hfe,  took  with  them  the  form  of  fantastic  and  arbitrary  etymologising  such 
as  is  satirised  in  Plato’s  Cratylus.  *  ugising,  sucii 


ECLECTICISM  AND  REACTION 


361 

so  even  once.i  The  fact  is  that  philosophy,  so  long  as  it 
clung  to  its  old  presuppositions,  had  nothing  more  to  say ; 
for  the  answer  of  Leukippos  to  the  question  of  Thales  was 
really  final. 

It  will  be  observed  that  all  these  warring  systems  found 
their  way  to  Athens,  and  it  was  there,  and  there  alone  that 
the  divergent  theories  of  Ionia  and  the  West  came  into 
contact.  Such  questions  as  whether  the  earth  was  round 
or  flat,  and  whether  “what  we  think  with”  was  Air  or  Blood, 
must  have  been  hotly  debated  at  Athens  about  the  middle 
of  the  fifth  century  b.c.,  when  Sokrates  was  young.  On  any 
view  of  him,  it  is  surely  incredible  that  he  was  not  interested 
in  these  controversies  at  the  time,  however  remote  they  may 
have  seemed  to  him  in  later  fife.  Now,  in  the  Phaedo,  Plato 
has  put  into  his  mouth  an  autobiographical  statement  in 
which  he  tells  us  that  this  was  actually  the  case,2  and  the 
list  of  problems  there  given  is  one  that  can  only  have  occupied 
men’s  minds  at  Athens  and  at  that  date.3  All  the  scientific 
schools  end  at  Athens,  and  it  was  the  Athenian  Sokrates  who 
saw  that  the  questions  they  had  raised  could  only  be  met  by 
making  a  fresh  start  from  another  point  of  view. 

1  Arist.  Met.  r,  5.  1010  a  12.  He  refused  even  to  speak,  we  are  told, 
and  only  moved  his  finger. 

2  Plato,  Phaedo,  96  a  sqq. 

3  I  have  tried  to  show  this  in  detail  in  my  notes  on  the  passage  in  my 
edition  of  the  Phaedo  (Oxford,  1911).  It  is  a  remarkable  proof  of  Plato’s 
historical  sense  that  he  should  have  been  able  to  give  an  account  of  the 
state  of  scientific  opinion  at  Athens  some  twenty-five  years  before  his  own 
birth,  without,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  a  single  anachronism. 


APPENDIX 

ON  THE  MEANING  OF  dPucrt? 


The  account  which  I  have  given  (pp.  io  sqq.)  of  the  meaning  of 
the  term  <£ixns  in  early  Greek  philosophy  has  been  criticised  by 
Professor  W.  A.  Heidel  in  a  paper  entitled  Ilepl  <fsv<re ws,  A  Study 
of  the  Conception  of  Nature  among  the  Pre-Socratics }  It  is  an 
exceedingly  valuable  paper,  and  I  cannot  find  that  it  contains 
anything  inconsistent  with  my  view,  though  the  writer  apparently 
thinks  it  does.  The  only  point  at  issue,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  is 
that  Professor  Heidel  assumes  that  the  original  meaning  of  <f>varis 
is  “growth,”  which  seems  to  me  extremely  doubtful.  No  doubt 
the  verb  <f>vopau  (t.e.  <frvlop.ai)  with  a  long  vowel  means  “  I  grow,” 
but  the  simple  root  <f>v  is  the  equivalent  of  the  Latin  fu  and  the 
English  be ,  and  need  not  necessarily  have  this  derivative  meaning. 

There  is  an  interesting  article  in  support  of  my  view  by 
Professor  Lovejoy  in  the  Philosophical  Review ,  vol.  xviii.  pp.  369 
sqq.,  and  Mr.  Beardslee  has  recently  examined  the  use  of  the  word 
(pvo-os  in  Greek  writers  of  the  fifth  century  b.c.  in  a  Ph.D.  disserta¬ 
tion  (University  of  Chicago  Press,  1918).  Here  again,  while 
acknowledging  the  value  of  the  work,  I  can  only  say  that  I  do  not 
find  its  results  inconsistent  with  the  account  I  have  given.  I  have 
never  questioned  the  obvious  fact  that  the  word  <f>v<r is  had  a 
history,  and  developed  meanings  quite  different  from  that  which 
it  may  have  had  for  an  Ionian. 

I  should  almost  be  willing  to  rest  the  case  for  this  on  the 
fragment  of  Euripides  quoted  on  p.  10,  where  the  significant 
epithet  d#dvaros  Kal  dyr/pio s  is  given  to  (f) vcros,  but  it  may  be  well 
to  collect  here  some  of  the  passages  on  which  I  also  rely. 

1.  Plato,  Laws  891  C  1,  KLvSvveve  1  yap  6  Xeywv  ravra  irvp  Kal 
vScop  Kal  yrjv  Kal  depa  TtpasTa  rjyCcrOai  ra>v  tv<xvt<dv  elvai,  Kal  rr/v 
(jivo-iv  ovop, a£eiv  Tafrra  ailrd.  892  C  2,  <f>vc nv  fiovkovrai  Xkyew 
yev&riv  rrjv  7T€  pi  ra  irporra-  el  o'e  pavlj<jeTai  rpCnov,  ov 

7 rvp  ov8e  dr/p,  foyl)  S’  ev  irpioToo;  yeyevrjfievr],  opOorara 

A eyoif  dv  elvat  8La<pep6vT<±>s  (fiva-ec 

1  Proceedings  of  the  American  Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences,  vol.  xlv.  No.  4. 

363 


364  EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 

,  in,89/«C  J  the  ”Se  °f  ^ts  here  criticised  is  expressly  said  to 

oe  mat  Ot  owoo-ot  wtowoTe  tw  vepi  <£w-«»S  k^av to  (rfn jparav. 

,,  2'  „  r'  ?S;  *93  a  9)  So/C€t  S  Y)  (f>v<Tis  xal  r/  ovcrta  twv 

fj"  WTW  r°‘S  *ri  Th  ^0V  ™«PXOV  exd<TT(l)  dppvO/JLUTTOV 

xaO  tavro  ocov  xXcvrjs  *wrty  rt>  £5Aov,  dvSpcdvros  S’  6  XaX x6s. 
ZTet0V  Ar^V  °Tt’  ef  TtS  **T0p%cu  xXlvrjv  xal  X dfdoc 

dkXd\{,XovW^V  “CrT€  rlVtlVat  PXaCrr6v’  oiK  “v  ywvOai  xXivrjv 

Antiphon  the  Sophist  was  a  contemporary  of  Sokrates. 

v  ^  \  189  b  2,  Ot  piav  Ttvd  <f>vo-iv  (tv at  Aeyovres 

rb  wav,  otov J8mp  r)  jrvp  f,  rb  p^v  ™W  B,  1.  193  a  L  ot 

'T™*  °‘  *  r>">  8  "f»  °i  Si  SSu,„,  ot  S’  1™  ™W 

®‘  '“T  ™«™  ™-  oW  r,  4.  203  a  ,6 

°.‘  f*  t”“5.  Wpor  TJ  4,Pa  i 

roW.  "“X'*'""'  ®»f>  V  «/»  h  rt  perofj 

-  4j  Ar-  M“' +  1014  b  16,  Aiyerai  Iva  pev  rpfcor  A 

r«w«,  T1!  A™.  ,i  s.  '  ' 

not  •  here,!s  n°  doubt  that  this  me»ns  that,  to  Aristotle,  Airis  did 
not  immediately  suggest  the  verb  That  has  a  long  „  and 

AnsmtS  difficuh  "  ^  rCd  diSCUSS  thG  ^esti-  Aether 
that  he  feltlt  7  *  *  ^  006  °f  n0t*  that  ™  us  is 

22  PLmnn°'Ie’ n?€7r”K0^  fr'  52  Rose  {ap  Iambl-  Protr-  p-  38. 

XL ^  wo’aT0"5  ™  ™pl  4>&rW  (eVT‘  Tl?  *****  «i 

JXV),  X  yy  7rf0TeP°V  avayKa-tov  Ttov  atrtwv  teal  r<Sv  arotvetW 
etvat  W tv  J  rt3v  fcrvov.  oS  y^  raSru  ™v  A  "Tt 
rovrtov  ra  w^ra  w^o«v,  AAA’  |£  eVetW  teal  St’  |«LV  .AAA 

7”Z\r  *»*>*»*•«.  ..v  dllt 

- atrtat  teat 

aAAcov  rt  ytyvaKrtcetv  etcetvas  dyvooSvras-  w<SS  ydo  Av  rt,  A  A  ' 
SZf 1  Aa^S  “7VO<S,/’  ^  radras  IwtWatro  ^  x<Sv  Zi  JZ 

The  importance  of  this  passage  for  our  purpose  is  thaf  it  ;<= 

Aetse  ofT'?r  W°rfk’  in.whic.h.the  phraseology  fs  Acadenf.c  (e.g 
the  use  of  ,trt,  lor  what  Anstotle  himself  called  mAh)  '  S 

The  usage  of  Theophrastos  is  the  same,  but  of  course  he  simnlv 
reproduces  Aristotle.  course  ne  simply 


INDEXES 


I.  ENGLISH 


Aahmes,  18  sq.,  46 
Abaris,  8i,  90  n.  2 
Abdera,  school  of,  61,  330  sq. 
Abstinence,  Orphic  and  Pythagorean, 
93.  95-;  Empedoklean,  250 
Academy,  29  ;  library  of,  33,  116,  171 
»•  3,  353 

Accommodation  (trvvoiKelutris) ,  32,  142, 
358 

Achaians,  2  n.  1,  4,  8r  ;  of  Pelo- 
ponnesos,  92  ;  dialect,  282  n.  4 
Achilles  and  the  tortoise,  3r8 
Achilles,  Eicrayieyr/,  Sources  §  9  (p.  34), 
191  n.  3,  292  n.  2,  298  n.  1 
Adrastos,  24  n.  2 

Aegean  civilisation,  survivals  of,  2,  3, 
15,  21  n.  2,  39,  80 
Aether.  See  ald-fjp 
Aetios,  Sources  §  jo  (p.  35) 

Ages  of  the  world,  5 
Aigospotamos,  meteoric  stone  of,  252, 
269,  357 

Ainesidemos,  152 

Air,  identified  with  mist  or  vapour, 
62,  64,  68,  74  sq.,  109,  no,  153, 
187  n.  r,  2r6  n.  2,  219  n.  3,  228  n.  2, 
246  n.  2  ;  identified  with  the  void, 
ro9,  r86,  194,  229 ;  atmospheric, 
log,  229,  266  sq.,  269,  289,  293,  337 
Akousmata,  96,  98,  283 
Akousmatics,  94,  96,  98 
Akragas,  3,  197  sqq. 

Alexander,  writer  of  Successions, 
Sources  §  17  (p.  37) 

Alexander  Aetolus,  255 
Alexander  Aphrodisiensis,  Sources  §  7 
(p.  33)  !  on  Anaximander,  64 ;  on 
Xenophanes,  116  n.  r,  126;  on  the 
Pythagoreans,  ro7  n.  1,  288,  306 
nn.  1  and  2  ;  on  Parmenides,  183  ;  on 
Zeno,  320  n.  1 ;  on  Hippon,  351 
Alkidamas,  86,  199  n.  5,  201  n.  2,  202, 
257  n.  r,  278  n.  1,  312 


Alkmaion  of  Kroton,  86,  no  n.  2,  153, 
193-196,  202,  248,  282  n.  5,  296,  332 
Allegorists,  Homeric,  49  n.  x,  116  n.  2 
Amasis,  40,  88 
Amber,  48  n.  r,  50 
Ameinias,  170 

Anakreon  and  Kritias,  203  n.  3 
Anaxagoras,  25X-275  ;  and  Euripides, 
I0>  255  ;  and  Sokrates,  256,  267  ; 
and  Perikles,  254  sqq.  ;  and  Zeno, 
349  J  and  Anaximenes,  253,  266, 
269,  270,  271  ;  and  Herakleitos,  264, 
268  ;  and  Empedokles,  261,  264,  265, 
267,  268,  273  sq.  ;  and  Leukippos, 
33X  ;  relation  to  the  Eleatics,  r82, 
26r,  3x0  ;  on  the  rise  of  the  Nile, 
45  ;  on  the  moon’s  light,  177  n.  1  ; 
on  eclipses,  306  ;  on  irbvos,  326  n.  2  ; 
primitive  cosmology  of,  111,  297 
Anaxagoreans,  29  n.  3,  359  n.  2 
Anaximander,  50-71  ;  as  an  observer 
in  marine  biology,  26  ;  and  Xeno¬ 
phanes,  1 14 

Anaximenes,  72-79,  179 ;  school  of, 
79,  253,  365,  330,  353  n.  1 
Androkydes,  283 
Andron  of  Ephesos,  87 
Anecdotes,  of  Thales,  46  n.  4 ;  of 
Xenophanes,  113  n.  2,  115  n.  3 ; 
of  Herakleitos,  115  n.  3,  131  n.  4; 
of  Empedokles,  200  n.  5 
Animals,  Anaximander,  26,  70  sqq.  ; 
Empedokles,  242  sqq.  ;  Anaxagoras, 
272  sq. ;  Diogenes  of  Apollonia,  358 
Antichthon,  297,  305  sq. 

Antisthenes,  writer  of  Successions, 
Sources  §  17  (p.  37) 

Antonius  Diogenes,  87  n.  2 
Apollo,  an  Achaian  god,  4 
Apollo  Hyperboreios,  4,  81,  87  n.  3, 
90,  200 

Apollodoros,  Sources  §  21  (p.  38)  ;  on 
Thales,  44  n.  2  ;  on  Anaximander, 


365 


366 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


51  ;  on  Anaximenes,  72  ;  on  Pytha¬ 
goras,  88  n.  2  ;  on  Xenophanes, 
113;  on  Herakleitos,  130;  on 
Parmenides,  169  ;  on  Empedokles, 
197  tin.  1  and  2,  198  ;  on  Anaxagoras, 
251,  254  n.  1,  331  n.  1  ;  on  Zeno, 
310  sq.  ;  on  Melissos,  321  ;  on 
Leukippos,  331  ;  on  Demokritos, 
33i  «•  1 

Apollonia,  52,  352  n.  3 
ApoUonios  of  Tyana,  87  n.  2,  95 
Apophthegms,  of  Thales,  50  n.  3  ;  of 
Herakleitos,  50  n.  3  ;  of  Anaxa¬ 
goras,  252,  274  ;  of  Philolaos,  284 
n.  2 

Appearances,  saving,  28,  188 
Arcadian  and  Cypriote  dialect,  4  n.  2 
Archelaos,  256,  358-360 ;  and  Anaxa¬ 
goras,  360 

Archippos,  91,  276  n.  1 
Archytas,  276  ;  on  Eurytos,  100  n.  2  ; 
definition  of  harmonic  mean,  106 
n.  2 

Aristarchos  of  Samos,  299 
Aristeas  of  Prokonnesos,  81,  90  n.  2 
Aristophanes,  on  Thales,  47  n.  1  ;  on 
Aivos,  61  n.  3  ;  on  Diogenes  of  Apol¬ 
lonia,  331,  353 

Aristotle,  Sources  §  2  (p.  31)  ;  on  the 
rise  of  the  Nile,  45  ;  on  Egyptian 
mathematics,  15  n.  4,  19  ;  on  Baby¬ 
lonian  astronomy,  23  n.  2 ;  on 
“  theologians,”  7 ;  on  Ionian 
monism,  9  n,  2 ;  on  Thales,  46 
n-  4)  47-5o  ;  on  Anaximander,  53, 
55  sq.,  57,  60  n.  4,  63  sq.,  66  n.  1  ; 
on  Anaximenes  f?),  77;  on  Pytha¬ 
goras,  86,  87  n.  3,  90  n.  2,  97 
».  3 ;  on  Xenophanes,  113  n.  2, 
”5  n.  3,  124  sq.,  126  sq.  ;  on 

Hippasos,  109,  142  ;  on  Hera¬ 

kleitos,  133  n.  1,  140  n.  2,  142,  144 
n.  x,  146,  151,  157,  158,  159;  on 
Parmenides,  170,  178  n.  3,  181,  182, 
185  sq.  ;  on  Alkmaion,  193,  196  ; 
on  Empedokles,  158  n.  1,  ig9,  200, 
229,  230,  231,  232,  233,  234,  235, 
236  n.  1,  237,  239  nn.  1  and  4,  240, 
241,  242,  243,  244,  249  ;  on  Anaxa¬ 
goras,  251,  252  n.  5,  257  n.  1,  261 
n.  1,  262  n.  1,  263,  264  ti.  3,  265, 
267,  268  n.  1,  269  n.  1 ;  on  the 
Pythagoreans,  92  n.  2,  107,  277, 
284  sqq.,  289,  290  n.  1,  291  sqq., 
305,  306,  307 ;  on  Eurytos,  100 
».  2  ;  on  Zeno,  312,  3x3,  317,  318  sqq. ; 
on  Melissos,  324  sq.,  327,  328  ;  on 
Leukippos,  330,  334  sq.,  335  sq., 
336  ;  on  Hippon,  351  ;  on  Diogenes 
of  Apollonia,  355  ;  on  Demokritos, 
342;  on  gravity,  340,  343;  0n 
eternal  motion,  12  ;  on  the  diurnal 


revolution,  13  n.  1  ;  on  the  celestial 
spheres,  188  ;  on  the  substance  of 
the  heavens,  15  n.  1,  27  ».  1  ;  on 
the  motion  of  the  earth,  299  sqq.  ; 
on  the  galeus  levis,  70  n.  2,  71  n.  2  ; 
on  the  theoretic  life,  83,  98  ;  on  the 
mysteries,  84  n.  4 ;  misunder¬ 
standings  of  Platonic  humour, 
Sources  §  2  (p.  32),  48  n.  2,  127,  170 ; 
UpoTpetmicds,  83  n.  2  ;  on  triangular, 
square,  and  oblong  numbers,  100  sq., 
103  n.  2 ;  on  incommensurability, 
105  n.  2 ;  doctrine  of  the  Mean, 
112  n.  2 

[Aristotle]  de  Mundo,  164 

[Aristotle]  de  Plantis,  241,  242  n.  1, 
257  n.  3,  272 

Aristoxenos,  on  Pythagoras,  86,  87 
n-  5>  89,  91,  93  nn.  4  and  5,  94  n.  1, 
99  n.  1,  307  n.  3  ;  on  the  Pytha¬ 
goreans,  97  n.  4,  277,  288  n.  3,  309  ; 
on  Eurytos,  100  n.  1,  277 ;  on 
Archytas,  276 ;  on  Philolaos,  283 

W'  i  J  Ui'ffayopiKal  dnro<f>d(Teis,  92 
n ■  3>  96,  281  ;  on  Hippon,  351  n.  1  ; 
on  Plato,  279  sq. 

Arithmetic,  Egyptian,  19 ;  Pytha¬ 

gorean,  99  sqq.  ;  Euclidean,  106 

Arnobius,  Sources  §  16  (p.  37) 

Arpedonapts,  20,  105 

Astrology,  24  n.  1 

Astronomy,  Babylonian  and  Greek, 

21  sq.  See  Heavenly  bodies,  Sun, 
Moon,  Planets,  Stars,  Earth, 
Eclipses,  Geocentric  and  Helio¬ 

centric  hypotheses 

Atheism,  50 

Athenagoras,  Sources  §  9  (p.  34) 

Athens,  meeting-place  of  Ionian  and 
Italiote  science,  321,  361  ;  Par¬ 
menides  and  Zeno  at,  169,  31 1  n.  1  ; 
Empedokles  at,  203  ;  Anaxagoras 
at,  254  sqq. 

Atomism,  180  n.  1,  182,  336  sqq.  See 
Leukippos 

Atoms,  movement  of,  13,  61,  340, 
345  sq.  ;  weight  of,  341  sq. 

Augustine,  Sources  §  16  (p.  37) 


.  - ,  A.  J.  X  J  /  y 

prediction  of  eclipses,  42  sq. 

Beans,  taboo  on,  93  n.  5 
Bias,  140 

Biology.  See  Animals,  Plants 
Blood,  Empedokles,  201,  229,  247; 
Diogenes  of  Apollonia,  355  ;  Sicilian 
school  of  medicine,  249  n.  4 
Boundless.  See  dweipov 
Brain,  Alkmaion,  r94 ;  Empedokles, 
201,  249  ;  Piat0  and  Hippokrates 
249  n.  4  ’ 

Breath.  See  Respiration 


INDEX 


Breath  of  the  world,  75,  108,  128,  185 
sq.,  231 
Brotinos,  194 

Calendar,  Babylonian,  22  ;  Thales,  47 
Cave,  Orphic,  83  n.  3,  223  n.  1 
Centum  and  satem  languages,  2  n.  1 
Chaos,  7  n.  1 

Cicero,  Sources  §  12  (p.  35)  ;  on  Stoic 
“  accommodation,”  32  n.  1  ;  on 
Thales,  49  sq. ;  on  Anaximander,  60  ; 
on  Anaximenes,  78;  on  Pythagoras, 
89  ».  3  ;  on  Parmenides,  191  n.  2, 
192  ».  1  ;  on  Anaxagoras,  253  n.  1  ; 
on  Atomism,  341  n.  2 
Clement  of  Alexandria,  16 
Comic  poets  on  Pythagoreans,  94  n.  3 
Condensation.  See  Rarefaction 
Conflagration.  See  c  kitv  pua  ls  . 
Constellations,  names  of,  21  «.  2 
Continuity,  320 
Copernicus,  299  n.  3 
Cosmogonies  7  sq. 

Croesus,  Solon  and,  24,  113  ;  Milesians 
and,  39  sqq. 

Cyril,  Sources  §  9  (p.  34) 

Damasias,  44 
Damaskios,  7  n.  3 
Damon,  255  «.  2,  256,  296  n.  2 
Darkness,  74.  i°9,  155,  186,  187,  237, 
239 

Death,  Herakleitos,  137  «.  6,  138, 
153  sq.  ;  Parmenides,  193 ;  Aik 
maion,  195  ;  Empedokles,  244  sq. 
Dekad,  102 
Delos,  80,  81,  90  n.  2 
Demetrios  Magnus,  on  Philolaos,  281 
Demetrios  Phalereus,  on  Thales,  44  ; 

on  Anaxagoras,  251 
Demokritos,  not  a  “  pre-Socratic,” 
1  n.  1  ;  date  of,  252  «•  2,  331  ; 
on  Egyptian  mathematics,  20 ;  on 
Anaxagoras,  232,  331,  348 ;  and 
Leukippos,  331 ;  and  Epicurus,  341 
sq.  ;  primitive  cosmology  of,  79  n.  1, 
hi,  297  sq.,  339 
Derkyllides,  42  n.  1,  304  n.  1 
Diagonal  and  side  of  square,  103 
Dialectic,  Eleatic,  180,  313  sqq. 

Diels,  Doxographi  graeci,  Sources  §  6 
(p.  33) ;  on  Apollodoros,  Sources  §  21 
(P-  38) 

Dikaiarchos,  on  Pythagoras,  86,  89  n.  4, 
92 

Diodoros  of  Aspendos,  95 
Diogenes  of  ApoOonia,  352-358,  64,  79, 
145  n.  1  ;  and  Empedokles,  356 ; 
and  Anaxagoras,  356  sq.  ;  and 
Leukippos,  357 

Diogenes  Laertios,  Sources  §  15  (p.  37), 


367 

§  20  (p.  38) ;  on  Herakleitos,  147 
sq. 

Dionysos,  81 

Distances,  measurement  of  inaccessible, 
46 

Divisibility,  262,  264,  316  sq.,  327,  335, 
349 

Dodecahedron,  284  n.  1,  293  sqq. 
Dorians,  2  «.  1,  89  sq. 

Doric  dialect,  281,  282  sq. 
Doxographers,  Sources  §  6  (p.  33 
sqq.) 

Earth,  shape  of,  23  n.  3,  66,  79  n.  1, 
hi,  190  n.  1,  298,  347;  originally 
moist,  26,  63  sqq.,  65,  240  ;  motion 
of,  66  n.  3,  69,  299  sqq.,  305,  307  ; 
Thales,  47  ;  Anaximander,  65  sq.  ; 
Anaximenes,  77;  Pythagoras,  in; 
Xenophanes,  125  ;  Empedokles,  240  ; 
Anaxagoras,  271  ;  Pythagoreans, 
300  sqq.  ;  Leukippos,  347 ;  Dio¬ 
genes  of  Apollonia,  357.  See 
Geocentric  hypothesis 
Echekrates,  85,  277,  293 
Eclipses,  22  ;  Babylonian  predictions 
of,  42  ;  Thales,  41  sq.,  113  n.  1  ; 
Anaximander,  67  n.  2  ;  Anaximenes, 
78 ;  Xenophanes,  122  ;  Herakleitos, 
67  n.  2,  148;  Alkmaion,  195; 
Empedokles,  239  ;  Anaxagoras,  271, 
272  ;  Pythagoreans,  298,  305  ;  Leu¬ 
kippos,  347 

Ecliptic.  See  Obliquity 
Effluences.  See  awoppoal. 

Egypt,  3,  15,  16 ;  Thales  and,  44 ; 

Pythagoras  and,  88 
Egyptian  mathematics,  15  ;  arith¬ 
metic,  18  ;  geometry,  19 
Ekphantos,  291  n.  3,  300  n.  1,  336  «.  1 
Elea,  169;  era  of,  113,  170;  Xeno¬ 
phanes  and,  113,  115,  127; 

Parmenides  and,  169 ;  Zeno  and, 
3U 

Eleatics.  See  Parmenides,  Zeno, 
Melissos  ;  Plato  on,  29  n.  2,  127  ; 
Leukippos  and  the,  331,  333  sqq., 
349 

Elements,  12  n.  2,  53,  55  sq.,  201  n.  5, 
206  n.  1,  228  sqq.,  83,  292  sq. 
See  Roots,  Seeds,  dSo s,  idea,  fiopipq, 
UToixeiov 

Embryology,  Parmenides,  178  n  2, 
192  ;  Empedokles,  244 
Empedokles,  197-250 :  was  he  a 
Dorian  ?  3  ;  at  Athens,  203  ;  and 
Orphicism,  200,249s?. ;  and  medicine, 
201  sq. ;  and  Pythagoras,  200,  224 
n.  5  ;  and  Xenophanes,  125,  212 
n.  3  ;  and  Parmenides,  182,  202, 
224  «.  5,  227  sqq.,  249,  310  ;  and 
Zeno,  202  ;  and  Leukippos,  202, 


368 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


332  ;  and  Gorgias,  201,  249  n.  1  ; 
on  “  air  ”  and  darkness,  237 
Engineering,  Ionian,  40  n.  1 
Ephesos,  130  sqq. 

Ephoros,  on  Anaxagoras,  255  n.  6 
Epicharmos,  113  n.  2,  116,  127  n.  3, 
152  n.  1 

Epicureans,  Sources  §  12  (p.  36) 
Epicurus,  on  innumerable  worlds,  59  ; 
on  Leukippos,  330  n.  2,  339 ;  atomic 
theory  of,  341  sq.,  343  sq. 

Epimenides,  7,  97,  112  ;  evaporation, 
49.  See  avaOv/xlaais 
Equinoxes,  21,  42  n.  1,  51,  3or  n.  1  ; 

precession  of  the,  22  n.  1 
Er,  myth  of,  188,  190,  191 
Eratosthenes,  Sources  §  21  (p.  38)  ; 
on  Anaximander’s  map,  51  ;  on 
Pythagoras,  88  n.  1 
Eros,  in  Hesiod,  7  ;  in  Parmenides,  191 
Ethics,  origin  of,  1 

Euclid,  arithmetic,  106 ;  i.  47,  105  ; 
iv.  11,  295  n.  2 

Eudemos  of  Rhodes,  on  Thales,  42 
n.  1,  44  n.  4,  45  nn.  4  and  5  ;  on 
Anaximander,  66  n.  3  ;  on  Pytha¬ 
goras,  104  n.  3  ;  on  Parmenides,  178 
«.  3  ;  on  Zeno,  315  n.  3  ;  on  Melissos, 
325  n.  1  j  on  the  term  ct  oiy  tiov . 
228  n.  1 

Eudoxos,  spheres  of,  62  n.  1,  188 ; 

theory  of  proportion,  106 
Euripides,  on  tpbcts,  10  ;  and  Anaxa¬ 
goras,  255 

Eurytos,  99  sq.,  100  n.  1,  107,  277, 
278,  283  n.  1 

Eusebios,  Sources  §  9  (p.  34),  §  I4 
(P;  36),  §  16  (p.  37)  ;  on  Mosaic 
origin  of  Greek  philosophy,  16 
Euthymenes  of  Massalia,  45 
Evans,  Sir  Arthur,  2  n.  1,  4  n.  2 
Even  and  Odd,  287  sqq. 

Evolution,  Anaximander,  71  ;  Empe- 
dokles,  242  sqq. ;  Anaxagoras,  272  sq. 
Exam  yes,  41 

Experiment,  27.  See  Klepsydra 

Figures,  numerical,  100  ;  “  Arabic,” 
100  n.  3 

Fire,  fed  by  moisture,  49,  64  n.  1,  150, 
156  n.  1 ;  Hippasos,  109 ;  Hera- 
kleitos,  145 

Fire,  central,  190,  296  sqq. 

Floruit.  See  dx/t?) 

Flux,  Herakleitean,  145  sq. 
lorgeries,  Pythagorean,  92  n.  5 
280  sqq. 

Fossils,  Xenophanes  on,  26,  123  sq. 

Galen,  Sources  §  9  (p.  34),  on 

Empedokles,  200 
Galeus  levis,  70  »,  2,  71  «.  2 


Geocentric  hypothesis,  23,  27  sq.,  in, 
190,  297  n.  3,  299  sqq.,  304  sq. 
Geometry,  Egyptian,  19  sq.  ;  of 
Thales,  45  sq. ;  of  Pythagoras, 
104  sq. 

Giaukos  of  Rhegion,  198  n.  1 
Gnomon,  the  carpenter’s  tool,  21  n.  1  ; 
the  astronomical  instrument,  26  n.  1, 
42  n.  1,  51  n.  4 ;  in  geometry  and 
arithmetic,  21  n.  1,  103 
God,  gods,  in  Homer,  4  ;  in  Hesiod, 
5,  14  ;  non-religious  use  of  the  word, 
14,  80 ;  fall  of  gods,  81  ;  Thales, 
48,  50 ;  Anaximander,  60 ; 

Anaximenes,  78 ;  Xenophanes,  128 
sq.  ;  Herakleitos,  167  ;  Parmenides 
(avoids  the  term),  179  ;  Empedokles, 
23°>  235,  249;  Diogenes  of  Apollonia, 
354  n.  1 

Golden  Section,  295  n.  2 
Gorgias  and  Empedokles,  198  n.  2, 
199  5,  200,  201,  222  n.  1,  249  n.  1 

Great  Year,  156  sqq. 

Greek,  origin  of  the  name,  2  n.  1 ; 
Greek  language,  ib. 


- - ry,  4 

Harmonics,  98,  306  sq. 

“  Harmony  of  the  Spheres,”  no,  306 
s?.,  307  n.  1.  See  Soul  and  ap/xovla. 

Hearing,  sense  of,  Alkmaion,  195  n.  1  • 
Empedokles,  247,  248  ;  Anaxagoras, 
273  sq. 

Heart,  Alkmaion,  194 ;  Empedokles, 
201  ’ 

Heavenly  bodies,  Anaximander,  62 
sqq.,  66  sqq.  ;  Anaximenes,  75  sqq  ■ 
Pythagoras,  no  sq.  ;  Xenophanes! 
121  sqq.  ;  Herakleitos,  148  sqq  - 
Parmenides,  187  sq.  ;  Alkmaion,’ 
195;  Empedokles,  237  sqq.  ;  Anaxa¬ 
goras,  271  sq.  ;  Leukippos,  347  • 
Diogenes  of  Apollonia,  357 

Hekataios,  in  Egypt,  17  n.  1  ;  on 
hales  (?),  45,  50 ;  and  Anaxi¬ 
mander  s  map,  51  ;  Herakleitos  on 
134 

Heliocentric  hypothesis,  23,  299  sqq. 

Herakleides  of  Pontos,  on  Pythagoras 
95  nn. .  2  and  3,  98  n.  3,  278  «.  1 ;  on 
Empedokles,  197  2)  I9g  n  1 

200  5,  2G3  r,  312  n.  1 ;  on 

Ekphantos,  336  n.  1  ;  on  the  earth’s 
motion,  300  n.  i 

Herakleides  Lembos,  Sources  S  17 
(P-  37)  s  7 

Herakleiteans,  29  n.  i,  145  M.  x  l6g 
n.  2,  360  n.  4 

Herakleitos,  130-168  :  on  Homer,  136 
141,  162,  164;  on  Hesiod,  134,  ng! 
on  AtcMoete ,  j  „„  H,kataios: 
134 ,  and  Anaximenes,  146 ;  0n 


INDEX 


Pythagoras,  85,  87  «.  5,  88,  97,  130, 
I3I»  I34»  135  «.  5  ;  on  Xenophanes, 
114,  130, 134  ;  and  Protagoras,  166  ; 
reference  to  the  “  three  lives,”  98 
n.  3,  140  n.  3  ;  apophthegms,  50  ru  3 
Herakleitos,  the  Homeric  Allegorist, 
on  Thales,  49  n.  1 

Hermippos,  Sources  §  18  (p.  37),  280 
Hennodoros  of  Ephesos,  130,  131  n.  1, 
140  sq. 

Hermokrates,  279  n.  2 
Herodotos,  on  Homer  and  Hesiod, 
6 ;  on  Egyptian  influences,  15  ; 
on  Egyptian  geometry,  19;  on 
the  rise  of  the  Nile,  44 ;  on  the 
gnomon,  51  «.  4;  on  Orphicism,  88  ; 
on  the  Hyperboreans,  81  ;  on 
Abaris  and  Aristeas,  81  ;  on  Solon 
and  Croesus,  24 ;  on  Lydian  in¬ 
fluences,  39  ;  on  Thales,  40-44,  46  ; 
on  Pythagoras,  85,  87  n.  5,  88  ;  on 
the  foundation  of  Elea,  113  n,  5; 
on  Empedokles  (?),  88  n.  5  ;  on 
Anaxagoras,  270  «.  6 
Hesiod,  5  sq.,  14.  See  Xenophanes 
Hieron,  ri3 
Hiketas,  300  n.  1 

Hippasos,  94  n.  2,  106  n.  1,  109  n.  6, 
142,  187,  293,  295 

Hippokrates  of  Kos,  on  Ionian 
monism,  9  n.  2,  26  ;  on  Empedokles, 
202  ;  on  the  brain,  249  n.  4 ;  Ilept 
atpwv  udariov  Toiruv,  74  n.  2  ;  IIe/>2 
dpxalys  iarpiKTjs,  355  n-  3 
[Hippokrates]  ircpl  Stafrys,  150  «. 
2,  151,  156,  162,  164,  264  n.  2,  265 
n.  2,  350  n.  1,  355  n.  3 
Hippolytos,  Sources  §  13  (p.  36)  ;  on 
Anaximander,  51,  54  n.  2  ;  on  Anaxi¬ 
menes,  78  ;  on  Herakleitos,  142  ; 
on  Anaxagoras,  270  sq. 

Hippon  of  Samos,  351-352  ;  and  Thales, 
48  n.  3,  351  ;  and  the  Pythagoreans, 
351  n.  1 

Hippys  of  Rhegion,  109  n.  6 
Homer,  4  sqq. ;  on  the  soul,  81.  See 
Xenophanes,  Herakleitos 
Homeric  allegorists,  49  n.  1,  229  n.  3 
Hylozoism,  12  n.  3 
Hyperboreans,  81,  90  n.  2 
Hypotenuse,  105 

Iamblichos,  Life  of  Pythagoras,  86  sq., 
97  n.  1,  100  n.  1  ;  on  numerical 
symbolism,  101  nn.  1  and  2 
Ibykos,  191  n.  3 
Idaios  of  Himera,  352 
“  Ideas,”  theory  of,  308  sq. 
Immortality,  84,  154,  195,  245,  250 
Incommensurability,  105 
Indian  philosophy,  18,  82  n.  2.  See 
Transmigration 


369 

Infinity,  Anaximander,  53  sqq. ;  Xeno¬ 
phanes,  124  sqq.  ;  Parmenides,  181  ; 
Melissos,  325  sq.  See  Divisibility, 
Aireipov 

Injustice.  See  dSuda 
Intermediate.  See  :j 

Intervals,  musical,  106  sq.,  112.  See 

Octave 

Ionians,  3  ;  pessimism  of,  8  ;  secu¬ 
larism  of,  13  sq.,  80  ;  as  engineers, 
4°  n.  1  ;  primitive  cosmology  of, 
hi 

Ionic  dialect,  72,  281,  282  sq.,  352  n.  3 
Irenaeus,  Sources  §  16  (p.  37) 
Irrationals,  101,  105 
Isokrates,  <pL\ooo<pia  in,  83 ;  on 

Pythagoras,  88,  95  n.  1  ;  on 

Anaxagoras  and  Damon,  254,  255 
n.  1 

Italiote  philosophy,  80 

Justice.  See  SUy 

Kallimachos,  on  Thales,  41  n.  2 
Kebes  and  Simmias,  277  n.  2,  295,  309 
Kebes,  IUva£,  on  Pythagoras  and 
Parmenides,  170 

Klepsydra,  27,  219  n.  2,  220  n.  1,  229, 
245,  267  n.  1,  332 
Korybantes,  97  sq. 

Kratinos,  351 
Kratylos,  360  sq. 

Kritias  the  elder,  203  n.  3,  279  «.  2 
Kritias  of  the  Thirty,  203  n.  3 
Kroton,  89,  193 
Kylon,  90  n.  1,  91 

Laertios  Diogenes.  See  Diogenes 
Laertios 

Lampsakos,  school  of,  256,  359 
Leukippos,  330-349  ;  and  the  Ionians, 
339  sq.,  349  ;  and  the  Eleatics,  182, 
33i  sq.,  333  sqq.,  337,  341,  349  ;  and 
Empedokles,  202,  332  ;  and  Anaxa¬ 
goras,  332,  347 ;  and  the  Pytha¬ 
goreans,  337,  339,  345  ;  and  Diogenes 
of  Apollonia,  348  ;  and  Demokritos, 
337  sq.,  34 7  n.  5,  348 
Light,  186,  239.  See  Sun,  Moon 
Lightning  and  Thunder,  Anaximander, 
68  ;  Anaximenes,  76  ;  Empedokles, 
239 

Limit.  See  7 rtpas 

Lives,  the  three,  98,  140  n.  3 

Logic,  origin  of,  1 

Love,  in  Hesiod,  7 ;  in  Parmenides, 
191  ;  in  Empedokles,  231  sqq. 
Lucretius,  on  Empedokles,  203  ;  on 
Anaxagoras,  264  n.  3  ;  on  Demo¬ 
kritos,  hi  n.  1 
Lydia,  39  sq.,  118 
Lysis,  91,  276,  277,  281,  283 


24 


370 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


Magnet,  Thales  on  the,  48,  50 
Man,  Anaximander,  70  sq.  ;  Hera- 
kleitos,  15 1  sq. 

Map,  Anaximander’s,  51 
Marmor  Parium,  on  Pythian  era,  44 
n.  3  ;  on  the  meteoric  stone  of 
Aigospotamos,  252  n.  6 
Materialism,  182 
Matter.  See  vXtj 

Mean,  Harmonic,  106  n.  2  ;  Aristotle’s 
doctrine  of  the,  112 

Measures,  134  n.  4,  135  n.  2,  150  sq., 

161.  357 

Medicine,  Pythagorean,  9 7,  193  ; 

Alkmaion,  193  sqq.;  Empedokles, 
200  sq.,  231  ;  Philolaos,  278 
Melissos,  320-329;  and  Parmeni¬ 
des,  1 8 1,  321,  324  ;  and  the  Ionians, 
321,  326 ;  and  the  Pythagoreans, 
327 ;  and  Anaxagoras,  326  n.  2, 
328,  335 

Mdissos,  Xenophanes,  and.  Gorgias, 
126  n.  1,  322  nn.  1  and  2 
Menon,  'I arpuca,  48  n.  3,  201  n.  5, 
278  n.  4,  283  n.  1,  292  n.  1,  351  n.  1 
Metapontion,  89,  90  n.  2,  91 
Metempsychosis.  See  Transmigration 
Meteorology,  at  first  confused  with 
astronomy,  2 7,  49,  195 
Milesian  school,  39-79 
Miletos,  39,  49,  52  n.  2,  330,  332 
Milky  Way,  igr,  271 
Milo  of  Kroton,  91 

Milton,  on  “  saving  appearances,”  28 
n.  2  ;  on  “  harmony  of  the  spheres,” 
307  n.  1 

Mixture,  Anaximander,  56  ;  Empedo¬ 
kles,  233  sq. 

Mochos  of  Sidon,  16  n.  4 
Monism,  9  n.  2,  180,  197,  310 
Monotheism,  128  sq. 

Moon,  Anaximander,  67  ;  Anaximenes, 
75  sq.-,  Xenophanes,  123  ;  Empedo¬ 
kles,  239 ;  Anaxagoras,  271  sq.  ; 
Leukippos,  347:  light  of  the,  177 
n.  1,  239,  272,  298  ;  rotation  of  the, 
297 

Motion,  eternal,  12,  61  ;  premundane, 
61  ;  denied  by  Parmenides,  179,  181  J» 
explained  by  Empedokles,  227  sq.  ; 
and  Anaxagoras,  267  ;  criticised  by 
Zeno,  318  sqq. ;  denied  by  Melissos, 
327 ;  reaffirmed  by  Leukippos, 
340  sq. 

Music,  Pythagorean,  97 
Mysteries,  84,  141 

Nabonassar,  era  of,  22 
Names,  176,  348  n.  1 
Navigation,  Thales,  41,  47 ;  Anaxi¬ 
mander,  51  sq. 

Necessity.  See  av&y K-q 


Neoplatonists,  Sources  §  5  (p.  32)  ; 

on  Parmenides,  178  n.  3,  183 
Neopythagoreans,  107 
Nigidius  Figulus,  95 
Nikomachos  of  Gerasa,  on  Pythagoras, 
87  n.  2  ;  on  numerical  symbolism, 
101  n.  1,  289  n.  1 
Nile,  rise  of  the,  44  sq.,  270  n.  6 
Noumenios,  16 

Nous,  in  Anaxagoras,  267  sqq. 

Numbers,  Pythagorean  doctrine  of, 
io7  sq.,  278,  285  sqq.,  307  sqq.  ; 
relation  to  Atomism,  336  ;  triangu- 
lar,  square,  and  oblong,  102  sq. 
Numerical  symbolism,  100  sqq. 

Obliquity  of  the  ecliptic  (zodiac), 
Anaximander,  51  ;  Anaximenes,  77  ; 
Leukippos,  347;  Diogenes  of  Apol- 
ionia,  357 

Oblong  numbers.  See  Numbers 
Observation,  26 
Octave,  106,  no,  296,  306 
Odd  and  Even,  287  sq.  ' 

Oinopides  of  Chios,  26  n.  1,  103  n.  1 
OI>mpiodoros  on  the  term  ueTt  p. \b 0- 
*wi s,  93  »•  2 
Onomakritos,  97 

Opposites  (hot-cold,  dry-wet),  8  sq., 
53  sq.,  57,  112,  143,  165,  185,  196’ 
201,  228,  231,  263,  356 
Oriental  influences,  15  sqq. 

Origen,  piXoaopo^ev a,  Sources  S  n 
(p.  36)  s 

Orphicism,  5  n.  2,  7  n.  3,  81  sqq.,  192,  200 


Pain,  273,  326 

Parmenides,  169-193 ;  and  Xeno¬ 
phanes,  170 ;  and  Anaximander, 
180  ;  and  Herakleitos,  130,  179, 
183  sq.  ;  and  Pythagoreanism  and 
Empedokles,  109,  170,  179,  184  sqq., 
192,  202,  293,  310  ;  at  Athens,  169, 
172  n.  1,  311 
Pausanias,  201  n.  1 
Pentagram*  295 
Pebbles.  See  pr/poi 
Perception,  sense,  Parmenides,  178 ; 
Alkmaion,  194 ;  Empedokles,  246' 
sqq.  ;  Anaxagoras,  273  sq.  ;  Leu¬ 
kippos,  347  sq.  ;  Diogenes  of 
ApoEonia,  358 

Perikles,  and  Zeno,  169,  31 1  n.  1  • 
an<*  Amixagoras,  251,  254  sqq.  ; 
and  Melissos,  320 
Petron,  60,  109 
Phaidros,  Sources  §  12  (p.  36) 
Pherekydes  of  Syros,  3,  7  n.  2,  80,  94 
n.  1,  97 

Philip  of  Opous,  305 
Philistion,  201  nn .  1  and  4,  231  n.  1,  '■>4.0 
n.  4 

Philo  of  Byblos,  16  n.  4 


INDEX 


37i 


Philo  Judaeus,  16;  on  Herakleitos, 
143,  164 

Philodemos,  de  pietate,  Sources  §  12 
(P-  36) ;  on  “  accommodation,” 

32  n.  1  ;  on  Anaximander,  60  ;  on 
Parmenides,  192  n.  1 
Philolaos,  83,  100,  276,  277  sqq.,  292, 
297  sq.  ;  Speusippos  and,  102  n.  2 
Philosophy.  See  piAooopia 
Phleious,  Pythagorean  society  of,  83 
n.  1,  98  n.  3,  277 

Phoenician  influence,  41*  See  Mochos 
Physiological  interest,  48,  232,  262, 
268,  350 

Physiology,  Parmenides,  192  sq.  ; 
Alkmaion,  194 ;  Empedokles,  244 
sqq.  ;  Diogenes  of  Apollonia,  355 
Pindar,  on  the  Hyperboreans,  81  ; 

Orphic  odes,  200 
Piremus,  19,  21  n.  1 
Placita,  26 ;  of  Aetios,  Sources  §  10 
(P-  35)  ;  Vetusta  (Poseidonian),  ib.  § 
11  (P-  35)  i  pseudo- Plutarch,  ib.  §  9 
(P-  34) 

Planets,  names  of,  23  n.  1  ;  motion  of, 
21,  70,  no,  193,  239  ;  Pythagorean 
system  of,  277,  296  sqq. 

Plants,  Empedokles,  240  sq. ;  Anaxa¬ 
goras,  272  sqq. 

Plato,  Sources  §  x  (p.  31);  on  Egyptian 
science,  15  n.  3, 19  n.  1  ;  on  oriental 
astronomy,  23  n.  2,  24  n.  2 ;  on 
astrology,  24  n.  1  ;  on  Orphicism, 
84  ;  on  K&dapm s,  98  n.  1  ;  on 
schools  of  philosophy,  29  sq.  ;  on 
Seven  Wise  Men,  44  n.  3  ;  definition  of 
harmonic  mean,  106  n.  2 ;  on 
stereometry,  283 ;  on  planetary 
motions,  no  n.  2,  195  ;  on  the 
earth’s  motion,  301  sq.,  305  ;  on 
gravity,  343 ;  on  the  doctrine  of 
the  Mean,  112  n.  2  ;  on  the  Great 
Year,  157 ;  on  AvtottoSools,  162 
n.i\  on  “  air,”  187  n.  1  ;  and  Empe¬ 
dokles,  248,  249 ;  and  Philistion, 
201  n.  4 ;  and  the  Pythagoreans, 
308  ( see  Er,  myth  of)  ;  on  Thales, 
46  n.  4,  47  n.  1 ;  on  Pythagoras,  85, 
89  n.  4  ;  on  Xenophanes,  127,  170  ; 
on  Epicharmos,  127  n.  3  ;  on 
Herakleitos,  131  n.  5,  144,  146,  158, 
159 ;  on  Herakleiteans,  29  n.  x, 
145  n.  1,  150  n.  2,  166  n.  2  ;  on 
Parmenides,  169,  170,  181,  192,  198 
n.  2,  311 ;  on  the  Eleatics,  29  n.  2, 
127  ;  on  Empedokles,  144,  201  n.  2, 
233.237»-3;  on  Anaxagoras,  252  n.  4, 
254,  256  n.  3,  257,  267  ;  on  Anaxa- 
goreans,  29  n.  3  ;  on  Philolaos,  276  ; 
on  Pythagoreans,  13,  61,  66  n.  1, 
83,  85,  89  n.  4,  98  nn.  2  and  3,  109, 

2 77  »•  2,  279  sqq.,  292  sqq.,  301  sqq., 


304  sq.  ;  on  Zeno,  169,  311,  312, 
SJfl.  3I4  I  on  Melissos,  329  n.  2  ;  on 
Sokrates,  361 

Pleasure  and  pain,  Empedokles,  241, 
246, 247 ;  Anaxagoras,  274  ;  Diogenes 
of  Apollonia,  358 

Pliny,  on  Thales,  43,  44  n.  2;  on 
Anaximander,  51  ;  on  Anaximenes, 
51  w.  4  ;  on  Hermodoros,  131  n.  1  ; 
on  the  meteoric  stone  of  Aigospota- 
mos,  252 

Pluralism,  197,  3x0 

Plutarch,  on  Thales,  46  n.  1  ;  on 
Anaximenes,  75  ;  on  the  Pytha¬ 
goreans,  95  n.  2  ;  on  Herakleitos, 
160 ;  on  Parmenides,  171  n.  2, 
186  n.  2,  311  n.  1  ;  on  Zeno,  169  sq., 
311  n.  x  ;  on  Melissos,  320  sq.  ;  on 
Anaxagoras,  255  n.  6,  256  n.  5,  257 
«■  5  ;  on  Demokritos,  336  n.  5  ;  on 
Plato,  304  sq.  ;  on  the  meteoric 
stone  of  Aigospotamos,  252 ;  on 
Odd  and  Even,  289 
[Plutarch]  Placita,  Sources  §  9  (p.  34) 
[Plutarch]  Stromateis,  Sources  §  14 
(P-  36)  ;  on  Parmenides,  187  n.  1  ; 
on  Empedokles,  236,  238 
Points,  lines,  and  surfaces,  290,  315 
sqq. 

Political  activity  of  philosophers : 
Thales,  46 ;  Anaximander,  52  ; 
Pythagoras,  90  sqq.  ;  Parmenides, 
171  ;  Empedokles,  198  sqq. ;  Zeno, 
3H 

Polybios,  on  Pythagoreans,  92  n.  1 
Polybos,  on  Melissos,  329 
Polykrates,  era  of,  38,  88 
Pores.  See  Tripoi 

Porphyry,  Life  of  Pythagoras,  87,  95 
Poseidonios,  and  Mochos  of  Sidon,  16 
n.  4  ;  and  astrology,  24  n.  1  ;  on  the 
tripartite  soul,  296  n.  2.  See  Placita, 
Vetusta 

Precession.  See  Equinoxes 
Primary  substance,  9-1 1,  12  n.  1 
Proclus,  Commentary  on  Euclid  I.,  26 
n.  r,  44  n.  4,  45  n.  4,  104  nn.  2  and 
3,  188  n.  1  ;  on  Parmenides  and 
Zeno,  170  n.  3  ;  on  Philolaos,  281  ; 
on  Pythagoreans,  290  n.  1,  309  n.  2  ; 
on  the  “  theory  of  ideas,”  309  n.  2 
Proportion,  106 

Protagoras,  and  Herakleitos,  x66  ;  and 
Zeno,  312  ;  kotoPoKKovtcs,  329  n.  2 
Purification.  See  Ka.9app.ol,  K&dapois 
Pyramids,  height  ot,  46.  See  nupapls 
Pyrrho,  82  n.  2 

Pythagoras,  84-112;  an  Ionian,  3,  81; 

Empedokles  on,  200 
Pythagoreans,  276-309  ;  in  the  At  (Tirol 
Aoyoi,  29  n.  3  ;  on  the  premundane 
motion,  61 ;  on  air  or  the  void,  109, 
24  A 


372 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


i79»  181,  231  ;  Plato  on,  13,  61, 
66  n.  1,  83,  85,  . 89  n.  4  ;  comic  poets 
on,  94  n.  3 

“  Pythagorean  theorem  ”  (Eucl.  i.  47), 
104  sq. 

Pythian  era,  44 
Pythodoros,  31 1  n.  1 

Rarefaction  and  condensation,  73  sqq., 
J46,  179,  327,  356 

Religion,  Aegean,  3,  4,  80  ;  Delian,  81. 
See  God,  Monotheism,  Orphicism, 
Sacrifice 

Respiration,  153,  201,  229,  245,  279 
Rest.  See  Motion 

Retrograde  motion  of  planets,  21,  304 
Revolution,  diurnal,  13,  61,  no 
Rhegion,  109  n.  4,  19 1  n.  3,  276 
Rhetoric,  Empedokles  and,  200 
Rhind  papyrus,  18  sqq. 

Rhodes,  3 

Roots  (=<rr«x<:ia),  Empedokles,  228 
sqq. 

Sacrifice,  mystic,  95  ;  bloodless,  93, 
224  n.  4 

Salmoxis,  85,  90  n.  2 
Sanchuniathon,  16  n.  4 
Sardeis,  era  of,  38,  44  n.  2,  51,  72.  See 
Lydia 

Saros,  42  n.  2 

Satyros,  Sources  §  19  (p.  38) ;  on 
Empedokles,  199  n.  5,  201  n.  2  ;  on 
Anaxagoras,  255  sq. ;  on  Philolaos,  280 
Schools  of  philosophy,  28  sqq.,  50  n 
4,  79 

Sea,  Anaximander,  64  sq. ;  Herakleitos, 
I49  i  Empedokles,  240  ;  Anaxagoras, 
270  ;  Diogenes  of  Apollonia,  357 
Seeds,  Anaxagoras,  264  sq. 

Seqt,  19,  46 

Seven  Wise  Men,  41,  44,  50,  113 
Sextus  Empiricus,  Sources  §  4  (p.  32)  ; 
on  Herakleitos,  152 ;  on  Anaxa¬ 
goras,  264  n.  1 

Shakespeare,  on  the  “  harmony  of 
the  spheres,”  307  n.  1 
Sight,  Alkmaion,  194,  195  M.  j  . 

Empedokles,  246  sq.,  248  ;  Anaxa¬ 
goras,  273  sq. 

Silloi,  1 16 

Simmias  See  Kebes 
Simplicius,  Sources  §  5  (p.  32)  ;  on 
Thales,  48 ;  on  Anaximander,  54 
n-  2 !  on  innumerable  worlds, 
59;  on  Xenophanes,  115  sq.,  116  n. 

1,  126  ;  on  Parmenides,  171,  174  n. 

1,  178  n.  3,  183,  186,  189  sq.,  190 
n.  4 ;  on  Empedokles,  243  n.  1  ; 
dn  Anaxagoras,  257,  263 ;  on 

Pythagoreans,  288,  300  n.  1;  on 
Zeno,  313 ;  on  Melissos,  321,  327 


«.  x  ;  on  Diogenes  of  Apollonia,  353, 
357 

Sleep,  Herakleitos,  137  n.  6,  138  n.  3, 
152  sq.  ;  Empedokles,  245 
Smell,  Alkmaion,  195  n.  1  ;  Empe¬ 
dokles,  247,  248  ;  Anaxagoras,  273 
sq. 

Sokrates,  on  the  soul,  84 ;  meeting 
with  Parmenides  and  Zeno,  169, 
256  n.  3,  31 1  ;  and  the  Pythagoreans, 
277>  278  n.  2  ;  and  Anaxagoras,  256, 
267  ;  and  Archelaos,  358  sq.  ;  and 
Damon,  296  n.  2  ;  “  theory  of 

ideas,”  308  sq. 

Solids,  regular,  283  sqq.,  284  n.  1, 
293  sqq. 

Solon  and  Croesus,  24  sq. 

Solstices,  21,  42  n.  1,  51.  See  rpoiral 
Sosikrates,  writer  of  Successions, 
Sources  §  17  (p.  37) 

Sotion,  Sources  §  17  (p.  37)  ;  on 
Parmenides,  170 ;  on  Anaxagoras, 
255  n.  6 

Soul,  of  the  world ;  Thales,  49  ; 
Anaximenes,  75  ;  of  man,  Orphic, 
81  sq.  ■  Anaximenes,  75  ;  Alkmaion, 
x95  ;  a  “harmony,”  295  sqq.; 
tripartite,  296  n.  2  ;  Sokrates  on 
the,  84 
Space,  317 

Speusippos,  on  Parmenides,  171  ;  on 
Pythagorean  numbers,  102  n.  3, 
278,  290  n.  1 

Sphere,  planetary  spheres,  62  n.  1  ; 
Parmenides,  181,  227,  231  ;  Empe¬ 
dokles,  227.  See  Earth,  Eudoxos, 
Harmony 

Square  numbers.  See  Number 
Stars,  fixed,  77  n.  4,  239,  271,  347 
otobaios,  Sources  §  9  (p.  34) 

Stoics,  Sources  §  3  (p.  32)  ;  and 
astrology,  24  n.  1  ;  as  interpreters  of 
Herakleitos,  131  n.  5,  132,  133  n.  1  ; 
142,  148,  160  sq.  ;  on  the  Great 
Year,  157 

Strabo,  on  Mochos,  16  n.  4 ;  on 
Pythagoreans,  90  n.  1 ;  on  Her- 
modoros,  131  ».  1 ;  on  Parmenides 
and  Zeno,  170,  171  n.  2,  31 1  ;  on 
Anaxagoras,  253  n.  1 
Strife.  See  Opposites,  (pis,  vcTkos 
Sublunary  region,  27  n.  1 
Successions,  Sources  §  17  (p.  37) 
Sulva-stttras,  20 

Sun,  Thales,  49 ;  Anaximander,  67 
s?.  ;  Anaximenes,  76  sq.  ;  Xeno¬ 
phanes,  122  ;  Herakleitos,  148,  155  ; 
Alkmaion,  195  ;  Empedokles,  238 
sq.,  298  n.  1  ;  Anaxagoras,  271  ; 
Pythagoreans,  298  n.  1  ;  Leukippos, 
347 

Sybaris,  89  n.  3,  91 


INDEX 


373 


Taras,  90  «.  i,  276 

Taste,  Alkmaion,  195  n.  1  ;  Empe- 
dokles,  247  ;  Anaxagoras,  273  sq. 
Temperaments,  112 
Temperature,  112 
Tetraktys,  ro2 

Thales,  39-50,  104  ;  era  of,  38 
Theaitetos,  105,  284 
Theano,  308 

Thebes,  <pi\6cro<poL  at,  91,  278  n.  1  ; 
Lysis  at,  91,  276  sq.  ;  Philolaos  at, 
276 

Theodoret,  Sources  §  10  (p.  35),  §  16 
(P-  37) 

Theodoros  of  Kyrene,  105 
Theogony,  Hesiod,  6  sqq.  ;  Rhapsodic, 
7  n.  3 

Theologians,  7  sq. 

Theologumena  arithmeiica,  102  n.  2, 
107  n.  r,  290  n.  1 
Theology.  See  God 
Theon  of  Smyrna,  on  oriental  astro- 
nomy,  24  n.  2  ;  on  planetary 
motions,  304  n.  1 

Theophrastos,  Sources  §  7  (p.  33)  ;  on 
abstinence,  95  n.  2  ;  on  astrology,  24 
n.i  ;  on  innumerable  worlds,  58  sqq.; 
on  schools  of  philosophy,  28  sq.,  50 
n.  4  ;  on  Prometheus,  40  n.  2  ;  on 
Thales,  40  n.  2  ;  on  Anaximander, 
50  n.  4,  52  sqq.,  54  n.  2  ;  on  Anaxi¬ 
menes,  72  sqq.  ;  on  Xenophanes, 
114,  122,  123,  124;  on  Herakleitos, 
132,  142,  146 ;  on  Parmenides,  178 
n.  1,  182  sq.,  186,  190,  191  sq.  ; 
on  Alkmaion,  194  ;  on  Empedokles, 
198  n.  2,  202,  232,  235  n.  1,  238  n.  4, 
241,  246  sqq.,  249  ;  on  Anaxagoras, 
252,  253.  271,  273  sq.  ;  on  “  Philo¬ 
laos,”  298  n.  1  ;  on  Hiketas  and 
Ekphantos,  300  ;  on  Leukippos,  330, 
332  n.  2,  333,  338  sqq.  ;  on  Diogenes 
of  Apollonia,  352,  358 ;  on  Hippon 
of  Samos,  351  ;  on  Demokritos,  342  ; 
on  Plato,  304  sq. 

Theoretic  life,  25  n.  1,  98,  252 
Thought,  Parmenides,  178 ;  Empe¬ 
dokles,  247 

Thourioi,  era  of,  38,  91,  198,  203  «.  2 
Thracian  influences,  81 
Thymaridas,  101  n.  2 
Timaeus  Locrus,  the,  280 
Timaios  the  Lokrian,  85,  195,  279 
Timaios  of  Tauromenion,  on  Pytha¬ 
goras,  86,  89,  93  ;  on  Xenophanes, 

1 1 3 ;  on  Parmenides  and  Zeno,  1 70  n.  3, 


171  n.  2,  31 1 ;  on  Empedokles,  198, 
199  n.  2,  200,  203  n.  2  ;  on  Pytha¬ 
goreans,  276  n.  1 

Timon  of  Phleious,  on  Xenophanes, 
115  n.  4,  116,  125  n.  1;  on  Hera¬ 
kleitos,  132  n.  2  ;  on  Plato,  280 
Touch,  Alkmaion,  195  n.  1  ;  Empe¬ 
dokles,  247  ;  Anaxagoras,  273  sq. 
Transmigration,  82  n.  2,  85,  88,  93, 
250 

Triangle,  Pythagorean  (3,  4,  5),  20,  104 
Triangular  numbers.  See  Numbers 

Unit,  Pythagorean,  108,  316  sqq. 

Void,  Pythagorean,  109,  179,  186,  289  ; 
Parmenides  on  the,  179,  186,  317  ; 
Alkmaion,  194  ;  Anaxagoras,  270 ; 
Melissos,  326  ;  Leukippos,  332,  337 
Vortex.  See  Sivy 

Water,  Thales,  47 
Weight,  342  sq. 

Wheel  of  birth,  97,  98 
Wheels,  Anaximander,  62  n.  1,  68,  no, 
189;  Pythagoras,  no,  189;  Par¬ 
menides,  189 

World.  See  oupavis,  Kixrp.os 
Worlds,  innumerable :  Anaximander, 
58  sqq.,  69  ;  Anaximenes,  78  ; 
Pythagoras,  109  ;  Xenophanes,  124  ; 
Anaxagoras,  269  sq.  ;  Diogenes  of 
Apollonia,  357  ;  Archelaos,  360 

Xenophanes,  112-129 ;  and  Anaxi¬ 
mander,  114;  on  Homer  and 
Hesiod,  115,  124,  125  ;  on  fossils,  26  ; 
on  Thales,  42,  112  ;  on  Pythagoras, 
84,  108,  112,  114,  118  n.  2  ;  and 
Parmenides,  170 
Xenophilos,  277 

Xenophon  on  Sokrates  and  the  Pytha¬ 
goreans,  2 77  n.  2 
Xouthos,  289 

Year.  See  Great  Year 

Zamolxis.  See  Salmoxis 
Zankle,  114  n.  5 

Zeno,  310-320;  at  Athens,  169,  311 
n.  1,  312  m.  4  ;  on  Pythagoreans,  314 
sqq.  ;  and  Empedokles,  202,  312 
n.  1,  314  n.  4 
Zero,  100  n..  3 

Zodiac,  Babylonian,  21  n.  2.  See 
Obliquity 


374 


EARLY  GREEK  PHILOSOPHY 


II.  C 

aSiida.,  9,  54  re.  1,  57,  65,  144,  165,  196 
dqp.  See  Air  * 

ddduaro s  Kal  dytfpois,  9  re.  x,  ro  re  3 
52 

alffrfp,  219  re.  3,  228  re.  2,  229,  269  re.  1 
Sources  §  21  (p.  38).  See  Apollo- 
doros 

dKovopara,  96 
dKovapanKol,  94  n.  2 
aWirpiov  <pws,  177  n.  1 
’AvdyKV)  187,  190,  191,  222  re.  1,  233 
250 

dva.8vpla<ns,  148  sqq.,  150  sqq. ,  151  „.  2 
x55  sqq.,  163 
dvr^peuns,  346 
&vrv£,  188  re.  5 

&Trecpov,  t6,  Anaximander,  54  n.  2,  57 
sqq.,  58  n.  1  ;  Pythagorean,  109 
arrvovs,  17,  200  n.  5 
dvirpicns,  61 

diroppoa.1,  202,  246,  248,  249  n.  1,  348 

cu rorop-ff,  339  n.  1 

dpiOp.TjTLK'q,  dist.  Xoyi.o'TLtcf),  19 

dpLo-TOKparla,  90  re.  1 

appovia,  no,  112,  143,  x44,  163 

dpTreoovdiTTCu,  20 

aPXh,  Aristotelian  term  for  the  material 
cause,  u,  47  re.  6,  54 
avrd  5  iariv,  308  re.  3 
<xvt6  ko.0’  airrd,  308  re.  3 

ya\eoi,  70  re.  2,  71  re.  2 

ai  re.  i,  26  s.  i,  103  *.  1. 

hnomon 
yorp-e s,  97 
yvpds,  65  re.  1 

Salpaiv,  5a.lfj.ove s,  250 
Siadoyai,  Sources  §  r6  (p.  37) 

5iaar!)paTa,  60  re.  3 
SiKV,  9.  54  n.  1,  i45l  165 
5^7/,  13  re.  3,  61  ry.,  66  re.  2,  69,  no, 
hi,  237  re.  3,  240,  269,  344  Sq., 
346  sq. 

Sioplfa,  xo8  re.  4 
SiuipLtrfj^vov,  xo8  re.  4 
duSe/cdo-Kuroi  <r<paipai,  294  re.  4 

efSos,  of  geometrical  figures,  103  re.  2  • 
of  atoms,  336  n.  5 
eiSiov  309  re.  2 

et8w\a,  348 

elyat>  rb  r78  re.  4  ;  <?($„  "true,"  133 
re.  1  oc> 

harifwnt  143,  iS7l  is8  sq„ 
eKGTacns,  8 1 
fK\ei\f/i s,  104  re.  3 

tv,  t6,  126  ;  Pythagorean,  108,  316  sqq. 


evavrla,  havTidrqTes.  See  Opposites 
evt^aj,  126  re.  2 
dsrd\\q\os,  18 7  re.  3 
fxr ava,KVK\T)<rets,  304  re.  1 
i-irlxf/avais,  346 
//>«>  143,  163 

Ecrreepo?  and  'Eu><r$x5pos,  regarded  as 
different,  23  re.  x,  69  ;  identified  by 
Pythagoras  or  Parmenides,  23  re.  1, 
191  n.  3 
iarla,  190 
dard),  285  re.  3 
erepofjrfKeis  dpi.0p.oL,  103  re,  2 
eiyvoipocrdvq,  Sources  §  5  (p.  32) 
iXepvOLa,  95  re.  1 
£XePPVPOcrvvq,  95  re.  1 

0e6s.  5«e  God 

6eo>pTfTLKds  /3 Los,  25  re.  1,  98 
Oeupla,  25,  98 
fi’uyuis,  140  re.  2 

f3<la  ( =  <XTOixeiov ),  201  re.  5,  228  re.  1  ; 

of  atoms,  336  re.  5 
f$os,  209  re.  1,  215  re.  1,  2x6  re.  1 
tMopai,  302  ry. 

LaovopLa,  195,  196  re.  2 
LooppoirLa,  66  re.  x,  344  jy. 
laropla,  10  re.  2,  25,  85,  97  re.  1 

Ka.8app.ol,  nddapcris,  82,  97  re.  4,  98  re.  r, 
249  sq. 

KaKorexvLrf,  134  re.  2 
KarapaWa),  329  re.  2 
KeyXplTV!  My  os,  312  re.  4 
Keveppareiv,  123  re.  2 
K\e\pdSpa.  See  Klepsydra 
K\r)poOxos  8e6s,  187,  190  re.  3 
Mopos,  9,  io  re.  3,  134  re.  3,  162  re.  2, 
190  re.  1 

Kpaois,  1 1 2,  296 
Kparetv,  111,  268  re.  x,  307 

XoyLtxTLK'f],  dist.  dpidpr/TiKi j,  19 
X67os,  133  re.  1,  135  «.  2,  138  re.  1 
139  re.  3,  143,  172  w  2,  240 
Myos  too  elvai,  tt)s  ovoLas,  308  re.  3 

pa$q pariKol,  94  re.  2 

peabrqs,  pecr&rqres,  106,  112  re.  1 

peragd,  t6,  Anaximander,  55  re.  4,  56  rere. 

1  and  2,  65 

peTep^xoia-is,  93  re.  2.  Trans¬ 

migration 

perevauipdruats,  93  re.  2 
pertoipa,  rd,  27 
pereupoMyLa,  27  re.  1 
ptrpa.  ■  See  Measures 


INDEX 


375 


/xovas  d£<riv  ^xovtra,  290 
P °P<Py  ( =  crroixeiov) ,  185,  228  re.  1 

vetKOs,  Empedokles,  231  sqq. 
vbpos,  opp.  <pd<ns,  347 

SyKoi,  291  re.  3,  319  n.  4,  336  re.  1 
oXretis,  294  re.  1 
opoiopepr),  264  sq. 

Sfxoios,  opoioT-qs,  66  re.  1 
6pyava,  265 
8pyia,  82,  97 
6'pos,  terminus,  104 

oiipavbs,  i.q.  ko<t  pos,  27,  56  n.  1,  60  re.  2, 
127  re.  4 

ird-yor,  236  n.  2 

TaXiyyevetrla,  93  re.  2.  Trans¬ 

migration 

traXivTovos  appovia,  136  n.  4,  174  n.  3 
TraXlvTpoiros  KfXevdos,  174  n.  3,  179 
TtavcrTcppla,  265  re.  2,  337 
ira pafioX-q,  104  re.  3 
TapaTnfjypara,  47 
nrdpoSoi,  302 

trepas,  Pythagorean,  109,  287  J7. 
TepLayiiry'ri,  59  re.  1 

irepi^Xu,  irepitxpv,  56  n.  1,  58  re.  i,  6o, 
IS2  3 

irepLcTaas,  59  re.  i 
ttL\t}<tls,  73  re.  3 
rvevpa,  tL-rrespov,  108 
Trottinjs,  263  re.  1 

Tripcn,  153,  194,  201,  202,  233  sq. ,  246 
sq.,  248,  332 

7 Tpyar'qp,  68  re.  2,  148,  149  re.  r 
TTpo^Xypa  (rpoBdWu),  28  re.  2 
irpbraoLS  {irpoTelvu),  28  re.  2 
Trpoxwprfcreis,  304  re.  1 
ni’^ayopicrTai,  dist.  Hvday ipeiop  94  re.  2 
irvpapls,  etymology,  21  re.  1 

pa\f/(j)8u>,  115  re.  1 
345 


crrjfia  aCipa,  98,  278 
<so<pia,  1 17  re.  2 
(Topurry s,  85,'  353  re.  4 
■  tTTacriwTcu,  12 7  re.  1 
oripavat,  187  177.,  191  re.  2 
o-toixeioj',  12  re.  2,  52  re.  5,  201  re.  5, 
228,  230  re.  3,  265,  336  re.  4 
o-wex^s,  108  re.  4 

( twoikclui ,  accommodo,  Sources  §  3  (p. 

32  re.  i),  142  re.  s 
apovSvXoi ,  188  re.  3 
c TX’qp.a.Ta ,  100 

rerpaKTiJS,  102  17. 
ropevs,  sector,  21  re.  1 
rporraL,  solstices,  62  re.  2,  63  re.  2, 
64  re.  1,  67  re.  2,  76  re.  3,  155  sq. , 
271,  302,  304 
rpoiris,  294  re.  2 
rpbxos,  62  re.  2,  77  re.  2 

OX77.  47  re.  6,  55,  294  re.  3 
izTrep/JoX^,  104  re.  3 
trer6(?fcris,  28  re.  2,  313  re.  6 
{nrofapaTa.,  294  re.  3 
VTtbXeipLS,  in  re.  1,  302  re.  1 
VTroTclvovo-a,  105 

pa ivopeva,  tripfeiv  rd,  28  re.  2 
pi\o<ropia,  25,  83,  278  re.  1 
< piXoaopos ,  277,  278  re.  1,  312  re.  2 
ppovris,  1 14  re.  1 

< pdcns ,  9-11,  54.  205  re.  4,  228,  336  re.  3, 
337  ;  Ilepi  pdoeus,  11 S  re.  5  ;  opp. 
v6pos,  347 

X<tos,  7  re.  1 
XtTciv,  224  re.  1 
Xp^para,  249  re.  1,  263  re.  1 
X^pa,  104  re.  2,  108  re.  4 
X<oplov,  104  re.  2 

1 pvpoi,  ioo,  102 
poXttbv  Ttvevpa,  249  re.  4 


THE  END 


Printed  in  Great  Britain  by  the  Hollen  Street  Press  Ltd.,  London ,  bV.  / 


Date  Due 


- if  1  Pi  fl  * 

- Ftm= - 

'  v  •?  2 

l  / 

SEP  7 

/  ice? 

NOV  7  f 

«?  fi  fi**! 

UU  / 

: i,  f 

i?  ‘V* 
nil  i  - 

1  /L  i-JWV 

NOV  i  ■ 

:  .  ‘  • 

)  1997 

’  »  t  :• 

»  1  ‘i 

J  -  --  A 

OCI  0  i 

im 

- 

c  1  c  IQQt 

J  ■ 

OCI  1 

&  19% 

i  tv'Ww 

V  v  i  | 

h*  a.v'  n  r 

'<s<yi 

n'V1: ? 

sflrn  4  ! 

w 

;  1997 

sjfcr  1 

/  lr  r  1 

TRENT 


11 


64  00469 


7 


B  1 88  » B'”'1  *  7 
Bur-net.  John.  1863-1928 

Earlv  Greek  philosophy 


[1930 J 


LU- ,3 


15657 


B 

188 

B9 


Burnet,  John 

Early  Greek  philosoohy. 
4th  ed. 


rent 

^Inivers'tv 


