v O¢G8ILLO LOLI € 


UM 


OLNOHOL JO ALISHSAINN 


Il 





Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2006 with funding from 
Microsoft Corporation 


* 


https://archive.org/details/thecommuningswit0Omarcuoft 


JO}, 








THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 


EDITED BY 
_ B.OAPPS, Pa.D.,LL.D. TT. EB. PAGH,Litr.D. W. H. D., ROUSE, Lirr.D. 


‘ 
MARCUS AURELIUS 
ANTONINUS 








Uh 


2 


~ 
~~ 
LJ 4 











RECEIVING GERMAN PRISONERS IN THE FIELD. 


NEL FROM TRIUMPHAL ARCH. 


PA 













| THE COMMUNINGS ¥ with ‘HIMSELF OF. 





EMPEROR, OF ROME 


g > et n, f si 
TOGETHER WITH. aS SPEECHES AND SAYINGS 


psi 


4 ov pbwSARIENNO ATION 
Pet INTO ENGLISH BY 


-' 





conquest of Germans and Sarmatians. It represents two 
lerman captives brought t in by a praetorian guard. They are 
ging y the _ Emperor's mercy, which the protective gesture of 
is hand shérws is being granted. The face of Marcus is 






and is now 


521478) 
Z7 4 -Sh 





ik ae 


NDON: , WILLIAM HEINEMANN. 
NEW YORK. :. G. P, PUTNAM'S SONS 


MCMXVI 


sad. Behind him appears the praetorian prefect,\ 
Rufus. _The seenae eer of the work is fine and) 
panel w rs.was taken from the Church) 


Malace of the Conservatori at) 


MARCUS © : URELIUS- ae 


“rn shy 2 Aieh a oe 
seat Nonna the double) 














4 
i 
E 
Y 
: 


sp / a FPL 
i au 











THE COMMUNINGS WITH HIMSELF OF 


MARCUS AURELIUS 
ANTONINUS 
EMPEROR OF ROME 


TOGETHER WITH HIS SPEECHES AND SAYINGS 


A REVISED TEXT AND A TRANSLATION 
INTO ENGLISH BY 


C. R. HAINES, M.A,, F.S.A. 


021478 
27.4-SI 








LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN 
NEW YORK : G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS 


MCMXVI 








ELA Ra Te aT a 


EIS BIBAON MAPKOY! 


Ei Avans Kparéew e0éAeis, 
ThYde wdKaipay avantbccwr 
BiBaAov érépxeo évduxéws, 

fis 63d yvadpunv drBiorny 

peid nev OWeo éooouevar 

bvtwy 7 Ade Taporxouevov 
TEepTwAny 7 avinv Te <AEyov > 
Kamvod undéev aperorepny. 


If thou would’st master care and pain, 
Unfold this book and read and read again 
Its blessed leaves, whereby thou soon shalt see 
The past, the present, and the days to be 
With opened eyes ; and all delight, all grief, 
Shall be like smoke, as empty and as a 

. R. . 


Mévos Bactréwy pidogoplay ob Adyos obte Soypdrwv yvdoen, 


 aepr@ Se Oe xa cwppdui Bip émtaotHoaro.—HERODIAN, i, 2, § 4. 


Oddev abrdy e&eBidoato ew r: Tav EavTodD HOG” mpata.—DI0 


Cassius 71. 30, § 2. 


*O Aoyiopds abrod Geios Kal ws GAnOds tvwhev Exwy Td wapd- 
devrypa Kal mpdos exelyny dpav Thy woArretav.—ARISTIDES, Paneg. 


in Cyz. § 427 (Jebb). 





1 This epigram is found at the end of the Vatican MS. and 
also in the Anthologia Palatina, ii. p. 603 sige y= Possibly 
by Arethas (see P. Maas in Hermes xlviii. p. 295 ff.). 


st eh ore ay a ae 
ap RERE <2 


a af 













animagh A sata 4b “gubAamee & 

ee ape Togs Bien yak ‘ 
Ese eee ‘ping feist org Vadssurt da Hiss. wt ve <4 
Wake sim (ida Pires, bata frags, Licen Hood shis ia re 
om “te: lage Had coor nade qed erraet beeold <i 


al cot oreb at Sure taverig. oft feed cy 
Beir Bein, He Segal ify. firs ¢ Bay? ee ae 
* et oe ues nae ee otome adil oct 1% 


Ti ase LS apet “vile: bel bo ienigene fac, waht 
OS yee : Heleeee aronaxern’ Date ee fox ists 








rie aay Seti CRaape a 


a san parte tae es | 


PREFACE 


Tue Greek text of this book is often difficult and 
in many places corrupt beyond cure, but no trouble 
has been spared to make the translation as accurate 
and idiomatic as possible. I have preferred to err, 
if error it be, on the side of over-faithfulness, 
because the physiognomy of the book owes so much 
to the method and style in which it is written. Its 
homeliness, abruptness, and want of literary finish 
(though it does not lack rhetoric) are part of the 
character of the work, and we alter this character 
by rewriting it into the terse, epigrammatic, 
staccato style so much in vogue at the present day. 
Another reason for literalness is that it makes a 
comparison with the Greek, printed beside it, 
easier for the unlearned. When a work has been 
translated so often as this one, it is difficult to be 
original without deviating further from the text, 
but I have not borrowed a phrase, scarcely a word, 
from any of my predecessors. If unconscious 
coincidences appear, it remains only to say Pereant 


Vii 


PREFACE 


qui ante nos nostra dixerint! Numerous references 
(such as have proved so invaluable for the due 
understanding of the Bible) and good indices have 
always been greatly wanted in the translations of 
this work, and I have taken pains to supply the 
want. For a better understanding of the character of 

Marcus I have added to the Thoughts translations of . 
his Speeches and Sayings, with a Note on his attitude 
towards the Christians (in which I am glad to find 
myself in complete agreement with M. Lemercier). 
A companion volume on the Correspondence with 
Fronto will contain all his extant Letters. In con- 
clusion my best thanks are due to Messrs. Teubner 
for permission to use their text as the basis of the 
revised one here printed, to Professors Leopold and 
Schenk] for advice and help on various points, 
and, last but not least, to my predecessors in the 
translation of this “ Golden Book.” 


C. R. HAINES. 


GopDALMING, 1915. 


Vili 


CONTENTS 


BRAC as oo Ws Sgn, CANT Ss ow bg toe wy ih ed ite Soe 
REPRODUCTION 15004) 4. SR aS Sia OS LC re ey 
ERAIOESGE Ce) AS ee Ae ets ee ee eg 
REMERON cee ot te, coh ONC, e. Mirae veut at Gee a heh RS Ree amnee 
RMP ROEEL As CaN cet cy gt vk Me Malthe), Looe leg atten) Namen neee 
MOMICSKINSSD (hi 5 oe he elteh' sa ach gh ben ay opbhe fan, /. heaton, Bee 
UD Oi 5 Saige etn ieee en: Saar eae PEM ec Birr eA 1s 
BOOK, Vig in Homaset) wt icyer, ens bi pewpi ce: eee eS SORES 
OOK AVES Oo herbal. eee oe Lhe OC eS 
OCP ET I Sta cereals, ASR T Ra nS Te, Sn ee 
BOE VEER STR ARTY OR STR AIOE AL TIS oy 2 ae 
“OSTA ©: eS 1 PSR Di tan Ry SR ae A NRA Rt <5 
REYES Te ie een doe take le a Mga tabkeo haste ee Cae ot Be ace 
DROPS E om Sik God) 9 Sh oa ne Sas, aia eed sip eer a 
OCT SR ae ae ee a ee SECT RCE me Oe ny Biv! 
PPUEROPING So ty6 Hibs ao. dad aencie -aagphat Soy rer estes Lets SE CRE oetae 
MCT NGA 25h Wrsidl Pie fe yoo co hs HAAR Ry elu ater cess aol bos FO 
NOTE ON OHRISTIANS I(t! 00 EA Se ee ol Ae! VEE 
INDEX OF MATTERS... 1... 26+. 5+... 308 
cNDEX OF ‘PROPER NAMES 9035020 0 eec'. eos ae ne es Oe 
NEORSARY OF GREEK TERMS). 9. cu. )5 06.5 we ee rene S08 










Rh = ee rises ja aaa ov ‘Hie! Rie 
2 separ Se aTidhi- * 5 ier jae? hate 

pie WD PIR Re AA te  Bpaisatrcze oi) RE, 3 
Meomuikk, wet & bee wks patil 
Papa Gere interac? 3 





~ 





isi oiled he tid. Feeaeats 





Weert: ari Soaying ee “ ; recs 
are pie Sagi See: = % aes 





Bicsvin t Deh. wee the caipabit 
L Nes Baa Bi sets - ane ; 





Pe 5 ‘sa 
(cr rks a art =r 4 i ¢ 
Seyi ee aa aot “ 








a 
re 
7 a 


rh. Pat Ms . hd 
Es a e884 5 Saat 
r a” Free - 


i al 


INTRODUCTION 


Ir is not known how this small but priceless book 
of private devotional memoranda! came to be 
preserved for posterity. But the writer that in it 
puts away all desire for after-fame has by means of 
it attained to imperishable remembrance. As 
Rénan has said, “ tous, tant que nous sommes, nous 
portons au coeur le deuil de Mare Auréle comme 
sil était mort d’hier.’’ Internal evidence proves 
that the author was Marcus Antoninus, emperor of 
Rome 7 March 161 to 17 March 180, and notes 
added in one MS between Books I and II and II 
and III shew that the second Book was composed 
when the writer was among the Quadi on the 
Gran, and the third at Carnuntum (Haimburg). 
The headquarters of Marcus in the war against the 
barbarians were at Carnuntum 171-173, and we 
know that the so-called “‘ miraculous victory ’’ against - 
the Quadi was in 174.2. But Professor Schenkl has 
given good reasons for thinking that the first book 
was really written last and prefixed as a sort of 
introduction to the rest of the work.? It was 
probably written as a whole, while the other books 
consist mostly of disconnected jottings. The style 

1 Marcus may be referring in Bk. ITI. 14 to this his own 
work as dmouynudria. 

2 See Dio, 71. 8. 


3 For a discussion of the chronology of the work, see 
Journal of Philology, vol. xxiii., No. 66, 1914. 


xi 


INTRODUCTION 


throughout is abrupt and concise, and words have 
occasionally to be supplied to complete the sense. 
There is here no reasoned treatise on Ethics, no 
exposition of Stoic Philosophy, such as the sectarum 
ardua ac perocculta! or the ordo praeceptionum,? on 
which Marcus is said to have discoursed before he set 
out the last time for the war in 178, but we have a 
man and a ruler taking counsel with himself, noting 
his own shortcomings, excusing those of others, and 
“ whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are 
honourable, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever 
things are pure,’ exhorting his soul to think on 
these things. Never were words written more 
transparently single-hearted and sincere. They 
were not merely written, they were lived. Those 
who accuse Marcus of pharisaism wilfully mistake 
his character and betray their own. Very noticeable 
is the delicacy of the author's mind and the 
restrained energy of his style. He eschews all the 
‘ windflowers’ of speech, but the simplicity, straight- 
forwardness, and dignity of his thoughts lend an 
imperial nobility to his expression of them. There 
is a certain choiceness and even poetry in his words 
‘which amply condone an occasional roughness and 
technicality of phrase. Striking images are not 
infrequent, and such a passage as Book II, 2 is 
unique in ancient literature. This is not a book of 
confessions, and comparatively few allusions to 
personal incidents are to be found except in the 
first book, while an air of complete aloofness and 
detachment pervades the whole. The author ex- 
pressly disclaims all 8piuzvrys or originality and 


1 Victor de Caes. xvi. 9. 
2 Vule. Gallicanus Vit. Av. Cass. iii. 7. 


xii 


INTRODUCTION 


acuteness of intellect, and there is a good deal of 
repetition unavoidable in the nature of the work, 
for “line upon line” and “ precept upon precept” 
are required in all moral teaching. 

Of his two great Stoic predecessors Marcus has 
no affinity with Seneca, He certainly knew all 
about him and they have many thoughts! in 
common, but Seneca’s rhetorical flamboyance, his 
bewildering contradictions, the glaring divergence 
between his profession and his practice have no 
counterpart in Marcus. Epictetus the Phrygian 
slave was his true spiritual father, but we do not 
find in the Emperor the somewhat rigid didacticism . 
and spiritual dogmatism of his predecessor. Marcus 
is humbler and not so confident. The hardness and 
arrogance of Stoicism are softened in him by an 
infusion of Platonism and other philosophies.2_ With 
the Peripatetics he admits the inequality of faults. 
His humanity will not cast out compassion as an 
emotion of the heart. His is no cut and dried 
creed, for he often wavers and is inconsistent. Call 
not his teaching ineffectual. He is not trying to 
teach anyone. He is reasoning with his own soul 
and championing its cause against the persuasions 
and impulses of the flesh. How-far did he succeed? 
‘By nature a good man,” says Dio, “his education 
and the moral training he imposed upon himself 

1 Marcus never quotes him by name, and though there are 
plenty of similarities between the two writers in thought, 
and even in expression, it is not certain that there is a single 
case of borrowing. Most of the resemblances are based on 
commonplaces ; see, however, Sen. Hp. 77 = vi. 2; Hp. 65 = 
xi. 10; de Prov. 4=iv. 1; Hp. 36 =v. 18; de Ben. vii. 31 
= xl. 18,89; Hp. 74=v. 8,§3; Hp. 28 =v. 16. 

2 Even Epicurus is mentioned with approval, as‘he is also 
by Seneca. 8 ep. Epict. iii. 24, 43; Man. 16, ete. 

xiii 


INTRODUCTION 


made him a far better one.1” “‘ As was natural to 
one who had beautified his soul with every virtuous 
quality he was innocent of all wrong-doing.”? The 
wonderful revelation here given of the doxyots of 
the spiritual athlete in the contests of life is full 
of inspiration still even for the modern world. It 
has been and is a source of solace and strength to 
thousands, and has helped to mould the characters 
of more than one leader of men, such as Frederick 
the Great,? Maximilian of Bavaria, Captain John 
Smith, the ‘saviour of Virginia,’ and that noble 
Christian soldier, General Gordon. It was but the 
- other day, on the fiftieth anniversary of Italian Unity, 
that the King of Italy, speaking * on the Capitol, 
referred to Marcus “as the sacred and propitiatory 
image of that cult of moral and civil Jaw which our 
Fatherland wishes to follow,’ a reference received 
with particular applause by those who heard it. 

Whoever rescued the MS of the “Thoughts” on 
the death of their author in 180, whether it was 
that noble Roman, Pompeianus, the son-in-law of 
Marcus, or the high-minded Victorinus, his lifelong 
friend, we seem to hear an echo of its teaching in 
the dying words of Cornificia, his possibly last 
surviving daughter, when put to death by Caracalla 
in 215: “O wretched little soul of mine, imprisoned 
in an unworthy body, go forth, be free!”® It was 
doubtless known to Chryseros the freedman and 
nomenclator of Marcus who wrote a history of Rome 
to the death of his patron,® and to the Emperor 

1 Dio 71. 35, § 6. 2 Aristides ad Reg. § 106 (Jebb). 

3 Who, however, in the field of morality cannot be said to 
have profited by its lessons. 


4 March, 1911. 5 See Dio, Fragm. Dindorf v. 214. 
8 Theoph. ad Autol. iii. 27. 


xiv 


INTRODUCTION 


Gordian I., for the latter in his youth, soon after the 
Emperor’s death, wrote an epic poem on Pius and 
Marcus. He also married Fabia Orestilla, the 
latter's granddaughter through Fadilla (probably) 
and Claudius Severus. As their eldest son Gordian 
Il. had sixty children, the blood of Marcus was soon 
widely diffused. 

The first direct mention of the work is about 350 
A.D. in the Orations of the pagan philosopher Themis- 
tius, who speaks of the rapayycAuara (precepts) of 
Marcus. Then for 550 years we lose sight of the 
book entirely, until, about 900, the compiler of the 
dictionary, which goes by the name of Suidas, reveals 
the existence of a MS of it by making some thirty 
quotations, taken from books I, III, IV, V, IX, and 
XI.1 He calls the book (cvyypady) an “ dywyy (a 
directing) of his own life by Marcus the Emperor in 
twelve books.” About the same time Arethas, a 
Cappadocian bishop, writing to his metropolitan, 
speaks of the scarcity of this peyadwdedéotarov 
BiBAiov, and apparently sends him a copy of it.? 
He also refers to it three times in scholia to Lucian, 
calling it 7a eis éavtov 76ixé. Two similar references 
are found in the scholia to Dio Chrysostom, possibly 
by the same Arethas. 

Again a silence of 250 years, after which Tzetzes, a 
grammarian of Constantinople, quotes passages from 
Books IV. and V. attributing them to Marcus. About 
150 years later (1300 a.p.) the ecclesiastical historian, 
Nicephorus Callistus (iii. 31) writes that Marcus 
* composed a book of instruction for his son, full of 
universal (xooptxjs, ? secular) experience and 
wisdom.” About this very time Planudes, a monk 


1 See Index, under ‘‘Suidas.” ? See A. Sonny in Philol, 54, 182f. 
XV 


INTRODUCTION 


of Constantinople, may have been engaged in com- 
piling the anthology of extracts from various authors, 
including Marcus and Aelian, which has come down 
to us in twenty-five or more MSS dating from the 
fourteenth to the sixteenth century.1 They are 
practically of no help in re-establishing the text,? and 
contain in all forty-four extracts from books IV.-XII. 

Our present text is based almost entirely upon two 
MSS, the Codex Palatinus (P) first printed in 1558 
by Xylander but now lost, which contains the whole 
work, and the Codex Vaticanus 1950 (A) from which 
about forty-two lines have dropped out by accidental 
omissions here and there. Two other MSS give some 
independent help to the text, but they are incom- 
plete, the Codex Darmstadtinus 2773 (D) with 112 
extracts from books I.-IX. and Codex Parisinus 319 
(C) with twenty-nine extracts from Books I.-IV., 
with seven other MSS derived from it or from the same 
source. Apart from all these there is but one other 
MS (Monacensis 323) which contains only fourteen 
very short fragments from Books II., III.,[V., and VII. 

Translations of this Book have been made into 
Latin, English, French, Italian, German, Spanish, 
Norse, Russian, Czech, Polish and Persian. In 
England alone twenty-six editions of the work 
appeared in the seventeenth century, fifty-eight in the 
eighteenth, eighty-one in the nineteenth, and in the 
twentieth up to 1908 thirty more.* 


The English translations are as follows.— 
1. Meric Casaubon.—* Marcus Aurelius Antoninus. 
His Meditations concerning himselfe: Treating of a 


1 One (Vat. 2231) has just come to light. 
2 Except Cod. Monacensis 2 = C. Hoeschelianus, 
3 See J. W. Legg, A Bibliography of Marcus Aurelius, 1908. 


xvi 


INTRODUCTION 


h Naturall Man’s Happinesse; wherein it consisteth, 
and of the Meanes to attain unto it. Translated 
out of the original Greeke with Notes by Meric 
Casaubon B.D., London, 1634.” 

This, the first English translation, albeit involved 
and periphrastic, is not without dignity or scholarship, 
though James Thomson in 1747 says that “it is every- 
where rude and unpolished and often mistakes the 
author’s meaning,” while the Foulis Press Translators 
of 1742 find fault with its “intricate and antiquated 
style.” It may be conveniently read in Dr. Rouse’s 
new edition of 1900, which also contains some ex- 
cellent translations of letters between Fronto and 
Marcus. 

2. Jeremy Collier.—*The Emperor Marcus Anton- 
inus His Conversation with Himself. Translated 
into English by Jeremy Collier M.A., London 1701.” 
A recent edition of it by Alice Zimmern is in the 
Camelot Series, but it hardly deserved the honour. 
We may fairly say of it that it is too colloquial. 
James Thomson in 1747 speaks of it as “a very coarse 
copy of an excellent original,’ and as “bearing so 
faint a resemblance to the original in a great many 
places as scarcely to seem taken from it.” R. Graves 
in 1792 remarks that it “abounds with so many 
vulgarities, anilities and even ludicrous expressions 
... that one cannot now read it with any patience.” 
The comment of G. Long in 1862 is much the same, 
but it called forth an unexpected champion of the 
older translator in Matthew Arnold, who says: 
“ Most English people, who knew Marcus Aurelius 
before Mr. Long appeared as his introducer, knew 
him through Jeremy Collier. And the acquaintance 
of a man like Marcus Aurelius is such an imperishable 

xvii 


b 


INTRODUCTION 


benefit that one can never lose a peculiar sense of 
obligation towards the man who confers it. Apart 
from this however, Jeremy Collier's version deserves 
respect for its genuine spirit and vigour, the spirit 
and vigour of the age of Dryden. His warmth of 
feeling gave to his style an impetuosity and rhythm 
which from Mr. Long’s style are absent.” The real 
defect of Collier as a translator, adds Arnold, is his 
imperfect acquaintance with Greek. 

3. James Moor and Thomas Hutcheson.—< The 
Meditations of the Emperor Marcus Aurelius Anton- 
inus. Newly translated from the Greek with notes.” 
Glasgow: The Foulis Press, 1742. Certainly the 
best translation, previous to Long’s, for accuracy and 
diction, and superior to that in spirit. Dr, Rendall 
(1898) praises it as “the choicest alike in form and 
contents.” R. Graves, however, in 1792, while 
allowing its fidelity, had pronounced it “ unnecessarily 
literal,” and shewing a “total neglect of elegance 
and harmony of style.’’ A very satisfactory revision 
of this translation appeared in 1902, made by G. W. 
Chrystal. 

4. Richard Graves—“'The Meditations of the 
Emperor Marcus Aurelius Antoninus. A New 
Translation from the Greek Original, with notes.” 
By R. Graves, M.A., Rector of Claverton, Somerset. 
Bath, 1792. 

A fairly accurate and smooth version of no 
especial distinction, but superior to most of its 
predecessors. An abbreviated edition of this was 
published at Stourport without any date by N. Swaine — 
with the title: “The Meditations of the Emperor 
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Philosophus collated with: 
and abridged from the best translations.”’ 


xVili 





INTRODUCTION 


5. George Long.—< The Thoughts of the Emperor 
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus.” Translated by George 
Long. London, 1862. This may be looked upon as 
in some sense the “authorized version,” and it is 
from it that most people know their Marcus Aurelius. 
For nearly forty years it was master of the field. 
M. Arnold, though finding fault with the translator 
as not idiomatic or simple enough and even pedantic, 
yet gives him full credit for soundness, precision, 
and general excellence in his translation. The 
author tells us that he deliberately chose a ruder 
style as better suited to express the character of 
the original, and he was right, for in spite of Arnold’s 
dictum to the contrary the book of Marcus has 
a “distinct physiognomy,’ and here, more than is 
usually the case, le style c'est [ homme. 

6. Hastings Crossley—‘ The Fourth Book of the 
Meditations of Marcus Aurelius.” A revised text with 
Translation and commentary by Hastings Crossley, 
M.A., London, 1882. This specimen makes us 
regret that the author did not publish the whole 
version which he tells us was in MS. The book 
contains an interesting appendix on the relations 
of Fronto and Marcus. 

7. G. H. Rendall.—‘ Marcus Aurelius Antoninus 
to Himself: An English Translation with Intro- 
ductory Study on Stoicism and the Last of the 
Stoics.” By Gerald H. Rendall, M.A., Litt.D., 
London, 1898. A second edition with a different 
introduction was published in 1901. 

This version has been pronounced by many critics 
the best rendering of the Thoughts. Its accuracy, 
ability, and liveliness are unquestionable. 

8. John Jackson.—“<The Meditations of Marcus 

xix 


b 2 


INTRODUCTION 


Aurelius Antoninus.” Translated by John Jackson. 
With an introduction by Charles Bigg. Oxford, 
1906. 

This version is the newest comer, and is a worthy 
presentment of the Thoughts. There are useful 
notes, but some very bold alterations of the text 
have been followed in the English version. The 
book would have been more acceptable without 
the introduction by Dr. Bigg, which gives a most 
unfair and wholly inaccurate view of the life and 
character of Marcus. 

Besides the above versions there are several 
abridged translations of the Thoughts, which need 
not be enumerated here. But the two chief ones 
seem to be by B. E. Smith, published by the Century 
Company, New York, 1899, and by J. E. Wilson, 
London, 1902. 


XxX 


STOICISM 


SroicisM was so called from the Colonnade! at 
Athens, where Zeno about 300 B.c. first taught its 
doctrines. More religious in character than any 
other Greek philosophy, it brought a new moral 
force into the world. It put intellectual speculation 
more into the background, and carried the moral 
attitude of the Cynics further into the domain of ° 
right conduct. Oriental fervour was in it grafted 
on Greek acumen, for Zeno was a Phoenician Greek 
of Cyprus, and Chrysippus, the St. Paul who defined 
and established ? Stoicism, a Cilician like the Apostle. 

In spite of its origin Stoicism proved wonderfully 
adapted to the practical Roman character, and under 
the tyranny of the early Caesars it formed the only 
impregnable fortress? of liberty for the noblest 
Romans. It reached its culmination, and found its 
highest exponents as a living creed in the courtier 
Seneca, the Phrygian slave Epictetus, and the 
emperor Marcus Antoninus. . 

Stoic philosophy consisted of Logic, Physics, and 
Ethics. Logic, which comprised Dialectics and 


1 Yrod moxiAn. 

2 ef uh yap hv Xptourmos, obk by hv Srod, an anonymous 
verse quoted by Diog. Laert.. Chrys. 5.. 

3 villi. 41, 48. * viii. 13. 


Xxi 


STOICISM 


Rhetoric, was the necessary instrument of all 
speculation ;! but Marcus found no satisfaction in 
either branch of it, nor in such Physics as dealt 
with Meteorology.” 

The key-note of Stoicism was Life according to 
Nature, and Marcus was converted to the pursuit 
of this possibly by Sextus the Boeotian. By 
«“ Nature” was meant the controlling Reason of the 
Universe.* A study of Physics was necessary for a 
proper understanding of the Cosmos and our position 
in it, and thus formed the scientific basis of philosophy ; 
but it was regarded as strictly subordinate, and 
merely a means to an end. 

Though he confesses to some disappointment in his 
progress therein,> there is no doubt that Marcus was 
well versed in Stoic Physics. Fully recognizing the 
value of a scientific spirit of enquiry,’ he describes it 
as a characteristic of the rational soul to “go the 
whole Universe through and grasp its plan,’? 
affirming that “no man can be good without correct 
notions as to the Nature of the Whole and his own 
constitution.” ® 

To the Stoics the Universe—God and Matter °—was 
One, all Substance, unified by the close ‘sympathy’ !° 
and interdependence of the parts, forming with the 
rational Power, that was co-extensive with it, a single 
entity. The Primary Being, by means of its inform- 

1 See Epict. i. 17. . 

2 i. 7,17, § 4; vii. 67; viii. 1. 

3 i. 9, §1, 17, §5. But Rusticus (i. 7) and Maximus 
(i. 15) were his chief instructors in Stoicism. 


4 vii. 11. 5 vii. 67. 
ae eg Es. Pee a Sd 
8 viii. 52; xi. 5. 9 atriov and #An. 


OV027 3 N20 1K, 9, $3: 
Xxili 


STOICISM 


ing Force,! acting as igneous or atmospheric current ? 
upon inert matter, evolved out of itself a Cosmos, 
subsequent modifications being by way of con- 
sequence.* This Universe is periodically destroyed 
by fire,tthus returning again to its pristine Being, 
only however to be created anew® on the same 
plan even to the smallest details; and so on for 
ever. 

God and Matter being thus indistinguishable, for 
all that was not God in its original form was God in 
an indirect sense as a manifestation of him, the 
Stoic creed was inevitably pantheistic. It was also 
materialistic ; for the Stoics, allowing existence to 
nothing incorporeal, by means of their strange theory 
of air-currents ® inherent even in abstract things such 
as virtue, rendered not only them but God himself 
corporeal, terming him the “ perfect living Being.” 7 
But their conceptions on this point seem to be really 
irreconcilable, for while on the one hand they speak 
of the Supreme Power by such names as Zeus, Cause 
or Force, Soul, Mind, or Reason of the Universe, 
Law or Truth, Destiny, Necessity, Providence, or 
Nature of the Whole, on the other they identify it 
with such terms as Fiery Fluid, or Heat, Ether 
(warm air) or Pneuma (atmospheric current). 


1 omepnatixds Adyos (used by Justin of Christ), iv. 14, 21; 
vi. 24; ix. l ad jin. 

2 nvetua, This set up tension (révos), resulting in expan- 
sion and contraction (cp. our attraction and repulsion) and 
gave to things shape, quality, and relation. 

3 vi. 36, § 2; ix. 1, §4 

4 v. 13, 32; x. 7. The doctrine of éxmipwois was Hera- 
clitan. cp. St. Peter, Ep. ii. 3,7; Justin, Apol. i. 20; ii. 7. 

5 madryyeveoia, vii. 19; xi. 1. cp. St. Matt. xix. 28. 

6 rvedpara. 7 ty. 40; xual. 


Xxiii 


STOICISM 


Other physical theories were borrowed from Hera- 
clitus, and Marcus constantly alludes to these, such as 
the “ downward and upward” round of the elements ! 
as they emanate from the primary Fire, air passing 
into fire, fire into earth, earth into water and so back 
- again,? and the famous doctrine that all things are in 
flux.? 

Man consists of Body, Soul, Intelligence, or Flesh, 
Pneuma, and the Ruling Reason.‘ But the yyy 
(soul) can be looked upon in two ways, as 
avevpatiov, an exhalation from blood,* and as 7 voepa, 
% Aoyixy Wuxy, t.e. the ruling Reason. It is the 
latter, a “ morsel”’ or “ efflux” ® from the Divine, which 
constitutes the real man. Marcus often speaks of 
this rational nature’ of a man as his daemon, or 
genius enthroned within him,® and makes the whole 
problem of life depend upon how this Reason treats 
itself. As all that is rational is akin, we are formed 
for fellowship with others and, the universe being one, 
what affects a part of it affects the whole. Reason 
is as a Law to all rational creatures, and so we are all 
citizens of a World-state.? In this cosmopolitanism 
the Stoics approached the Christian view, ethics 
being divorced from national politics and made of 
universal application. It was no cloistered virtue the 
Stoics preached, showing how a man can save his 
own soul, but a practical positive goodness ; }° though 
it cannot be denied that the claims of atrdpxea 


l tyw katrw. vi. 17; ix. 28. 2 iv. 46. an 

3 Gmayra pei, ii. 17; iv. 3ad fin., 36; v.10; vi. 15; vii. 25; 
1x, 193 xu. 4 iii, 16; xii. 3. 

5 vy, 33; vi. 15, or (wf, an inhalation from the air. 

6-1, Ties 4ov.. 27: Vix, 

8 ii. 17; iii. 7, 16; v. 27, etc., and he calls this God, iii. 5; 
v. 10; xii. 26. 9 iv. 4. 10 vi, 30. 


XXiV 


STOICISM 


the self-sufficiency of the Inner Self) and xowwvia 
oe interdependence of parts of a common whole) 
are not easy to reconcile. It is certain, however, 
that the Stoic admission of slaves into the brother- 
hood of man had an ameliorating effect upon slavery, 
and the well-known bias of Marcus in favour of 
enfranchisement may well have been due to his 
creed.! 

From virtue alone can happiness and peace of 
mind result, and virtue consists in submission to the 
higher Power and all that he sends us, in mastery over 
our animal nature, in freedom from all perturbation,? 
and in the entire independence of the Inner Self. Since 
life is Opinion® and everything but what we think 
it, the vital question is what assent we give to the 
impressions of our senses. “ Wipe out imagination,” 
says Marcus, time after time, “and you are saved.’ 
“Do not think yourself hurt and you remain 
unhurt.” ° He longs for the day when he shall 
cease to be duped by his impressions and pulled like 
a puppet by his passions,® and his soul shall be in a 
great calm. But virtue must also show itself, like 
faith, in right actions. It means not only self- 
control but justice and benevolence to others and 
piety towards the Gods. 

By the Gods Marcus sometimes means the con- 
trolling Reason,’ sometimes, apparently, Gods in a 
more popular sense, such as are even visible to the 


? See Digest, xxviii. 4. 3. 2 @rapatla, ix. 31. 
S iv. 33 vii. 17,53x0 i" § 7, ete. 
4 xii. 25, 5 iv, 


6 ii. 2; iii. 16; vi. 16, io 
7 xii. 5; vi. 44 ; viii. 17; ili. 3; ix. 1.. He even calls the 
Supreme Nature mpeoButdrn trav OeGr, ix. 1, 


XXV- 


STOICISM 


eyes.! He often puts the alternative God (or Gods) 
and Atoms,? but himself firmly believes that there 
are immortal Gods? who care for mankind, live 
with them, and help even bad men.t He bids 
himself call upon them, follow them,® be their 
minister, live with them and be likened to them.® 
They too are part of the Cosmos and subject to its 
limitations, and “by our own loyalty to Destiny we 
contribute to the welfare and permanence of God 
himself. But a predestined Order of things involved 
fatalism, and the Stoics were hard put to it to 
maintain the complete freedom of the will. 
Unfortunately the Stoic scheme left no room for 
Immortality. At most a soul could only exist till the 
next conflagration, when it must be absorbed again 
into the Primary Being. Seneca indeed, who was no 
true Stoic, speaks in almost Christian terms of a 
new and blissful life to come,’ but Epictetus turns 
resolutely, and Marcus with evident reluctance, from 
a hope so dear to the human heart. In one place 
the latter even uses the expression “ another life,’’ ® 
and finds it a hard saying that the souls of those who 
were in closest communion with God should die for 
ever when they die.? But he does not repine. He 
is ready for either fate, extinction or transference 
elsewhere.1!0 
One more question remains, that of Suicide. The 
Stoics allowed this, if circumstances made it im- 
xii. 28 ; iii. 165; viii. 19: 6 HAcos Kad of Acro) Geol. 
iv. 3, § 2; viii. 17; xi. 18, § 1. 
ii. 11; vii. 70. 4 ix. 11, 27, 40. 
A Stoic precept. 8 cp. Julian, Conv. 421. 
Ep. 54, 102; Polyb. Consol. 28; ad Marciam, 25. 
iil. 3. ae iba oh 
iv. 21; xi. 3.3 xii. 31. 


oon cw NW eH 


XXVi 





STOICISM 


possible for a man to maintain his moral standard.! 
The door is open, but the call must be very clear.” 
Still the act seems quite inconsistent with the 
doctrine of submission to Destiny, and the classing 
of things external as indifferent. 

In this brief sketch of Stoicism much has perforce 
been omitted, and much may seem obscure, but 
Marcus confesses that “things are in a manner so 
wrapped up in mystery that even the Stoics have 
found them difficult to apprehend.” ? This at 
least we know, that Stoicism inspired some of 
the noblest lives ever lived, left its humanizing 
impress upon the Roman Law, which we have 
inherited, and appeals in an especial way to some of 
the higher instincts of our nature. 


1 vy, 29; ix. 2. 


2 xi. 3; Epict. i. 29, § 28; i. 24 ad fin. ; iii. 13, § 14. 
3 -v. 10. 


XXVIi 

















 dhaebeebit eee husiplaotoeiaae 
esting a: Se saasiasables: ett ee vith eb 
wed Pbdtivn a4 Silos Siti is: cgiasacsae:: cade: 
on sittahes Pr saeas ‘OL lenin’ tal aochttida 
ROsAE © cntt quest Aire tiinti an Ugieest ee ng esis 
© eatin desk slori tin Mtinietets do ‘vi oy eB joand aida 
“inde enieds mea ST _ bse Ben te fone: farb fiat; aise 
ie lees Das ckat wat are seria tafhty Bae nag tant) 
pe ayid cased oot <6 949 dpi kx ayusaene’ cic te: iniatioy 
Pet Agee. dee cstiragiyee 2 Of) dost: Longe rh 
Adan obs rijeai Speseiuths dedte Srenk path duals: 
| aa garelanerik ep ts fHok «- Nersifiiessd socihs nekien, edt | 
“ee atten Paik ¢ awe dateur watt Wefc rusts oF OE cD Be eer egeat | 
" + Speomusie “es Enis Osis bic dtnpire al sskyepsts bas yoe hit 
fet Ret CBs ati, ah dan Later whey Wash jodyikadt } 


me os SSP hy jt Sse : b cep in hie x? ‘ot i< ro oS 
























a t $ % 
a iS WAS Sag y6 a arity studs 
Me eae 5 Soe: kere hb 8 t eri sf shone 
; tay i aaa: fie Shes omc” ogres sper ras as ¢ 
at BALA @ te eit mage ia) toe Sear al Bhese eats 
; 3 het. “aman AY IER ie eeiuie ee fon = 
el tc; cie.* pass be Gee reir poe ae 
ay fo eho Be patina ac trersiksenine 








: Sd i Sate eS 
4 Baie: ae heer ae age pieorath es Boe! iia 


Wd ar, 2 a , 





BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Of the chief editions and commentaries referred to in the 
critical notes. 


Xyl.—The premier edition from the lost Palatine MS., 
issued in 1558, with a Latin translation by Xylander 
(i.e. W. Holzmann of Augsburg). 

Cas.—Meric Casaubon’s first edition of the original Greek 
in 1643. Reprinted 1680. 

Gat.—Thomas Gataker’s edition, published in 1652 at 
Cambridge with a new Latin version and voluminous 
notes including contributions from Saumaise (Salm.), 
Boot, and Junius. Reprinted 1696, 1704, 1707, 1729 
(Wolle and Buddeus), 1744, 1751, 1775 (Morus). 

Sch.—Jo. Matth. Schultz. Editions 1802 (Sleswig), 1820 
(Leipzig), 1842 (Paris). Menagius and Reiske supplied 
notes to Schultz. 

Cor.—A. Coraes, in vol. iv. : mdpepya rijs BiBAoOhkns ‘EAAnr- 
ixjs. Paris, 1816. This editor has made more successful 
emendations of the text than any other. 

Bach.—Nicholas Bach, ‘‘De Marco Aurelio Antonino,” 
Lipsiae, 1826. 

Pierron.—Alexis Pierron, ‘‘ Pensées de l)Empéreur Marc 
Auréle Antonin.” Paris, 1843 (with introduction and 
notes). 

Loffi.—Edition by C. L. Porcher (=Capel Lofft). New 
York, 1863. Proof-sheets of this, with additional notes, 
are in the British Museum. 

Scaph.—Panag. Schaphidiotes, ‘‘ Kperical Taparnphoes én) 

* ray eis Eautdy 1B’ BiBAlwy Mdpxrov Avrwvivov.” Athens, 
1881. 

Stich.—Jo. Stich, ‘‘ Adnotationes criticae ad M. Antoninum,” 
Programm der K. Studienanstatt, Zweibriicken, 1880/1. 

The same editor brought out an edition for the Teubner 
Series in 1882, and a second revised edition in 1903, 
with valuable introductions and index. 


Xxix 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Nauck.—August Nauck, ‘De M. Antonini Commentariis,” 
1882, Bulletin de ? Académie impériale des Sciences de St. 
Petersbourg (28), pp. 196-210. See also ‘‘ Mélanges 
Gréco-Romains ” ii. 743-5. 

Pol.—Hermann J. Polak, ‘‘In Marci Antonini Commentarios 
analecta critica,” Hermes xxi. (1886), pp. 321-356, and - 
Sylloge commentationum quam C. Conto obtulerunt philo- 
logi Batavi, Lugd. Bat., 1894, pp. 85-94. 

Rend.—G. H. Rendall, ‘‘ On the text of M. Aurelius Anton- 
inus ta eis éavrdv,” Journal of Philology, xxiii., 
pp. 116-160. 

Wilam.—Ulrich de Wilamowitz-Moellendorf, Griechisches 
Lesebuch ii., pp. 311-320. Berlin, 1902. 

Hofim.—P. Hoffmann, ‘‘ Notes critiques sur Mare Auréle,” 
Revue de l’Instruction publique en Belgique, x\vii., 1904, 
pp. 1i-23. 

Sonny.— Adolf Sonny, ‘‘ Zur Ueberlieferung Geschichte von 
M. A.,” Philologus 54, pp. 181-3. 

Leop.—J. H. Leopold, ‘‘ Ad M. Antonini commentarios,” 
Mnemosyne xxxi., 1902, pp. 341-364; xxxiv., 1907, pp. 
63-82. He also brought out a new edition of the Greek 
text for the Clarendon Press in 1911. 

Fourn.—Paul Fournier, ‘‘Pensées de Mare Auréle.” ‘Tra- 
duction d’Auguste Couat éditée par P. Fournier. Paris, 
1904. There are numerous notes. 

Rich.—Herbert Richards, ‘‘ Notes on Marcus Aurelius,” 
Classical Review, xix., Feb. 1905, pp. 18-21. 

Kron.—A. J. Kronenberg, ‘‘Ad M. Antoninum,” Classical 
Review, xix., July, 1905, pp. 301-3. 

Schmidt.—Karl Fr. W. Schmidt, ‘‘Textkritische Bemer- 
kungen zu Mark Aurel,” Hermes, xlii. 1907, pp. 595-607. 

Lemerc.—A. P. Lemercier, ‘‘ Les Pensées de Mare Auréle,” 
Paris, 1910, with notes and a good introduction. 

Schenkl.—Heinrich Schenkl, a new edition of the Thoughts 
for the Teubner Press, 1913. The latest and most 
complete edition with valuable introductions and full 
indices. The same Editor has also published ‘ Zur 
handscriftlichen Ueberlieferung von Marcus Antoninus” 
(ELranos Vindobonensis, 1893), and “Zum erste Buche 
des Selbstbetrachtungen des Kaisers Marcus Antoninus” 
(Wiener Studien, 1912). 


XXX 





BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Haines.—C. R. Haines, ‘‘The Composition and Chronology of 
the Thoughts of Marcus Aurelius,” Journal of PReegy, 
vol. xxxiii., No. 66, pp. 278-295. 


For the history and doctrines of Stoicism besides the | 
standard work of Zeller and the recent treatise on ‘‘ Roman 
Stoicism ” by E. V. Arnold, the following will be found 
useful :—N. Bach (mentioned above) 1826; H. Doergens, 
‘*de comparatione Antoninianae philosophiae cum L. Annaei 
Senecae,” 1816; the admirable essay on Stoicism by G. H. 
Rendall prefixed to his edition of 1898; ‘‘ Greek and Roman 
Stoicism ” by C. H. 8. Davis, 1903 ; and ‘‘ Stoic and Christian ” 
by Leonard Alston, 1906. 


Xxii 


P = Codex Palatinus (Xylander), = T (Schenkl). 
A = Codex Vaticanus 1950. 

C = Codex Parisinus 319. 

D = Codex Darmstadtinus 2773. 

Mo? = Codex Monachensis (Munich) 529. 


< > Words thus enclosed are inserted by conjecture. 
~[ ] Words in the text which should probably be omitted. 
+ Doubtful readings in the text. 


«¢ ” mark quotations or words of a speaker. 


‘ ? mark proverbial, colloquial, or poetical expressions. 


XXxil 





MARCUS AURELIUS 
ANTONINUS 





MAPKOY AYPHAIOY ANTONINOY 


ATTOKPATOPOS 


TON EIS EAYTON 


BIBAION A 


a’. Ilapa rod tammov Oinjpov, 7d Kardonbes 
Kal aopyntov. 
/ Ul \ n 60 \ rd a \ n 
B’. Lapa ris d0Ens cal pvipns ths wept Tod 
YevVNTAaYTOS, TO aidjjmov kal appeviKov. 
ry’. Tlapa THS LNT POS, 70 GeoeBEs Kab peTa- 
SoTikov' Kar aextixoy ov movoy Tod Kaxorroteiy, 
arXa Kal Tod él évvoias yiverOat TovadTns: Ett 
d€ TO iTOY KaTa THY SiatTavy Kal Toppw THs 
Trovatakhs Sraywyijs. 
8 Tl \ nr if \ \ te 8 / 
. Tapa tod rpotammov, TO pr eis Snmocias 
dratpiBas porioar, Kal 70 ayabois diacKddous 
KAT OlKOV xpioacban, Kal TO yvavat, bt eis TA 
TotavTa Set exTEVaS avarioKew. 





* sc. ‘*T had an example of,” ‘‘ was in the way to learn.” 
But the construction varies and sometimes a direct statement 
of characteristics is given. It is obvious that Marcus does 
not claim to possess all the good qualities enumerated. 

2 Died before 136. The grandfather of M. (§ 1) died 


MARCUS AURELIUS ANTONINUS 
THE EMPEROR 


TO HIMSELF 


BOOK I 


1. From my Granpratuer Verus,! a kindly dis- 
position and sweetness of temper. 

2. From wHatr I HEARD oF MY FaTHER? AND MY 
MEMORY OF HIM, modesty and manliness. 

3. From my Morner, the fear of God, and 
generosity; and abstention not only from doing ill 
but even from the very thought of doing it; and 
furthermore to live the simple life,’ far removed from 

the habits of the rich, 
_ 4, From my GranpraTuer’s Fatuer,‘ to dispense 
with attendance at public schools, and to enjoy good 
teachers at home,® and to recognize that on such 
things money should be eagerly spent. 
aged nearly 90 in 138 (Capit. Vit. Mar. vi. 1; Vit. 
Pit iv. 2). ! 

8 cp. Aristides, ad Reg. § 115 (Jebb) dialrys eirércca (of 

Marcus). 

* Catilius Severus, praef. urbi, who hoped to succeed 
_Hadrian (Spart. Vit. Hadr. v. 10; xxiv. 6). 

® Capit. Vit. Mar. (ii. 3-iii. 4) gives a list of these. 


B 2 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


e. Llapa rod tpopéws, TO pujte Upactavds 
pate Bevetiavos, pnte Tladpovrdpios 7) ZKovt- 
dpios yevéoOar Kal To hepérrovoy Kal drduyodeés, 
Kal TO avToupytKoy Kal aToNUTpaypov: Kal TO 
dvatrpoadextov SiaBonys. 

s. Llapa Avoyyyrov, 76 axevoorovdov: Kal TO 
AMLOTHTLKOY TOLS UTO TOV TEepAaTEVOMEVODV KAL YOHT- 
wv Tepl ém@dav Kat Trept Satpovev atoTouTiAs 
Kal TOV TOLOUT@Y EyomévoLs: Kal TO UL) OpTUYO- 
tpopetv, unde Tepl Ta ToLadTa érToncOat Kal TO 
avéyetOar Tappycias' Kal TO oixevwOhHvar pidro- 
copia Kal TO axovoat Tp@Tov pev Baxyeiov, eita 
Taviddowdos kal Mapkiavodt: Kal to ypdyvac 
Siaroyous év Taidi: Kal Td cKiprrodos Kal Sopas 
émOuphoat kal dca Towadta THs “EXdAnviKAs 
_ ayoryis éxoueva. 

¢'. Tlapa ‘Povetixov, 76 XaBeiv davtaciav 
Tov xpntew SiopPwcews Kal Oepatreias Tod )Oovus- 
Kal TO fa extpatrhvat eis Chrov codiotiKdy, unde 
TO ovyypadew trepl Tay Oewpnudtor, 7) mpoTper- 
Tika Noydpia SiaréyerOat, 7) pavTaciomAHKTOS 
TOV GOKNTLKOV 7) TOV EvEpyETLKOY Avdpa em LOeiKVU- 
cOat' Kal TO aTooTHVval pynTopLKAS Kal ToLNTLKTS 
Kal aoTeloroyias: Kal TO uu) ev OTOAR KAT OlKOV 





1 The name has perhaps dropped out, Capit. Vit. Pai x. 5 
has an anecdote of the death of the educator of Marcus, but 
Aristides in his funeral oration on Alexander of Cotiaeum 
calls the latter not only d:ddo0Knados but tpodeds to Marcus 
and Verus (Jebb’s Ed. §149). But he is mentioned below 
§ 10. 

2 Capit. Vit. Ver. vi. 2; Malalas xi. ad jin. 

3 Dio (71. 6, §2) calls M. gtAdmovos. 

4 A Diognetus taught M. painting (Capit. iv. 9). 
5 cp. Capit. xiii. 6; Dio 71. 9, § 2 (Xiphilinus). © 


4 





a aden 


BOOK I 


5. From my Turor,! not to side with the Green 
Jacket or the Blue? at the races, or to back the 
Light-Shield Champion or the Heavy-Shield in the 
lists ; not to shirk toil,’ and to have few wants, 
and to domy own work, and mind my own concerns; 
and to turn a deaf ear to slander. 

6. From Dioenetus,‘ not to be taken up with 
trifles; and not to give credence to the statements 
of miracle-mongers and wizards® about incantations 
and the exorcizing of demons,® and _such-like 
marvels ; and not to keep quails, nor to be excited 
about such things: not to resent plain speaking ; 
and to become familiar with philosophy and be a 
hearer first of Baccheius, then of Tandasis and 
Marcianus; and to write dialogues as a boy; and 
to set my heart on a pallet-bed and a pelt’? and 
whatever else tallied with the Greek regimen. 

7. From Rusticus,3 to become aware of the fact 
that I needed amendment and training for my char- 
acter; and not to be led aside into an argumentative 
sophistry ; nor compose treatises on speculative sub- 
jects, or deliver little homilies,® or pose ostentatiously 
as the moral athlete or unselfish man; and to eschew 
rhetoric,!® poetry, and fine language ; and not to go 


8 Undoubtedly refers to the Christians, see Digest L. 13.1, 
§ 3, and cp. Justin, Apol. ii. 6 of Rome itself. The Christians 
constantly boasted of their power to exorcize: Tert. Apol. 
23; Iren. ii. 6, § 2; Lact. v. 21. cp. also the legend of 
Abercius and his visit to Rome to cure Lucilla. 

7 Capit. Vit. Mar. ii. 6 

8 i. 17, §§ 4, 6. cp. Digest. xlix. 1.1, §3 ‘* Rusticus, our 
friend”; Capit. iii. 3; Them. Orat. xiii. 173 0; Fronto, ad 
Ant. 1. 2. 9 roydpia (ratiunculae). cp. Epict. i. 29. 55. 

Wj, 17, § 4. cp. Fronto, ad Ant. i. 2 (Nab. p. 96); de 
Eloqu. 3 (Nab. p. 150). Dio (71. 35, §1) says M. was &axnéels 


év Tots pyntopiKois Adyats. 


5 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


TepiTatei, pndée Ta ToLadTa ToLeiv? Kal TO Ta 
eTlaTOMa aperos ypadew, olov to bm’ adtov 
TovTov amo Yvodcons TH pntpi pov ypadév: 
Kal TO Tpos TOUS XadewHvavTas Kal TANUpMEAH- 
cavtTas evavakrAnTas Kal evdoiadrAdKTOs, éTELdaV 
TaxloTa avtol émavedOciv eOeAnowor, dia- 
ketoOar’ Kal TO axpiBas avaywooKew Kal pH 
apxeta Oat | mepivoodvTa ooo Xepas pndé Tots 
Teptdanrovor Taxéos cuycatatibecbar Kab 70 
évtuyely tots “Emixtnteios ttouvjpacw, ov 
oixoGev peTédwxer. 

”. Tapa *"AmoAA@viov, TO édedOepov Kal 
avappiBoros axvBevtov" Kab <™pos pndev ado 
amoBrérew pndé én OdLyov 7) Tpos TOV AOyor 
kal TO ael bpo.ov, év adyndoow o€eiats, év atro- 
Bodh téxvov, év paxpais vocois Kal To én 
‘ qrapabelypatos Cavtos ideiv évapyas, tt SivaTat 
6 avTos opodpotatos eivar kal averpévos: Kal 
70 év tais éEnynoeot 1) SvoXepavTuKdy: Kal 
TO bOetv av0 porov capas eAaxXLoTOV TOV éavtob 
Ka Ov tyyoupevov THY éwrrerpiav ral Thy éevTpex- 
eva TH mept TO mapadidovat Ta Gewprpara: 
Kal TO pabeiv, Tas et AapBavew Tas dSoxovoas 
XapiTas Tapa hirwv, pre ent To pevov bua 
TavTa pnte avatcOntws mapanéurovra. 

0’. Tlapa XéErov, ro evpevés: xal TO Twapa- 





1 As Marcus in the case of Herodes, see Philost. Vit. Soph. 
ii, 12 (Kayser’s ed. p. 243). 

2 cp. Fronto, ad Caes. v. 36. Capit. (Vit. Pui x. 4) and 
Lucian (Demonax 31) shew him in a different light, as 
ill-mannered and avaricious. He is mentioned as ’Avtwvivov 
éraipos by Epiphanius. 

3 See the behaviour of Marcus on the death of M. Annius 


6 


BOOK I 


about the house in my robes, nor commit any such 
breach of good taste; and to write letters without 
affectation, like his own letter written to my mother 
from Sinuessa ; to shew oneself ready to be reconciled 
to those who have lost their temper and trespassed 
against one, and ready to meet them halfway as soon 
as ever they seem to be willing to retrace their steps? 
to read with minute care and not to be content with 
a superficial bird’s-eye view; nor to be too quick in 
agreeing with every voluble talker; and to make the 
acquaintance of the Memoirs of Epictetus, which he 
supplied me with out of his own library. 

8. From Apo.tontius,? self-reliance and an unequi- 
vocal determination not to leave anything to chance ; 
and to look to nothing else even for a moment save 
Reason alone; and to remain ever the same, in the 
throes of pain, on the loss of a child,’ during a linger- 
ing illness; and to see plainly from a living example 
that one and the same man can be very vehement 
and yet gentle: not to be impatient in instructing 
others; and to see in him a man who obviously 
counted as the least among his gifts his practical 
experience and facility in imparting philosophic 
truths; and to learn in accepting seeming favours 
from friends * not to give up our independence for 
such things nor take them callously as a matter of 
course. 

9. From Sextus,° kindliness, and the example of a 


Verus, aged 7, at Praeneste in 169 (Capit. xxi. 3), and on the 
death of his first-born son T. Aelius Antoninus soon after birth 
in 147. (Corp. Inscrip. Graec. Boeckh 3176.) cp. Dio 71.34, §5. 
4 cp. Fronto, ad Appian. (Nab. p. 246). 
5 Capit. iii. 1. He was of Chaeronea and grandson of 
Plutarch. cp. Suidas sub voce: ‘‘He was held in such 
honour by the Emperor as to act as his assessor on the bench.” 


7 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


devypa Tod olKov TOD TaTpovopouvpévouv: Kal THY 
évvotav TOU KaTa pvow Chv Kai TO oEeuvoV 
amAdoTes: Kal TO TTOXATTLKOV TOV pirwy 
KNOEMOVLKOS* Kal TO AVEKTLKOD TOV iiorey Kab 
+70 aBedpnrov olopevev.+ 

Kal TO T™ pos TAVTAS eVappoaToy, dare Kohax- 
elas. ev «= TaoNS §=«Tpoonvertépay elvat THY 
OptrAlay avTov, aldeciuwTtatov Sé avTois éxeivols 
map avtov éxeivoy Tov KaLpov Elva: Kal TO KaTA- 
AnTTLK@S Kal 00@ éFevpeTiKov Te Kal TAKTLKOV 
TOV eis Biov dvaryKatov Soypatov. 

Kal 70 nde. eupaciv Tore opyijs ) Gov TLvOs 
mabous Tapacyel, GAA awa pev amabéaratov 
eivat, apa dé pidoo Topyorarov" Kal TO ebpnjov 
Kat TovTo awodnti’ Kal TO Todvpabes aveTt- 
paras. 

v. Tlapa "AdeEdvOpou TOU YpaupatiKod, TO 
dverihnetov" Kal TO en ovEeLrdtoTLKOS emthapBdv- 
ec0ar tov BdpBapov  coroKov Te 7 amrnyxés 
T POEVEYKALEVOV, ANN EmrideEiws avTO povov éxeivo, 
6 eder eiphao0at, mpopéper Car, év TpoT@ aToxpic- 
ews 4) TUVvETTLAapTUpHTEws 7) TUVdLAA EWS Trepl 
avTov Tov mpadypyaTos, ovXl Epi TOU patos, 
H Ov étépas Tivos ToLtavTns éupedods TapuTo- 
pVHTEDS. 

la. Ilapa Ppovrwvos, TO eMLI THT aL, ola 7 
TUPAVVLK Backavia Kal ToLKinia Kal UroKpiots, 
Kal bTL ws énimay ot Kahovpevor odToL Tap 

Hpiv evTaTpioaL doTopyoTEpol Tes eiciv. 





1 Of Cotiaeum, see Aristides, Orat. xii. 142 ff. (Jebb’s Ed.). 
He lived toa great age. He was in Rome in 145 (see zbid. § 159) 
and resided at the palace (§§ 148, 154). See above on i. 5. 


8 


BOOK I 


household patriarchally governed ; and the conception 
of life in accordance with Nature; and dignity 
without affectation; and an intuitive consideration 
for friends; and a toleration of the unlearned and 
the unreasoning. 

And his tactful treatment of all his friends, so 
that simply to be with him was more delightful 
than any flattery, while at the same time those who 
enjoyed this privilege looked up to him with the 
utmost reverence; and the grasp and method 
which he shewed in discovering and marshalling 
the essential axioms of life. 

And never to exhibit any symptom of anger or any 
other passion, but to be at the same time utterly 
impervious to all passions and full of natural affection ; 
and to praise without noisy obtrusiveness, and to 
possess great learning but make no parade of it. 

10. From ALEXANDER THE GRAMMARIAN,! not to be 
captious ; nor in a carping spirit find fault with those 
who import into their conversation any expression 
which is barbarous or ungrammatical or mispro- 
nounced, but tactfully to bring in the very expression, 
that ought to have been used, by way of answer, or 
as it were in joint support of the assertion, or as a 
joint consideration of the thing itself and not of the 
language, or by some such graceful reminder. 

11. From Fronro, to note the envy, the subtlety, 
and the dissimulation which are habitual to a tyrant ; 
and that, as a general rule, those amongst us who 
rank as patricians are somewhat wanting in natural 
affection. ” 

2 See Fronto, ad Ver. ii. 7 (Naber, p. 135; cp. p. 231). 
-Marcus acknowledges greater debts to Fronto elsewhere, 


e.g. ad Caes. iii. 12, Verwm dicere ex te disco. Hu re proswm 
dis hominihusque ardua. 


9 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


B. Tapa "AdeEdvbpov Tob IIXatwuxod, TO 
p21) ToARaKes poe Xeopis dvaryens eyery T pos 
Twa % &v émlaToN ypadery, OTe daxonros ele’ 
poe Sua TovTOU Tob TpoTou TUVEXOS Ta palr- 
eto Gar Ta KATa® TAS Mpds TOS oupBioovras 
oKXETELs xabncovra mpoBardopevov Ta TepL- 
eoTOTa Tpaypara. 

uy’. Mapa Karovhou, TO pn oAUyopws exe 
dirou a@iTL@pévov Tl; way TUXN GdOyos aire 
pevos, GANG mepac bar Kal! amoxabiaotavat ert TO 
auvnbess Kat TO mepl TOV bdacKddov exOUpos 
evpynpov, ola Ta Trepl Aoperiov® Kat "A@nvodorou 
aTrouvnpovevopeva’ Kal TO TEpt Ta TéxvVa admO- 
WOS aYATNTLKOD. 

16’. Ilapa tod aderpod pou Yeounpov, To piroik- 
eLov Kal prraribes Kal pirodixaiov: Kal to be 
aQuTOV yvavat Opacéar, “EXBt6u00, Katova, 
Aiwva, Bpodrov: Kat pavraciay AaBetv TONTELAS 
icovopou, Kat loornta Kat lonyopiay dvorKov- 
pevNS, Kab Baovretas TLULOTNS m dv TOV pdduora 
THY érevOepiav TOV ap omevon cal ert mapa TOU 
avTood TO omanes * kat omorovov év TH TUT TIS 
prrocopias: Kal 70 UT OLNTLKOY, Kal TO eUpeTa- 
6oTor € EKTEVOS, Kal TO eveATL, Kal TO TLoTEVTLKOV 
mepl TOU UT TOV pidov prreia bar: Kat TO av- 
em ix pum TOV 7 pos TOUS KaTayvoocews UT avtov 
TuyXavovTas: Kal 70 pa) deta au oToxXac pov TOUS 
irous avToo Teph Tov, TL Oéret %) TL ov Oéreu, 
andra S4rov eivar. 


1 This seems at first sight like our inaccurate ‘‘ try and,’ 
but xa) must mean even. 

2 Aountlov PAD. For Aopmeriov cp. Herodian i. 3, § 4; 
C.I.G. 4154, ete. 3 dwedes PAD: duares Cor, 
ite) 


BOOK I 


12. From ALEXANDER THE PxaTonisT,! not to say to 
anyone often or without necessity, nor write in a 
letter, I am too busy, nor in this fashion constantly 
plead urgent affairs as an excuse for evading the 
obligations entailed upon us by our relations towards 
those around us. 

13. From Carutus,? not to disregard a friend’s ex- 
postulation even when it is unreasonable, but to try 
to bring him back to his usual friendliness ; and to 
speak with whole-hearted good-will of one’s teachers, 
as it is recorded that Domitius? did of Athenodotus ; 
and to be genuinely fond of one’s children. 

14. From my ‘ BroruHEer’ Severus,’ love of family, 
love of truth, love of justice, and (thanks to him !) to 
know Thrasea, Helvidius, Cato, Dion, Brutus ; and the 
conception of a state with one law for all, based upon 
individual equality and freedom of speech, and of a 
sovranty which prizes above all things the liberty of 
the subject ; and furthermore from him also to set a 
well-balanced and unvarying value on philosophy ; 
and readiness to do others a kindness, and eager 
generosity, and optimism, and confidence in the 
love of friends; and perfect openness in the case 
of those that came in for his censure; and the 
absence of any need for his friends to surmise 
what he did or did not wish, so plain was it. 


1 See Phil. Vit. Soph. ii. 5, p.247 Kays. He was summoned by 
Marcus to Pannonia about 174 and made his Greek secretary. 
2 A Stoic, see Capit. iii. 2. 
® Domitii were among the maternal ancestors of Marcus, 
and an Athenodotus was Fronto’s teacher (ad Caes. iv. 12; 
Nab. p. 78). 
4 See Index Il. He was father of the son-in-law of Marcus. 
II 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ve . Llapa Ma€ipov, TO Kparely éavTod Kal 
KATA wnoev meptpopov eivat' Kal TO edOupor é ev Te 
Tats adhaus TEeplaTacect wal év Tats vo os" Kal 
TO eb arov TOD ous Kal perdixvov Kal yepapov" 
Kal 76 ov oyxeTriws KaTEpyacTLKOY TOV Tpo- 
KELMEVOD. 

Kal ro mavtas aiT@ miotevew, Tepl ov réyoL, 
OTL oUTwS povel, Kal Tepl @v MpdTToL, OTL 
OU KAKOS TpaTTE. Kal TO ADaipacToy Kal av- 
éxTAKTOV, Kal pndapod erreur opevov u) oxvoby i 
aunxavody u) Karnpes ) Wpoceonpos, ) Tadw 
Oupovpevov 7 i) dpope@pevov. 

Kai TO eve pryeTUCOV Kal TO oUrryv@poviKoY 
Kal TO arpevdés: Kal TO ddiaaTpopou Baddov n 
SiopPovpévov pavractav mapex ery” Kal OTe ovre 

on av wore TUS bmepopacOar bn avTOv, OUTE 
bmépewer av KpelT Tova. avTod avTov bTovaPeiv: 
Kab TO evxapievTiverOa.t? 

re apa, Tob TATpOS, TO Huepov, Kal peveTeKov 
do arevTos éml TOV eEntac nevers xpibevtav: Kat 
TO dxevobo€ov Tepl Tas Soxovoas TLuds* Kal TO 
pirorrovoy Kal évderexés* Kal TO akovaTLKOY TOV 
eXOVTM@Y TL KOWM@pPErneS Eeiohépery’ Kal TO aTTapa- 
TpémTos [ets] TO? Kat’ akiav GTrOvE LN TUCO 
EKAOT OD Kal TO eprrerpov, 700 pev xpeta evTacews, 
mod 58 aver ews” Ka TO Tavoat Ta TEpl TovS 
Ep@Tas TOV perpakior. 

1 ¢} xaptevriCecOar Menag.: etxaps ev rais dusAias Leop. : 
evxapt ev .... lCecar Schenk. 2 del rod Schenkl. 

1 7. 16, §9; viii. 25. See Capit. iii. 2; Index II. 

2 Marcus raised a temple to Evepyeoia, a new deity. See 
Dio 71. 34, § 3. 3 cp, iii., 5 
12 ; 





BOOK I 


15. From Maximus,! self-mastery and stability of 
purpose; and cheeriness in sickness as well as in 
all other circumstances ; and a character justly 
proportioned of sweetness and gravity; and to perform 
without grumbling the task that lies to one’s hand. 

And the confidence of every one in him that what 
he said was also what he thought, and that what he 
did was done with no ill intent. And not to shew 
surprise, and not to be daunted ; never to be hurried, 
or hold back, or be at a loss, or downcast, or smile a 
forced smile, or, again, be ill-tempered or suspicious. 

And beneficence? and placability and veracity ; and 
to give the impression of a man who cannot deviate 
from the right way rather than of one who is kept 
in it®; and that no one could have thought himself 
looked down upon by him, or could go so far as to 
imagine himself a better man than he; and to keep 
pleasantry within due bounds. 

16. From my Farner,’ mildness, and an unshak- 

} able adherence to decisions deliberately come to; 
and no empty vanity in respect to so-called honours ; 
and a love of work and thoroughness ; and a readiness 
to hear any suggestions for the common good; and 
an inflexible determination to give every man his 
due; and to know by experience when is the time 
to insist and when to desist; and to suppress all 
passion for boys.° 


4 Here Pius, his adoptive father, is meant, not as above 

(i. 2) his father Verus. For a first sketch of this eulogy of 
_ Pius see below vi. 30. 

5 It is not quite clear whether this means that Pius had 
put away this vice from himself or others, but the active verb 
seems rather to favour the latter view. Capit. Vit. Pii ii. 1, 
calls him clarus moribus (cp. also Aur. Vict. de Caes. xv.), but 
Julian says he was cd¢gpwr ob ra és *Appoditny. 


13 


2 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Kat % Kxowovonpoctvn, Kal Td édetcPar Tots 
firous punte cuvodeirvety aiTt@ TavT@s prjTe 
cuvaTroonpety éemdvayKess adel S€ dpmoroy avTov 

s ok n \ / \ 
KkatadapBaverbar wo tov Sua xpeElas TLVas 
3 / \ \ \ > a ? 
amonepbévtwv' Kal to EntntiKdy axpiBas év 

_ 4 \ >. ¥ BJ ? LA 1 
Tois ocupPovrjtos, Kal éripovov, adAN + ovtor 
mpoatéaTn + THs épetvns apKxeabels tails mpo- 
xelpors pavtaciais: Kxal To SiatnpntiKdy TOV 

+ \ a if , \ > / 
girtwv Kal pndapod arixopov pndé émipavés 

, \ 
kal TO avtapKes év Tavti, Kal TO padpov" Kal Td 
Toppwlev tmpovonTtixdy, Kal TOV éXNaXLoTOY TpO- 
SiorentiKoy atpayedas. 

Kal 70 ras ériBonoes nat wacav KoNakeiav 

> a n 
ém avtod otadivar Kal TO puAaKTLKOY del TOV 
avayKxalov TH apyXh, Kal TapevTLKOY THS Kopny- 
tas, kal wropevetixoy ths éml tev ToLOUToY 
TLO@VY KaTaLTLdcEWS’ Kal TO pte Tepl ODeods 
decoidarpov, pnte trept avOpwrrovs SnuoKxoTiKov 
Xx > \ Xx > / 2 \ a > 
i) apecKkevTiKOoY 4 OXAOXapES, ara Vipoy Ev 
maov, kat BéBaov, Kal pndapmod aretpoxadov 
pndé Kavvotopor. 

\ Rae lal >] > /, 7 if, , 

Kai 70 tois es evpadperav Biov dépovoi Tt, 
e ¢ 7 / /- \ > 4 
av) TUXN Tapéxer Sarpireray, XpNoTLKOY aTidas 

/ 
dua xal ampopaciotws, @aTe TapoYTwY ev 
aveTiTNSevTaS ArTecOal, aTrovTaV Oé 1) Seto Oat: 
Kal TO pnde av tiva eimely pnte Ott coda THs, 
pate OTL ovepvdKdos pte OTL aHKOAACTLKOS, 
> > oe ree’ , / ? / 
aXX OTL avnp TeTrEelpos, TEAELOS, AKOANAKEUTOS, 


1 oi 7) PA: otra: Stich: 87: od Gat. : ofmore Cor. 
14 


BOOK I 


And his public spirit, and his not requiring his le 
friends at all to sup with him or necessarily attend 
him abroad,! and their always finding him the 
same when any urgent affairs had kept them 
away; and the spirit of thorough investigation, ,,,.,, 
which he shewed in the meetings of his Council, | 
and his perseverance; nay his never desisting, , ,,, 
prematurely from an enquiry on the strength of | 
off-hand impressions; and his faculty for keeping 
his friends and never being bored with them or aul Deg 
infatuated about them; and his self-reliance in > . 
every emergency, and his good humour; and his ¢,,)~, 
habit of looking ahead and making provision for the~ 
smallest details without any heroics. 

And his restricting in his reign public acclamations 
and every sort of adulation; and his unsleeping 
attention to the needs of the empire, and his wise 
stewardship of its resources, and his patient tolerance 
of the censure that all this entailed ; and his freedom 
from superstition with respect to the Gods and from 
hunting for popularity with respect to men by 
pandering to their desires or by courting the 
mob: yea his soberness in all things? and stedfast- 
ness ; and the absence in him of all vulgar tastes and 
any craze for novelty. 

And the example that he gave of utilizing without 
pride, and at the same without any apology, all the 
lavish gifts of Fortune that contribute towards the 
comfort of life, so as to enjoy them when present as 
a matter of course, and, when absent, not to miss 
them: and no one could charge him with sophistry, 
flippancy,® or pedantry ; but he was a man mature, 


1 ep, Fronto, ad Caes. iii. 20; v. 44. : 
2 cp. St. Paul, Tim. ii. 4. 5. e 
> lit, that he was a “ home-bred slave,” 7.e. impudent, 


15 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


mpocotavar Suvduevos, Kal Tav éavTod Kal 
adrov. 

IIpos rovtous 5é Kal TO TiunTikdy TOV adnOds 
prrocopovvrwn, Tots 6é adros ouK efoverdior- 
LKOV ovee pa evTapayoryov vr’ avrav ere 
be TO evopthov Kal evxape ov’ KaTaKopas Kal 
TO Too iSiou TOLATOS émripehnTiKov eUpeT pas, 
oure @S a THs prrolwos ouTE 7 pos kadhon- 
Lo pov ovTe nv duyopas, aN’ @ote ola 
THY idtav ™ poooxny eis oriyeota t lar puxis xpne- 
ely 7) PappaKov kal émenarov €xTOS. 

Manota &€ 70 Tapaxcopnt cov aBacKkaves Tois 
Svvapiv TWa KeKxTnMEVOLS, olov THY ppacriany i) 
THy é& latopias vopeov 9 eOdv 7 adXov TwWOY 
Tparyparov: ; wal guamovdact Kop avrois, wa 
éxacto. KaTa Ta idta TpoTepnuata evdoKipact’ 
mdavra 5€ KaTa Ta TaTpLaA TPdoowY, OVS avTO 
TovTO émitndevov gaiverDar, TO TA TaTpLA 
gurdocetv. 

"Ere 5€ TO pe edpetaxivntovr Kal pirtact- 
Lov, arXrxAa Kal TOTOLS, Kal T paypace Tos 
avtois évdvat pumtiKoy" Kal TO peta TOUS Tap- 
o€vapovs THs ceparayias veapov evd vs Kal 
dix paiiov 7 pos 7a ouviOn épya: Kal TO [1 eivas 
avT@® ToAAa TA aTOppyTa, GAA ONYoTA Kal 
oTaviotata, Kal Tav’Ta UTép TOV KOLY@Y pLOvoV" 
Kal TO Euhpov Kat PE MET PN [LEVOV éy Te Pewpiav 


-émuTehece Kal é Epyov | KaTaoKevais Kat Stavopais 


Kal Tois ToLovTOLs, <a> avOpemTov' mpos adTo TO 


1 GvOpérus PAD: & &v@pémov Schenkl. 





1 Julian calls Marcus tetpdéywvos—‘‘ a man foursquare.” 


16 


— a oe 


BOOK I 





complete,! deaf to flattery, able to preside over his 
own affairs and those of others. a) 

Besides this also was his high appreciation of all 
true philosophers without any upbraiding of the 
others, and at the same time without any undue 
subservience to them; then again his easiness of 
access and his graciousness that yet had nothing 
fulsome about it; and his reasonable attention to his 
bodily requirements, not as one too fond of life, 
or vain of his outward appearance,’ nor yet as one 
who neglected it, but so as by his own carefulness 
to need but very ‘seldom the skill of the leech or 
medicines and outward applications. 

But most of all a readiness to acknowledge with- 
out jealousy the claims of those who were endowed 
with any especial gift, such as eloquence or know- 
ledge of law or ethics or any other subject, and to_ 
give them active support, that each might gain 
the honour to which his individual eminence entitled 
him; and his loyalty to constitutional precedent 
without any parade of the fact that it was according 
to precedent. 

Furthermore he was not prone to_change or 
vacillation, but attached to the same places and the 
same things ; and after his spasms of violent head- 
ache he would come back at once to his usual em- 
ployments with renewed vigour; and his secrets 
were not many but very few and at very rare intervals, 
and then only political secrets; and he shewed 











_ good sense and moderation in his management of 


public spectacles, and in- the construction of public 
works, and in congiaria * and the like, as a man who 


2 Capit. (Vit. Pit xiii. 1) says he wore stays to keep himself 


_ upright in old age. 


3 lit. ‘‘ distributions.” cp. Capit. Vit. Pii iv. 9; viii. 11. 
| 


Cc 


8 


9 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


déov mpaxOnvar dedopKotos, od mpds THY éml Tois 
mpay Geto evdofiav. 

OvK [ev] awpi hovorns, ouxt tAotKodopmos, 
ov rept Tas cbodas em vonTHs, ou mrepl éoOnrav 
opas Kab xpéas, ov Tept T@paTov pas. TH @ aro 
Awpiou oro) avayouoa amé THS KATO érravhews, 
Kal tov év AMavouvBiw Ta TONG. T@ TehOvy 
év Tovondous Taparroupéve as éxpjocato, Kal 
Tas Oo ToLovTos TpOoTos. 

Ovdéev amnvés od6e pny advoerntov ovee 
AdBpov ovdé ws av Tiva eimeiy mote “ &ws 
iSparos-” GAA travTa SvecAnppéva Aehoyiabas, 
os éml oXorijs, aTapaXos, TETANY LEVOS, éppo- 
HEVOS, ouppeves | éavtois. épappoocee 8 av 
avr 76 mept Tod Loxpdrous HUN MovEvopEvor, 
ore Kal améxeo au Kat amonavew eOvvarto TOUTOV, 
@v ToXXol pos Te TAS amroxas acbevas Kai 
™ pos Tas amonavaels evdor sedis éXovow. TO 6€ 
iaxderv Kab émexaptepedy * Kab eve ExaTép@ 
dvdpos éoriy dprvov Kal antrnTov Woy EXOVTOS, 
olov év TH voow Th Magipov. 

iC. Ilapa trav Ocdv, Td ayabois rdrrobs, 
ayabovs yovéas, ayabny adergyy, aryaous b:- 
SacKdrovs, ayabovs oixetous, ouyyevels, pirous, 
axedov a amavras éxew" Kal O74 mepl ovdéva avTav 
TpoeTweroy TANHMEN}O at TL xaitou Siadecw & eXov 
TOLAvTHY, ap’ Hs, ei ErUXE, Kav Erpakd TL TOLOUTO: 


1 Sri naprepeiy PA: éemnaprepeiv Cas. 





1 Xen. Mem. I. 3, $15. moAdAoi would here seem = of zoAAol. 

2 The Greek may also mean ‘‘To be strong and to persist 
without excess in each case is characteristic,” and éxatrép@ 
suits this better. 


18 


BOOK I 


had an eye to what had to be done and not to the 
credit to be gained thereby. 

He did not bathe at all hours; he did not build 
for the Tove of building ; he gave no thought to his 
food, or to the texture and colour of his clothes, or 
the comeliness of his slaves. His robe came up from 
Lorium, his country-seat in the plains, and Lanuvium 
supplied his wants for the most part. Think of how 
he dealt with the customs’ officer at ‘Tusculum when 
the latter apologized, and it was a type of his usual 
conduct. 

There was nothing rude in him, nor yet over- 
bearing or violent nor carried, as the phrase goes, 
“to the sweating state”; but everything was con- 
sidered separately, as by a man of ample leisure, 
calmly, methodically, manfully, consistently. One 
might apply to him what is told of Socrates,! that 
he was able to abstain from or enjoy those things 
that many are not Strong énough to refrain from 
and too much inclined to enjoy. But to have 
the strength to persist in the one case and be ab- 
stemious in the other? is characteristic of a man who 
has a perfect and indomitable soul, as was seen in the 
illness of Maximus. 

17. From tHe Gops, to have good grandfathers, 

.good parents, a good sister, good teachers, good 
companions, kinsmen, friends—nearly all of them ; 
and that I fell into no trespass against any of them, 
and yet I had a disposition that way inclined, such as 
might have led me into something of the sort,‘ had 











3 7.e. M. Annius Verus, three times consul (Dio 69. 21, 
§ 1) and praef. urbi (Capit. i. 2), who died 138, and P. Cal- 
visius Tullus, cons. suff. 109. See Capit. i. 3; Fronto, ad 
Caes. iii, 2. 4 cp. i. 17, $63 xi. 18, § 4. 


19 
c 2 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Tov Ocov Sé evrrotia TO pndepiay cuvdpomryy 
Tpayparov yevéo Bas, TUS Ewerre pe énéyEerv. 

Kal 70 pany Errk ™éov Tpadijvac Tapa TH TadhaKy 
Tob mammou" Kal TO THY Gpav diacdoau Kal 70 
pay ™po @pas avdpwOjvatr, aN étt Kal éridaBetv 
Too xXpovou. 

To a apxovre Kal TAT pl broraxOijvat, o Os Guerre 
TwavTa TOV TUpoy aparpnaew pou, Kal eis évvovav 
afew Tou Ot duvatov éotw év avrg BiovvtTa 
MHTE Sopugpopicewy xpnSew pare eoO nt av 
THMELWOOV TE haymddov Kal avodpiavtov 
[Toravdé tivwv| Kal Tod opotov Kopmou: aAN 
ebeorev éyyuTat@ idv@rou ova réhhew éavTov, Kal 
pay bua TodTo TATELVOTEPOY 7) paduporepov & éyvew 
mpos Ta UTép TOV KOLVOV HrYyEmovLKas mpaxOhvat 
déovra. 

To abeXpod TovovTou Tuxety Suvapévou bev 
bia nOovs émeyetpat pe pos erripuéNevay €“avTov, 
dua 5& cal tinh Kal otopyh edvppaivorTos pe 
TO Talia por adv pa yevécOar pndé Kata 
TO 7 @parLov Suda tpopa. TO py én mhéov pe 
mpoxorrat év pnTopiKh Kal ToUnTLKh Kal Tots 
dows éreTndev pac wy, € év ols i lows av karecxeOny, 
et noOouny euavTov evddas TpoidvTa. TO POdcat 
Tous tpopéas évy a&i@pate KatacTicat, ov 81) 





1 ep, ix. 21. After his father’s death Marcus was 
brought up at his grandfather’s house (Capit. i. 7). Capit. 
(v. 3) says he migrated de maternis hortis much against his 
will to the imperial palace when adopted by Hadrian. It 
is possible but not likely that ‘‘ grandfather” here means 
Hadrian. 

2 L. Verus, whose character was more of a warning than 
an example, as Lucian Nigr. 19 calls Rome for its wickedness 


20 





' 


» 


aoe 


BOOK I 


it so chanced ; but by the grace of God there was no 
such coincidence of circumstances as was likely to 
put me to the test. 

And that I was not brought up any longer with 
my grandfather's! concubine, and that I kept 
unstained the flower of my youth ; and that I did not 
make trial of my manhood before the due time, but 
even postponed it. 

That I was subordinated to a ruler and a father 
capable of ridding me of all conceit, and of bringing 
me to recognize that it is possible to live in a Court 
and yet do without body-guards and gorgeous 
garments and linkmen and statues and the like 
pomp ; and that it is in such a man’s power to reduce 
himself very nearly to the condition of a private 
individual and yet not on this account to be more 
paltry or more remiss in dealing with what the 
interests of the state require to be done in imperial 
fashion. 

That it was my lot to have such a brother,? capable 


‘by his character of stimulating me to watchful care 


over myself, and at the same time delighting me by 
his deference * and affection : that my children have 
not been devoid of intelligence nor physically 
deformed. That I did not make more progress in 
rhetoric* and poetry® and my other studies, in which 
I should perhaps have been engrossed, had I felt 
myself making good way in them. That I lost 
no time in promoting my tutors to such posts of 


yupvdowv aperis, see Epict. iii. 20, § 11. Marcus seems to 
have been genuinely fond of him, see Fronto, ad Ver. ii. 1; 
ad Caes. ii. 17 ; and cp. Aristides, Paneg. in ve § 425 (Jebb). 
3 Capit. Vit. Ver. viii. 5. 
5 I. 7. cp. Fronto, ad Caes. i. 8; ad Ant. i. 2 (Nab. p. 96) ; 
de Elog. 3 (Nab. p. 150). 


21 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


eddxovv por emiOvupeiv, kal pn avaBaréobas érrids 
Tov pe,’ érrel véou ets Hoav, VaTEpov avTo mpd£eLv. . 
TO yvavat AtroAAOVMWLOP, ‘PovotiKxov, Mdé:pov. 

To pavracOivar mept ToD KaTa puow Biov 
evapyas Kal TONNEKLS, olos tis €oTtt’ wate, boov 
éml tots Oeots Kal tabs éxeibev Siaddcecr Kal 
ourAmIpert Kal émivoiats, pnoev Kondvew 78 
Kare pvow civ He; dmoneier Oar Oe € ere TOUTOU 
Tapa THD pny aitiay, Kal mapa TO 4) Svat npeiv 
Tas é€k Tov Oedy wvropvyncers Kal povovovyl 
diackadias. 

To avruaxeiv pot TO cpa eri Tocodtoy év 
ToLovT@ Bip: TO payre Bevedicrns axpacBat pHTE 
@coddtov, adrAa Kal Botepov ev épwtixois mdeot 
yevopuevov wUytavat' TO YareTVaVYTAa TOANAKIS 
‘Povotixo pndév mr€ov mpad~ar, ep’ © av per- 
éyvov" TO wéANOVEAY Véay TEXNEVTAY THY TEKOVTAY 
Smos oiKhoar peT euod TA TeAXEUTALa ETN. 

To ocdkis éBovrnOnv éemixovpicat tiwt Tevo- 
Eve }) eis didXo TL xpntovrt, pndérrote axodoat 
HE, ore ouK  eore pou Xpnwara, d0ev yevijrar kal 
TO auT@ épol xpelav opoian, os Tap érépov 
peraraPeiv, ps 7) oupmeceiv" TO THY yuvaixa 
TOLAUTHY elvat, ovTa@al pep mecOjviov, oUT@ O€ 
prdoaropyov, obre dé adeniy TO émuTndetov 
tpopéwy eis TA matdia evTrophiaar. 


1 rot wh PA: we Cas. 





1 e.g. Rusticus, cons. ii, in 162, and praef. urbi; Pro- 
culus, see Capit. ii. 5. 
i. 9. ® Dio 71. 36, § 3. 
4 Domitia Lucilla, dau. of P. Calvisius Tullus. She died 
in 156, aged about 50. For her see above i. 3; viii. 25; 


22 


BOOK I 


honour + as they seemed to desire, and that I did not 
put them off with the hope that I would do this 
later on since they were still young. That I got to 
know Apollonius, Rusticus, Maximus. 

That I had clear and frequent conceptions as to 
the true meaning of a life according to Nature,? so 
that as far as the Gods were concerned and their 
blessings and assistance and intention, there was 
nothing to prevent me from beginning at.once to 
live in accordance with Nature, though I still come 
' short of this ideal by my own fault, and by not 
attending to the reminders, nay, almost the instruc- 
tions, of the Gods. 

That my body holds out so long in such a life as 
mine ?; that I did not touch Benedicta or Theodotus, 
but that even afterwards, when I did give way to 
amatory passions, I was cured of them; that, though 
often offended with Rusticus, I never went so far as 
to do anything for which I should have been sorry ; 
that my mother,* though she was to die young, yet 
spent her last years with me. 

That as often as I had the inclination to help any- 
one, who was in pecuniary distress or needing any 
other assistance, I was never told that there was no 
money available for the purpose; and that I was 
never under any similar need of accepting help from 
another. That I have been blessed with a wife so 
docile,® so affectionate, so unaffected ;® that I had no 
lack of suitable tutors for my children. 

Fronto, ad Caes. iv. 6; Capit. vi. 9. Her head appears on a 
coin of Nicaea in Bithynia. > cp. Fronto, ad Caes. v. 11. 

5 cp. Fronto, ad Pium 2, ad fin. for Pius’ opinion of his 

daughter. The coiffure of the younger Faustina as seen on 


coins is much simpler than that of her mother. She was 
with Marcus in Pannonia for a time at least. 


23 


8 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


To & overpaT@y BonOnpara Sob jvae adda 
Te Kab @S pn TwrvELW ala Kal pi) Daryryediv, Kal 
To Tov ev! Kaijntn tT“ @orep xpynon + Gres Te 
errcOvpnoa pirocodias, uy éumecety els Twa cod- 
Lor HY, pndé atroxaBioa émi tovs ouyypapers,t® 
of) oudroyLIT HOUS dvanvew, a7] mept Ta [eTEwpo- 
oyna Karayiver Bar. TaVvTa yap, radta * Oeav 
BonOdv kat tvxns Setrat <Twos>.* 


Ta év Kovddos rpds 76 Tpavova. a’ 4 


1 rotTov PA: 7d Tov ev Kaihtn *‘ bomep xenon” Lofft. 

2 rods avyypapets PA: 7d ovyypapew Reiske: én) rod 
yploous (riddles) Schenkl. 

3 Ihave added tivds to complete the apparent senarius, 
the source of which is not known. 

4 It is not clear what this numeral (= 1) represents. 





1 ep. Fronto, ad Caes. iii. 9, and below, ix. 27. Marcus 
himself became a dream-giver after his death, see Capit. 
xviii. 7. Dreams were the recognised method by which the 


24 


BEES RECIE T t oe 


BOOK I 


That by the agency of dreams! I was given 
antidotes both of other kinds and against the 
spitting of blood and vertigo; and there is that 
response also at Caieta, “as thou shalt use it.” And 
that, when I had set my heart on philosophy, I did 
not fall into the hands of a sophist, nor sat down 
at the author’s desk, or became a solver of syllogisms, 
nor busied myself with physical phenomena. For 
all the above the Gods as helpers and good fortune 
need. 

Written among the Quadi on the Gran,? 


God of healing communicated his prescriptions. Belief in 


‘them was universal, and shared by the atheist Pliny, the 


sceptic Lucian, Aristides the devotee, Galen the scientist, 
Dio the historian and man of affairs. It is not unknown to 
Christians. Yet there have been found writers to gird at 
Marcus for his ‘‘ superstitious ” belief in dreams ! 

2 These words may be intended either to conclude the first 
book or, more likely, head the second. In the former case, 
as Gataker points out, té5¢ would have been usual, not ra. 


25 


BIBAION B! 


a. Ewéev  Tponreyety éavT@* cuvTev&ouat Tept- 
Epye, axapiore, wBpiorii, dodEp@, Backave, 
dKowernte. TavTa TAUTA oupBeBnrer éxeivous 
Tapa THY dryvovay TOV dyad ov Kal KAKOV. éy@ 
dé TeHewpnKas THY puow Tob ayabod, 6 6Tt KANO, 
Kal Tob KaKov, 6TL aiaypov, Kal TIV avrod Tov 
dpa pT avovTos piow, OTL pot _TVyPEvNS, ody 
aipatos o) om épparos TOU avrod, GXXa vod kai 
Oeias atropoipas * HETOXOS, ovTE PraBivae bare 
TWos avToV _Sivapac: alax pe yap pe ovdels 
meptBanrei: ouTe opyiferBar TO ouyyevel Svvapae 
ovTE anéxGerbau avTo. yeyovapev yap ™ pos 
cuvepyiav, @s TOdES, ws Yelpes, ws Brehapa, ws 
ot oroixor TOY avo Kat KATO odovT@v. TO ovv 
avTUm pace ew aX hows Tapa puow: GVTUT PAaKkT- 
tov Oé TO ayavaxrety Kat aroarpepea Oat. 

B’. “O Th TOTE TOUTO elu, capKia éoTi Kal 
Tvevpatiov Kal TO HryEm“oviKoV. ages TA BiBria- 
pnKéti oT @ ov Séd0TAaL. AAN ws On aTroOvncK- 

r \ oe @ / ‘ef \ 
ov TOV MeV TapKio” Kata povncov AO pos Kal 
dard pia Kah KpOoKUpavTos, €K vetpar, pr<Bior, 
apTnpiov wreypatiov. Oéacas dé Kal TO Tvedpa, 


1 <1o0d a’tod Mdpkov: &ytixpus émxrynti€er> D. 
2 amrédppota (cp. ii. 4) ** efflux from,” Corssen, 


26 


BOOK Il 


1. Say to thyself at daybreak:! I shall come 
across the busy-body, the thankless, the bully, the 
treacherous, the envious, the unneighbourly.? All 
this has befallen them because they know not good 
from evil. But I, in that I have comprehended the 
nature of the Good that it is beautiful, and the 
nature of Evil that it is ugly, and the nature of the 
wrong-doer himself that it is akin to me, not as 
partaker of the same blood and seed but of 
intelligence and a morsel of the Divine, can neither 
be injured by any of them—for no one can involve 
me in what is debasing—nor can I be wroth with my 
kinsman and hate him. For we have come into 
being for co-operation, as have the feet, the hands, 
the eyelids, the rows of upper and lower teeth. 
Therefore to thwart one another is against Nature ; 
and we do thwart one another by shewing resentment 
and aversion. 

2. This that I am, whatever it be, is mere flesh 
and a little breath and the ruling Reason. Away 
with thy books?! Be no longer drawn aside by 
them: it is not allowed. But as one already dying 
disdain the flesh : it is naught but gore and bones and 
a network compact of nerves and veins and arteries. 
Look at the breath too, what sort of thing it is ; air: 


Fo Th 2 ep. Sen. de Ira ii. 10. 3 cp. ii. 3. 
27 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


omotov Th éotiv: dvewos ovde del TO avTO, GAA 
maons pas eFepovpevov Kal Tadw popovpevor. 
TptTov ob € éorl TO TYE MOVLKOV. ade! érrivonOnte: 
yépav et unKkéte TovTO édons SovAEdoaL, pnKéeTL 
cal oppny aKowevntov vevpoomaarnOjvar, pnKere 
TO el juarppévov i) Tapov Svaxepava % péAXov 
dmodvbper Bau.” 

a Ae Ta tov Oedv '™ povolas HeoTd, TA THS TUYNS 
ovK avev pucews 1) TU YKAWTEDS Kal emiT ons 
TOV 7 povoig Sotcoupevor. Tavra exeiBev pet: 
Tpooerre 88 7d avarycaior, wal TO TO OAD KOT We 
cupépor, ov pépos el. mavtl 6é giccos pépet 
dryabor, O héper 9 TOD AOU pvous, Kat 6 exelvns 
éotl cwoTLKOV. cotovor de Koo Mov, domep at 
TOV TTOLXEL@Y, OUTWS Kal al TOV TUYKpLLaTOV 
petaBonat. TAUTA GOL apKeiTo, el Soypara éott.® 
THV d€ TOV BiBALov Sixpay pivov, iva pn yoyyuSov 
anobavys, aNXG trews, AANGHs, Kal amd Kapdias 
eUxdplo Tos Tots Geois. ‘ 

o. Mépvno, ék Tocov Tav’Ta dvaBarry, ral 
oTrocakis poder pias haSeav Tapa TOV dedv ov 
xpe avrais. bet be 780 TOTE aisbécbat, Tivos 
KOo WOU HE pos el, Kal Tivos StocobvTos TOV KOG “OV 
amoppoa UmEaTNS Kal ore Opos éort ool TEepuye- 

ypappévos TOU Ypovov, @ éay eis TO aTraLOpidoat 


16 6h ADC: 43) Wilam.: dmrovonOnrs PADC. 

2 Gmodtvecba: AD: srodtecda: P: a&mrodiperbat (bwodvp. Lofft) 
Rend. 

3 ei Sdyuata éort AD: Gel. . . €otw PC. 





1 cp. ii. 6; i. 17, §6; Dio 71. 24,§4. Marcus would be 
a little over 50, Contrast i. 17, § 6, and note. Cromwell 
when 51 writing from Dunbar says, ‘‘ I grow an old man.” 


28 


“uo 


BOOK II 


and not even that always the same, but every minute 
belched forth and again gulped down. Then, 
thirdly, there is the ruling Reason. Put thy thought 
thus: thou art an old man!; let this be a thrall no 
longer, no more a puppet? pulled aside by every 
selfish impulse ; nor let it grumble any longer at what 
is allotted to it in the present or dread it in the future. 

3. Full of Providence are the works of the Gods, 
nor are Fortune’s works independent of Nature or 
of the woven texture and interlacement of all that is 
under the control of Providence. ‘Thence® are all 
things derived 4; but Necessity too plays its part and 
the Welfare of the whole Universe of which thou art 
a portion. But good for every part of Nature is that 
which the Nature of the Whole brings about, and 
which goes to preserve it. Now it is the changes 
not only of the elements but of the things com- 
pounded of them that preserve the Universe. Let 
these reflections suffice thee, if thou hold them as 
principles. But away with thy thirst for books,® that 
thou mayest die not murmuring but with a good 
grace, truly and from thy heart grateful to the Gods. 

4. Call to mind how long thou deferrest these 
things, and how many times thou hast received from 
the Gods grace ° of the appointed day and thou usest 
it not. Yet now, if never before, shouldest thou 
realize of what Universe thou art a part, and as an 
emanation from what Controller of that Universe 
thou dost subsist; and that a limit has been set 
to thy time, which if thou use not to let daylight 


? iii, 16; vi. 16, 28; vii. 3, 29; xii. 19. ep. Clem. Alex. 


Strom. ii. 3; iv. 11. 3 vi. 36; xii. 26. 
4 Referred to by Arethas on Dio Chrys. Orat. 32. 15 as 
wavra tvwbev pet. cp. St. James, Ep. i. 17. otha ae 


§ mpodecula lit. ‘a time-limit for enforcement of claims 
after which they lapsed.” 29 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


pay XpHoH, O'XHTETAL, Kal o'ynon, Kal adits ovK 
é€eorat.! 

és Ildons Bpas ppovrite o7tPapas, as ‘Pop- 
aios Kal ppm, TO €v Yepal pera THS ax prods 
Kab amhaarou GEeuvoTntos Kal pidoaTopyias Kal 

edevPeptas cal StxasornT os mpdocew" kal oyonv 
cavT@® aTd Tacov Tov adov pavtaciov 
mopitew. Topics 86, av as erxdtnv tod Biov 
éxdotny mwpakw evepyns amnd\X\aypéevnv taons 
elxaLoTnTos Kal éumabovds atoatpodys amo Tov 
aipovvTos oyou Kat UToKpicews Kal diravTias 
Kat Sucaper tires ™ pos Ta ouppEepolpapéera. 
opas, TOS orbya éoTiv, OY KpaTHaas Tus dvvarat 
evpouv Kal Geovdi Bidcar Biov: Kai yap ot 
Geol mréov ovdeéy atatncoVveL Tapa TOD TadTa 
pvrAdooorTos. 

Ps "TBpute, UB pute * ari, @ uy Tod be 
TULHo at ceauTny ovKere Karpov Ges: eis ® t yap 
0 Bios éxadoT@ obTos d€ cou oxedov Sujvucrat 
pny) aidovpévyn CEauTiy, aX’ év Tals dNXNwv vpuyais 
Tibenevn THY chy evporpiay. 

C. Mepioma Tl oe Ta eEwbev éumimrtovta ; 
Kal oXoN)V Tapexe cEaUT@ TOU T poo pavO avery 
ayabov Tl, KaL TavoaL pepBopevos. non Oe wal 
THY érépav Tepipopav pudaxtéov. Anpovat yap 
cal bua mpageov ot KEK MNKOTES TO Bip Kal pn 
éyovtes oKotrov, ép’ bv Tacav opunv Kai kabanak 
pavraciay atrevO bvovow. 


1 Htera: P: Zeora: AD. 2 SBpiles Gat. (cp. § 16). 
3 ob A: ef P: Bpaxis (cp. iv. 26) D: efs Boot. 





1§11; vii. 69; Sen. Hp. xii 2 8§ 16, 17; iv. 2. 
30 


BOOK II 


_ into thy soul, it will be gone—and thou !—and never 
again shall the chance be thine. 

5. Every hour make up thy mind sturdily as a 
Roman and a man to do what thou hast in hand with 
scrupulous and unaffected dignity and love of thy kind 
and independence and justice; and to give thyself 
rest from all other impressions. And thou wilt give 
thyself this, if thou dost execute every act of thy 
life as though it were thy last,! divesting thyself of 
all aimlessness? and all passionate antipathy to the 
convictions of reason, and all hypocrisy and self-love 
and dissatisfaction with thy allotted share. Thou seest 
how few are the things, by mastering which a man 
may lead a life of tranquillity and godlikeness; for 
the Gods also will ask no more from him who keeps 
these precepts. 

6. Wrong thyself,> wrong thyself, O my Soul! 
But the time for honouring thyself will have gone 
by ; for a man has but one life, and this for thee is 

_ well-nigh closed,‘ and yet thou dost not hold thyself 
f in reverence, but settest thy well-being in the souls 
of others. 

7. Do those things draw thee at all away, which 
befall thee from without? Make then leisure for 
_ thyself for the learning of some good thing more, and 
_ cease being carried aside hither and thither. But 
therewith must thou take heed of the other error. 
For they too are triflers, who by their activities have 
worn themselves out in life without even having 
an aim whereto they can direct every impulse, aye 
_ and even every thought. 


8 Apparently a sarcastic apostrophe, which is not in 
Marcus’ usual manner. 
Pris’ 2, 


iy 31 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


7. Mapa pep TO py) épioravew, ti év TH adNOV 
Yexh yiverar, ov padios TLS OhOn karoSarpovev" 
Tous O€ Tots THS iSias auxns Kivnpace a) Tap- 
axorov0odrtas avayKn KakobaLpovelp. 

Ce Tovroy del bel pepvijo Cas, tis 4 TOV dow 
puots, Kal tis uy eu}, kat Tas airy T™ pos éxetvyy 
éxovea, Kai omroiov TL pépos oTroLou Tov SXov oboa 
kal drt ovdels 6 K@UV@Y TA AKdrOVOA TH hdoeL, HS 
pépos el, mpacoew TE del Kal every. 

ee Prrocdpas 6 oO Ocdgdpacros, € €v TH ouyxpices 
TOV dpaptnpdrov, @s adv TIS KowoTEpov Ta 
To.adta cvyKpivee, pnolt Bapvrepa civat Ta Kat’ 
émvOupiay TAnpMERovpEVa TOV Kara Gupov. 6 
yap Ovpovpevos pera Tivos NUTS Kal EANOVias 
gvaTONHS paivetat Tov oyov amroaTpepopevos” O 
dé Kar’ émBupiav dpapt aver, id’ Hooviis NTTO- 
bevos, dKodaaTorEpos TOS paiverar Kal Onrv- 
TEPOS év Tais duapriass. opas ov Kal prrocog - 
ias a&iws edn, pei Sovos eyKM LATOS exerOar TO 
ped? noovis a dwapTavowevov HIrep TO pera Aumns” 
dAws TE O pev Tpondixnwevep paddov €ouxe Kat 
Oua duTrNS TVAYKAT LEV OupoPjvar 6 be avTodev 
MTpos TO adixeivy Opuntat, hepopevos emt To wpakat 
Te kat ériOvpiar. 

ta’, ‘Os 48n dvvatod dvtos é&tévat tod Biov, 
ovtas Exacta Totty Kal réyerv Kal SiavoeioPa. 
To O¢ €& avOpoTav amedOelv, ct pév Oeol cicir, 





1 Here Marcus deviates from the strict Stoic doctrine, 
which allowed no degrees in faults. 
2 For sveroay cp. Diog. Laert. (Zeno) 63, Zrcos efvar mdBos 
kal gvotoAhy &Aovor. 3 above, § 5. 


32 


BOOK II 


8. Not easily is a man found to be unhappy by 
reason of his not regarding what is going on in 
| another man’s soul; but those who do not attend 
closely to the motions of their own souls must in- 
evitably be unhappy. 

9. This must always be borne in mind, what is the 
Nature of the whole Universe, and what mine, and 
how this stands in relation to that, being too what 
sort of a part of what sort of a whole; and that no 
one can prevent thee from doing and saying always 
what is in keeping with the Nature of which thou 
art a part. 

10. Theophrastus in his comparison of wrong- 
doings—for, speaking in a somewhat popular way, 
such comparison may be made—says in the true 
philosophical spirit that the offences which are due 
to lust are more heinous than those which are due to 
anger! For the man who is moved with anger 
seems to turn his back upon reason with some pain 
and unconscious compunction?; but he that does 
wrong from lust, being mastered by pleasure, seems 
in some sort to be more incontinent and more un- 
manly in his wrong-doing. Rightly then, and not 
unworthily of a philosopher, he said that the wrong- 
doing which is allied with pleasure calls for a severer 
condemnation than that which is allied with pain; 
and, speaking generally, that the one wrong-doer is 
more like a man, who, being sinned against first, has 
been driven by pain to be angry, while the other, 
being led by lust to do some act, has of his own 
motion been impelled to do evil. 

11. Let thine every deed and word and thought 
‘be those of a man who can depart from life this 
moment. But to go away from among men, if 


33 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ovdey Sewov Kax@ yap ce ovK av TepiBdrotev" ei 
dé Hot ovK eioiv, } ov pédret adTois TOV avOpoT- 
elwv, Ti por Cv ev Kdop@ Kev@ Oedy 7 Tpovoias 
KeV@® ; ANA kal elot, Kal péree avtois TeV 
avO poorredon kat tots yey Kar’ adjBevay Kaxois 
iva pn) mepiminty 0 dvO pwmos, é én aur 7o map 
eevro: Tov oe ovr ay el 7 KaKov iy, KaL Toro 
ay mpoeidovro, é iva éml navel 7) TO fn) mepemim rely 
aur@. d dé yelpw pur) Trovet avOpwmor, mas av 
TodTO Biov avOpamov xelpor TOLNT €bEV ; ovte Oé 
KaT dayvoway ouTe eldvia pév, pn Suvapévn 5é 
mpopvrdtacbar 7) SiopPdcacPa tadTa, 4 TOV 
ddXwv puous mapeidev div: ovre av Tn AtKodTOV 
ijpaprev HTOL Tap _aduvapiay i) Tap’ areyviay, 
iva Ta ayaba Kal Ta Kaka érrions Tots TE aryaBois 
avOpeéros Kal Tois Kakois Tepuppévos cupPBaivy. 
Pavatos bé ye Kal Fwy, ddEa cal adokia, rovos Kal 
00Vn, TWAOUTOS Kal Tevia, TavTa TadTa érions 
oupBaiver avO perro Tots TE aryabois Kal Tots 
KaKols ovTe Kana évTa ovTEe aicypd. ovT ap’ 
ayada ove KaKd €or. 

HB. Has mavTa TAX EWS _evahaviterat, TO pev 
Koo pep aura Ta copara, T@ 5€ aidve ai pvijpar 
aitav old dott Ta aicOnta mdvta Kad pdduorta 
Ta noovn Seredlovta 7) TO Trove hoBodrta 7 TO 
TUh@ diaBeBonuéva,. TOs evTEAH Kal evKaTa- 
ppovnta Kal puTapa Kal evpOapra Kat vexpa, 
voepas Suvdpews eproravat. Th elow OUTOL, OY ai 
vrordnyes Kal ai dwval tiv eddoFiav <map- 





1 cp. Fronto, de Nep. Nab. p. 233. 2 iv. 8. 
34 


BOOK II 


there are Gods, is nothing dreadful ; for they would 
not involve thee in evil. But if indeed there are no 
Gods, or if they do not concern themselves with the 
affairs of men, what boots it for me to live in a 
Universe where there are no Gods, where Providence 
is not? Nay, but there are Gods, and they do con- 
cern themselves with human things ;! and they have 
put it wholly in man’s power not to fall into evils 
that are truly such. And had there been any evil in 
what lies beyond, for this too would they have made 
provision, that it should be in every man’s power not 
to fall into it. But how can that make a man’s life 
worse which does not make the man worse?? Yet 
the Nature of the Whole could not have been guilty 
of an oversight from ignorance or, while cognizant of 
these things, through lack of power to guard against 
or amend them; nor could it have gone so far amiss 
either from inability or unskilfulness, as to allow good 
and evil to fall without any discrimination alike upon 
the evil and the good. Still it is a fact that death and 
life, honour and dishonour, pain and pleasure, riches 
and penury, do among men one and all betide the 
Good and the Evil alike, being in themselves neither 
honourable nor shameful. Consequently they are 
neither good nor evil. 

12. How quickly all things vanish away, in the 
Universe their actual bodies, and the remembrance of 
them in Eternity, and of what character are all objects 
of sense, and particularly those that entice us with 
pleasure or terrify us with pain or are acclaimed by 
vanity—-how worthless and despicable and unclean 
and ephemeral and dead !—this is for our faculty of 
intelligence to apprehend ; as also what they really 
are whose conceptions and whose voices award 


D Sort WAN th pind { BA " GAA @ ft 35 


3! Bi pee 
rae vt. Uw ‘he 


. 
‘ 
Sod Vi 1 

ae 2 6th hv AA , r a a + , 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


éyovot>.| ti éott TO arroBaveiv, Kai Ott, édv TIS 
avTo povov ibn Kal TO pepiop@ THs évvoias Sia- 
Avon Ta éuhavralipeva avdT@, ovKéTL AdXO TL 
UToAnWeTat avTo elvat t} HvcEews Epyor. hicews 
dé Epyor el Tis HoBei tat, radiov éotiv: TOOTO pévTOL 
ov povov picews Epyov éotiv, dNAa Kal cupépov 
avtTh. mwas dmtetat Geod avOpwros, Kal Kata Ti 
éavTov pépos, kal titav Tas [éyn] Staxéntart® TO 
Tov avOpwrov TodTO popLov. 

wy’. Oddev GOAL@TEpOY TOD TaVTA KUKA exTrEpt- 
EpxouEevon, wal “ra vép0ev yas,” pyoiv, ‘ épevvaov- 
TOS, Kal Ta év Talis Wuyxais TOV TANCion dia 
Texpdpaews CnTovvTos, un aicPopévov bé, dT apKet 
T pos pove TO évov éavTov daipov eivat kal TodTOV 
yunoiws Oepatrevery. Oepatreia dé adtov, kaBapov 
maBouvs Siatnpety Kal eixavdtnTos Kal duo- 
apeaTHaews THS mpos 7a éx Gedy Kal avO parov 
ylvopeva. Ta pev yap ex Oedv aidéoipa 8 
apetny: Ta dé €€ avOpwrrav dira bia curyyéverar, 
gore 5é Ste kal TpoTov Tia édeewva SV aryvolay 
ayabdv cal Kax@v" ovK €XaTT@Y 7 THPwats AUTH 
Ths otTepioxovens Tov dvaxpivery Ta RevKA Kal 
péXava. — 

8. Kay tpicyidsa érn BiocecOar pédrAns, Kal 
TogauTaKis pupla, Guws péuvnoo STL ovdels AXXAOV 

1 <zapéxove1> Gat. 


2 ais Exn diaxatnra A: En h dian. Cor.: mooaxi Rader- 
macher. 





1 Pindar, Frag. (see Plato, Theaet. 173 8). 

2§ 17; iii. 6, 16. cp. Shaks. Vemp. ii. 1. 275: ‘*Con- 
science, this deity in my bosom.” The da:udviov of Socrates 
is well known. 


36 


BOOK II 


renown ; what it is to die, and that ic a man look at 
death in itself, and with the analysis of reason strip 
it of its phantom terrors, no longer will he conceive 
it to be aught but a function of Nature,—but if a 
man be frightened by a function of Nature, he is 
childish ; and this is not only Nature’s function but 
her welfare ;— and how man is in touch with God 
and with what part of himself, and in what disposi- 
tion of this portion of the man. 

13. Nothing can be more miserable than the 
man who goes through the whole round of things, 
and, as the poet! says, pries into the secrets of 
the earth, and would fain guess the thoughts in 
his neighbour’s heart, while having no conception 
that he needs but to associate himself with the 
divine ‘genius’ in his bosom,” and to serve it 
truly. ‘And service of it isto keep it pure from 


| passion and aimlessness and discontent with any- 


thing that proceeds from Gods or men. For that 
which proceeds from the Gods is worthy of rever- 
ence in that it is excellent ; and that which proceeds 
from men, of love, in that they are akin, and, at 
times and in a manner,® of compassion, in that they 
are ignorant of good and evil—a defect this no less 
than the loss of power to distinguish between white 
and black. 

14. Even if thy life is to last three thousand years 
or for the matter of that thirty thousand, yet bear in 
mind that no one ever parts with any other life than 





3 Marcus qualifies his departure from the strict Stoic view, 
for which see Seneca de Clem. ii. 4-6, where he calls pity 
pusillanimity, and says sapiens non miserebitur sed succurret. 


- Marcus was far from a Stoic in this, see Herodian i. 4, § 2. 


See above, p. xiii. 


37 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


aToBannes Biov q TovTOD ov Ch ovde aXov oH h Ov 
arroBadnet. eis TAavTO obv cabiorarat TO paKiar 
ov TP Spaxvutare. TO yap mapov Taow icov, Kal 
70 drrodAdpevov ovK idsov"! Kal 70 amoBanhopevov 
obTas axaptatov dvahaiverar. ovTeE yap TO TApox- 
nKos oure TO péddov amoBarrot av Tis. 8 yap 
ovK EXEL, mas ay TOUTO TIS avtod abédorto; 
TOUT@Y ovv Tov dvo Ser pepvijo Bar évos pév, ore 
mavta €& aidiov opoedh Kal avaxvxrovpeva, Kal 
ovdey Srapéper TOTEpOv év éxaov éreow H év d1a- 
Koglous } ev TO ametpep Xpove Ta avTa Tes Opera: 
étépou O€, OTL Kal o TOhVXpovswratos Kal o TaX Lo 
Ta TeOvn Eopevos TO loov amroPdnret. TO yap 
mapov éotl povov, ov otepicxecOar pmédret, eltrep 
rye Exes Kal TovTO povov Kal, 6 pH EXEL TUS, OVK 
atroBanneu. 

ve. “Ore av brrorAnWis. Sra pev yap Ta TpOS 
tov Kuvixov Movipov eyoueva dijdov 6é Kal TO 
XProtpov ToD Aeyouevov, édv Tis avTov TO vooT- 
Ljuov’ pEexX pe TOU arn bods déxnrae. 

Pe ‘TBpiter éauTny TOU dvOperou Puy, 
padre bY, Oray amroaTn La. Kab olov Pipa TOD 
Koo HOV, Boop eg’ éayTh, yeu Ta. TO yap. Svoxep- 
aivey Tvl TOV yevopeveny amoatacis €oTL THS 
pucews, 7S év pépet <ai> éxdorou TOV oLT@V 
puoes TeplexovTa’ émerta dé, Stay avO pwr ov 
Twa anootpadh, % Kal évavtia dépyntat, ws 


1 otk PA: otv Gat. : toov PAD: tdtov Schenkl. 





1iii.10. ° ? Sen. Nat. Q. vi. 32 ad fin. > xii. 36. 
* ripoy clvat 7% wavta, Menander, Frag. 249, Kock (Diog. 


38 





, 6awr *erirel-~ wait eclied alah 5 oe * ee = eee ek ee AZ see 
‘ Y) Sees Sew ( Fev 


cee Vecce Ce ole) F 
/ BOOK II 


{ | the one he is now living,? nor lives any other than that 
which he now parts with. The longest life, then, and 
the shortest amount but to the same. For the 
present time is of equal duration for all, while that 
which we lose is not ours ;? and consequently what is 
parted with is obviously a mere moment. No man can 
part with either the past or the future. For how 
can a man be deprived of what he does not possess? 
These two things, then, must needs be remembered : 
the one, that all things from time everlasting have 
been cast in the same mould and repeated cycle 
after cycle, and so it makes no difference whether a 
man see the same things recur through a hundred 
years or two hundred,’ or through eternity: the 
other, that the longest liver and he whose time to 
die comes soonest part with no more the one than the 
other. For it is but the present that a man can be 
| deprived of, if, as is the fact, it is this alone that he 
| has, and what he has not a man cannot part with. 
15. Remember_that_everything is but what we 
| think it. For obvious indeed is the saying fathered 
on Monimus the Cynic, obvious too the utility of 
what was said, if one accept the gist of it as far as 
it is true. 

16. The soul of man does wrong to itself then 
most of all, when it makes itself, as far as it can 
do so, an imposthume and as it were a malignant 
growth in the Universe. For to grumble at anything 
that happens is a rebellion against Nature, in some 
part of which are bound up the natures of all other 
things. And the soul wrongs itself then again, when 
it turns away from any man or even opposes him with 














Laert. vi. 3, § 2); Sext. Empir. (Adv. Log. ii. 1) attributes 
the saying to Monimus, 


39 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Brarpovea, oiai eicty ai TOV opytfouévwv. TpiTov 
UBpiver éavtyny, Stav Hocatas HdSovis 7) Trovov. 
TéTapTov, OTav broKpivytat Kal emiTrdaTws Kat 
avarybos Tl TOLH i) éyn. Tem TOV, orav mpativ 
Tia éautijs nal opuny én’ ovdéva oKorrov agi, 
adXra eich} kal arrapaxonovOnras oTvoby evepyh, 
déov Kal Ta piKpoTaTa .KaTa Ti éTl TO TEdOS 
dvacopay ylvec Oa: térdos 6 Aoyieay Soeov, 
To €meoOau TO THS TrOdEwS Kal ToNTEelas THS 
mpecButatns Noy@ Kal Gecue. 

wf. Tod avOporivor Biov 6 pev xpovos, 
oTLypLN, ? dé ovaia péovea, Se aicOnors 
apvdpa, » &€ 6rov TOU cwpaTos ovyKpLots 
evonT TOS, 1 be vex?) pouBos, H 8€ THXN 
dvotéxpaptov, ) Se dyun axKptTov ouvehovrt 
6é elreiv, Tava Ta bev Tob TOLATOS TOTALOS, 
Ta 5é Tis puis éverpos Kal topos 0 5é Bios 
TOAELOS kal _Sevou erin pia: H 5é vaTepopnpia 
Ayn. ti ovv TO mapaTré uy at duvdapevov; év 
Kal fLovov prrocodia. TOUTO be év T@® THpEV 
TOV évdov Saipova aviBproror | Kal aown, NOOVOV 
Kal Tovev Kpeiacova, pndev eli} movoduTa pnde 
dueWevopévas cal pe? bTroKpicews, avevden Tod 
GAXov Toihoai TL yn TonTaL: Ete O€ TA CUp- 
Baivovta Kal aT OVE MO pEVEL Sexopuevov, ws éxeiPév 
moben € épxopeva bOev avros 7 Oev- emt maoe dé 
TOV Oavarov the@ TH youn TEpLWEVOVTA, @S 
ovdev GdXo F ow Tov otovyeiov €& ov ExacTov 
Seov avyxpivetar. ef b€ adtois Tots atovyeious 





1 ep. Eur. Frag. 107: brav yAukelas Hdovis Hoowy ts 7. 
2 Aristides Paneg. ad Cyzic: § 427 (Jebb), 6 yap Aoyipds 


40 


BOOK II 


intent to do him harm, as is the case with those who 
are angry. It does wrong to itself, thirdly, when it 
is overcome by pleasure? or pain. Fourthly, when 
it assumes a mask, and in act or word is insincere or 
untruthful. Fifthly, when it directs some act or desire 
of its own towards no mark, and expends its energy 
on any thing whatever aimlessly and unadvisedly, 
whereas even the most trifling things should be 
done with reference to the end in view. Now the 
end for rational beings is to submit themselves to 
the reason and law of that archetypal city and 
polity ?—the Universe. 

17. Of the life of man the duration is but a 
point, its substance streaming away, its perception 
dim, the fabric of the entire body prone to decay, 
and the soul a vortex, and fortune incalculable, and 
fame uncertain. Ina word all the things of the body 
are as a river, and the things of the soul as a dream 
and a vapour; and life is a warfare and a pilgrim’s 
sojourn, and fame after death is only forgetfulness. 
What then is it that can help us on our way? One 
thing and one alone—Philosophy ; and this consists 
in keeping the divine ‘genius’ within pure® and 
unwronged, lord of all pleasures and pains, doing 
nothing aimlessly * or with deliberate falsehood and 
hypocrisy, independent of another’s action or in- 
action; and furthermore welcoming what happens 
and is allotted, as issuing from the same source, 
whatever it be, from which the man himself has 
issued ; and above all waiting for death with a good 
grace as being but a setting free of the elements of 
which every thing living is made up. But if there 
ait@v (Marcus and Lucius) Oeios Kal ws GAnNOas tLywhev Exwy Td 
Tapdderyua, Kat mpds éexelyny dpav rhv woAtrelav. 


3913, 485,16. 
4T 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


pndev Sevvov év Te Exactov Sunvera@s eis Etepov 
4 \ / y rf / \ A 
petaBarrxcKWw, dia Ti UTidntat Tis THY TaYTwV 
petaBornv kal Sidrvow; Kata dvow yap 
ovdey O€ KaKov KaTa puowv. 
Ta év Kapvotrto.! 

1 These words may very possibly be intended as a heading 

for Book ITI. 


42 


BOOK II 


be nothing terrible in each thing being continuously 
changed into another thing, why should a man look 
askance at the change and dissolution of all things? 
For it is in the way of Nature, and in the way of 
Nature there can be no evil. 


Written at Carnuntum.} 


1 Now Haimburg in Hungary. 


43 


BIBAION [ 


a. Ovyi TOUTO povor def oyikerIas 6 ore cal 
éxdoTny Hepa amavaNioKeTat o Bios Kal hépos 
éXaTTov avTOU KaTAaNEiTETAL’ AANA KAaKEiVO NOYLO- 
Téov OTL, e& éml mAéov Bion Tis, exelvo ye 
adnrov, ei éEapxécer opoia avOis 4 Sidvora mpos 
THY avVECW TOV TpayydTwv Kal Ths Oewpias 
THS TvvTEWovanNS eis THV éwmeiplay Tov Te Ociwv 
Kal TOV a0 pwrrei@v. éav yap Tmapadnpeiv 
dpéntat, TO ev Svarrveia Aa Kal TpéperOar Kal 
pavrater Gar Kal oppav Kat doa adda Toatra 
ovK évoenoe* TO S€ EavTo xpijoOar, ral TOUS TOD 
KaOnKovtos aptO mors ax pipodv, Kal Ta Tpopaw- 
opeva StapOpodv, Kat tmept avTod Tod, ef Hon 
éEaxtéov avrov, epuo rave, Kal dca Towra 
Loyeo pod ouyyeyupvac wévou Tavu xpucer, 7 po- 
atoa BévvuTat. xpn ovv érrei'yerOar, ov povov TO 





1 vi. 16. Arist. Probl. i. 21 6wep ev 7G Odpant avanvon, TovTO 
év TG caHpare diarvoy 51a TaV aptrnpiav (arterial breathing). 

2 cp. Sen. Hp. 60 vivit is qui se utitur. 3 v7is_26, 

4x. 8,§3. The right of suicide was part of the Stoic 
creed (Zeno and Cleanthes both took their own lives). Marcus 
allows it when circumstances make it impossible for a man 
to live his true life (v. 29; viii. 47; x. 8. cp. Epict. 
i. 24, § 20; i. 25, § 18). Hadrian (Digest 28. 3. 6, §7) 


44 


BOOK Ill 


1. We ought not to think only upon the fact that 
our life each day is waning away, what is left of it 
being ever less, but this also should be a subject for 
thought, that even if life be prolonged, yet is it 
uncertain whether the mind will remain equally 
fitted in the future for the understanding of facts 
and for that contemplation which strains after the 
knowledge of things divine and human. For if 
a man has entered upon his dotage, there will still 
be his the power of breathing,’ and digestion, and 
thought, and desire, and all such-like faculties ; but 
the full use of himself,? the accurate appreciation 
of the items* of duty, the nice discrimination of 
what presents itself to the senses, and a clear 
judgment on the question whether it is time for 
him to end his own life,t and all such decisions, as 
above all require well-trained powers of reasoning— 
these are already flickering out in him. — It needs, 
then, that we should press onwards, not only because 


enumerates as causes of suicide taedium vitae, valetudinis 
adversae impatientia, iactatio (in the case of certain philo- 
sophers). Marcus himself, if Dio (71. 30, § 2) is to be 
trusted, threatened, in a letter to the Senate, to commit 
suicide, and according to Capitolinus (xxviii. 3) actually 
hastened his own death by abstaining from food. 


45 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


éyyutépw tod Oavdtou éExdotote yiverOat, adra 
kal dua TO THY evvonow TV TpaypaTeV Kal Ti 
TapaxoovOnow TpoaTorAnyev. 

; Xp Kal Ta TowadTa mapapuhdo cer, ote 
Kal Ta emrurywvopeva Tots pvce ywouevors eeu Tt 
evyapt cal émaryoryov. olov dipTou omTepévou 
Tapappiyyvurat Twa pEpn, Kal TabTa oo 7a. 

LeXOVTa oT ws, Kal TpoTrov Twa Tapa TO émay- 
yedpa THs aptotrovias éyovta, émumpéTer Tas Kal 
Tm poOupiay Tpos THY TPOPHV Ldiws avaKwel. TaN 
Te Ta coxa, OT OTE apasorara € éort, Kéxnver. Kat 
év tails SpuTeméow éNaiais avTo TO éyyds TH 
omer idvov Tl KadXos Te KapT@ mpooriOnawv. 
Kal oi oraxves Karo vevovTes, Kal TO Tob éovTos 
emia Kvyiov, Kal 0 TOV ovav éx Tod oToparos péwy 
appos, kal Toda Erepa, KaT idiay ei Tis oKOTT- 
oin, Toppw dvTa Tov eveLdods, Guws diva TO TOFS 
hice yivopévors émaxoNoveiv cuveTrixocpel Kal 
puxayoryel. 

“Qore, €l TLS EXEL mabos Kal évvocav Baburépav 
™ pos Ta & TO Ode ywoueva, axedov ovdéer 
ovxt S0€er att@ Kai Tov Kat émaxodovOnow, 
ovpRawovrov SoS Tas idia owviaracban.! 
ovtos 5é Kal Onptov arnO7n Xaopara ovx Hooov 
HSEWS OrpeTat 7) boa ypageis Kal Thao TAL pupov- 
pevor Sexviovotv: Kal ypads Kal yépovtos axpyy 
Twa Kai @pay Kal TO év Tatoly émadpdditov 


1 Lofft for d:acvvioracdat PA. 





1 A very fine early medallion shows Marcus in full chase 
after a wild boar (Grueber, Plate xviii.). cp. Dio 71. 36, § 2, 
ais ayplous év Ohpa KaréBaddAev and twmov; Fronto, ad Ces. 
iii. 20; iv. 5; Capit. iv. 9. 


46 





BOOK III 


we come each moment nearer to death, but also 
because our insight into facts and our close touch of 
them is gradually ceasing even before we die. 

2. Such things as this also we ought to note 
with care, that the accessories too of natural 
operations have a charm and attractiveness of their 
own. For instance, when bread .is in the baking, 
some of the parts split open, and these very fissures, 
though in a sense thwarting the bread-maker’s 
design, have an appropriateness of their own and in 
a peculiar way stimulate the desire for food. Again 
when figs are at their ripest, they gape open; and 
in olives that are ready to fall their very approach to 
over-ripeness gives a peculiar beauty to the fruit. 
And the full ears of corn bending downwards, and 
the lion’s beetling brows, and the foam dripping from 
the jaws of the wild-boar,! and many other things, 
though, if looked at apart from their setting, they 
are far from being comely, yet, as resultants from the 
operations of Nature, lend them an added charm and 
excite our admiration. 

And so, if a man has sensibility and a deeper 
insight into the workings of the Universe, scarcely 
anything, though it exist only as a secondary con- 
sequence to something else, but will seem to him to 
form in its own peculiar way a pleasing adjunct to the 
whole. And he will look on the actual gaping jaws? 
of wild beasts* with no less pleasure than the repre- 
sentations of them by limners and modellers ; and he 
will be able to see in the aged of either sex a mature 
prime and comely ripeness, and gaze with chaste eyes 

2 iv. 36. 

% Such are the things Marcus noticed in the amphitheatre, 


and not the bloodshed which his soul abhorred (Dio 71. 
29, § 3). 


47 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Tots éavTov corp poo apOarpois o opav Suvycerae 
Kat TONG TOLAUTA ou Tavtl mibava, Hove bé 
TP ™ pos Thy piow Kal Ta TadTHs Epya yvncias 
DELO MELD T™poomeretrat. 

ry’. ‘Inroxparns ToAAas vosouvs lacdpevos 
avtos voonoas améBavev. of Xaddaior toddOv 
Gavarous mTponyopevoav, eita Kal avTovs TO 
TET peo Levov KkatéraPev. ‘Ad€Eavdpos kal Lop- 
TNHLOS wal Tdios Kaioap das Toes dpdnv 
TogavTaKis AVENOVTES Kal év mapardager Todas 
pupadas imméov Kat melon KataKowpavTes kal 
avTot Tore e€ ov Tod Biov. ‘Hpd«devtos qept 
THS TOD KOgpoU exTTUPMTEwWS TOTAadDTA dudLOAOY?)- 
cas véarTos Ta évTOos mrnpobeis BorPite Kkara- 
Kexpiopévos atréBavev. Anpoxpetov dé of hOeipes, 
Lwxparny S€ ddror pOeipes améxTewav. 

Ti Tabra; évéBns, émdeveas, KarixOns ex Bn Oe. 
et pev eg’ érepov Bior, ovdey Jedy KEVOV ovde € exer" 
ei bé év avatc Onoig, Taven Tovey Kal 1Sovav 
dvexopevos Kab hatpevov TOT OUT@ elpovt 7@ 
dnyyelp tihmep éorit TO omnpetooy TO pev yap 
vous Kal daipwv, TO dé yA kal AO pos. 

5. My KkaTar pins 70 UmoderT Opevov TOU 
Biov pépos ev Tais meph /Etépwy pavraciats, 
omoray rz) THY avadopav emt TL Kowapenes TOL. 
rot yap GdrXov epyou orépy, Toutécte havrato- 


1 4 (h A) wepleors PC: 4 wép éor Dz 





1 iv. 48. 

* Told of Pherecydes (Diog. Laert. Pher. v, viii.), of 
Speusippus (Speus. ix.), and even of Plato (Plato xxix.), 
but not elsewhere of Democritus. Lucian (?), Macrob. 15, 
says Democritus died of starvation aged 104. 


48 


BOOK III 


upon the alluring loveliness of the young. And many 
such things there are which do not appeal to everyone, 
but will come home to him alone who is genuinely 
intimate with Nature and her works. 

3. Hippocrates, after healing many a sick man, 
fell sick himself and died. Many a death have 
Chaldaeans foretold, and then their own fate has 
overtaken them also.t Alexander, Pompeius and 
Gaius Caesar times without number utterly destroyed 
whole cities, and cut to pieces many myriads of horse 
and foot on the field of battle, yet the day came 
when they too departed this life. Heraclitus, after 
endless speculations on the destruction of the world 
by fire, came to be filled internally with water, and 
died beplastered with cowdung. And lice caused the 
death of Democritus,? and other vermin of Socrates. 

What of this? Thou hast gone aboard, thou 
hast set sail, thou hast touched land; go ashore; if 
indeed for another life, there is nothing even there 
void of Gods; but if to a state of non-sensation,? thou 
shalt cease being at the mercy of pleasure and pain 
and lackeying the bodily vessel* which is so much 
baser than that which ministers to it. For the one 
is intelligence and a divine ‘genius, the other 
dust and putrescence. 

4, Fritter not away what is left of thy life in 
thoughts about others, unless thou canst bring these 
thoughts into relation with some common interest. 
For verily thou dost hereby cut thyself off from 
other work, that is, by thinking what so and so is 


3 ep. Justin, Apol. i. §§ 18, 57. 

4 So vas animi Cic. Tuse. i. 22, § 52. cp. St. Paul, 1 Thess. 
iv. 4 (oxedos) ; Dio Chrys. Or. xii. 404 R. avOpdémwov cGua os 
ayyetor pporvhoews Kad Adyou, 


49 


w 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


pevos TL O Oelva Tpdaoe Kal Tivos Evexev Kal Ti 
reyes kal Ti evOvpeitar Kal ti TexvabeTar Kal 
boa ToLtavtTa Tovet aToppéuBecOar THs Tod idiov 
HYELOVLKOD TrapaTHpHoEwS. 

Xp péev odv Kai 70 elk Kal patnv év TO 
eipu@ Tov dhavtaci@v tepiictacOal, Tord 4é 
padiora TO Teplepyov Kal Karon Ges” Kal €OtoTéov 
éauTov poova pavrates bau, Trepl ov el TIS ave 
émavépowTo" Be Te vuv Savoy; ry pera mappnaias 
Tapax phya av amroxpivaso, ort TO Kal TO: @s 
é& avuT@v evOds djra elvat, OTL mayra aTra Kal 
evpevh, Kat Ce@ouv. Kotvwvikod Kal dpedodVTOS 
Hdovucdy 1) 7] xabanak ATONAVOTLK@Y pavracpatov 
y) piroverias TUvOs ? Backavias Kai browias ? 
dou Twos é’ 2 av épv@pidceras éEnyovpevos, 
bre év vp avTo eixes. 

‘O yap ToL avip 6 ‘ToLobTos, ovK ere brep- 
TiOéwevos TO ws ev apioToLs 76n elvat, lepevs 
tis éott Kal Umoupyos Gear, XPoOmevos Kal TO 
évdov idpupév@ avT@, 6 mapéyetar Tov évOpoov 
dx pavTov HOOVOV, aTpwrov vmro TAVTOS TOovov, 
Taons bBpews avéragor, maans dvais Onror 
Tovnpias, abrXxnTHv GOrov Tod peyictov, TOD UT 
pmdevos ma0ous caTtaBrnOjnva., dicavoc wy Be- 
Bappévov eis Babos, aomaSopevov per ee édnS 
Tis Puxiis Ta ovpBaivovra Kal dmoveyopeva 
mavra, pay modaxus dé pndeé xeopls peyadns 
Kar Kowwpenous cv aryxns paancneeast rh more 
adros reyes 7) Tpdocet 7) Siavocitar. pova yap 





ys 
ii. 5. 

2 cp. Fronto, ad Am. i. 12: nullum est factum meum 
dictumve quod clam ceteris esse velim : quia cuius rei mihimet 


5° 





BOOK III 


doing and why, what he is saying, having what in 
mind, contriving what, and all the many like things 
such as whirl thee aside from keeping close watch 
over thine own ruling Reason. 

We ought therefore to eschew the aimless? and the 
unprofitable in the chain of our thoughts, still more all 
that is over-curious and ill-natured, and a man should 
accustom himself to think only of those things about 
which, if one were to ask on a sudden, What is 
now in thy thoughts? thou couldest quite frankly 
answer at once, This or that; so that thine answer 
should immediately make manifest that all that is in 
thee is simple and kindly and worthy of a living 
being that is social and has no thought for pleasures 
or for the entire range of sensual images, or for any 
rivalry, envy, suspicion, or anything else, whereat 
thou wouldest blush to admit that thou hadst it in 
thy mind.? 

For in truth such a man, one who no longer puts 
off being reckoned now, if never before, among the 
best, is in some sort a priest and minister of the 
Gods, putting to use also that which, enthroned 
within him,? keeps the man unstained by pleasures, 
invulnerable to all pain, beyond the reach of any 
wrong, proof against all evil, a champion in the 
highest of championships—that of never being over- 
thrown by any passion—dyed in grain with justice, 
welcoming with all his soul everything that befalls 
and is allotted him, and seldom, nor yet without 
a great and a general necessity, concerning himself 
with the words or deeds or thoughts of another. 


' wpse conscius sim, ceteros quoque omnes iuxte mecum scire 
velim. 
3 ii. 13. 17; iii. 6. 16. 


51 
E 2 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


\ a a 
Ta éavTovd Tpos évépyevav éyxet,' Kal Ta EavT@ EK 
TOV OMoV cvYKN@OdpEVa SinVEeKas evvoel? KaKEiva 
pev Kara trapéyetar, Tadta Sé ayaba eivar Té- 

: \ 4 ~ 

TELOTAL. 1) yap EXdoT@ Vvewouévn potpa cuUVEp- 

, ‘ / 
pépetai Te kal cvveudéper. 

/ \ nee ¢ \ an \ / 
Mépurntar S€ Kai dte ovyyevés Wav TO NoytKov, 

kat Ste KidecOar péev tradvTav avOpeTev Kata 

\ nw. / 7 > / , \ > \ a 
Thy Tov avOpwtrov piaw éoti: Sons 5é ody THs 
Tapa TavToV avOeKTéov ANNA TOV OMOOYOULEVOS 

an 4 / fa) 
Th pvoet BrovyT@v mover. oi Sé wn oUTws BiovvTes, 
omrotot Tuves olKot Te Kal é&w Tis oikias, Kal 

4 \ ? x / e ? as 7 
voxTop Kai pel” npépav, olor pe oiwv dipovtat, 
peuvnpévos Stateret. ov Toivuy ovdé TOY Tapa 
TOV ToOLOUTwY errawwov év Oyo TiOETAL, oirye OSE 

a / 
avtol éavTois apéoKovTat. 
/ / > A aed / 2 , 
é. Myre axovoros évépyer pnte axowwwvntos 
pynte avekétactos ponte avOeXKopevos’ pnjte 
/ \ , NA / / 
Kopryeia tiv Svavordy cov KaddwmiléTo: jnte 
TONUPPHMOV pte TokUTTPaypwaV ero. Ett dé O ev 
/ 
aol eds éxtw mpootdtns fdou appevos, Kab 
mpecButov Kal todttixod Kal “Pwpyaiov Kai 
/ 
apYovtos avaTeTaxXoTos éavTov, olos av ein Tus 
\ \ n 
TEplyLev@Y TO aVAaKANTLKOY éx TOV Biov evrUTOS, 
/ , 
pnte Spxov Sedpevos pate avOpw@mov Tivos papT- 
upos. év 6€ TO hatdpov® Kal TO amrpocdees eEwOev 
€ / \ \ > \ i? la & or: 
imnpecias Kal TO ampocdeés ovyxias, iv adXot 
\ 
Tapéyovow. <opOov ody eivat xpx, ovyt dpBov- 
pevov. 
1 es: ADC. 2 ev d¢ 7d parvduevov AD: ér: Morus. 


52 





BOOK III 


For it is only the things which relate to himself that 
he brings within the scope of his activities, and he 
never ceases to ponder over what is being spun for 
him as his share in the fabric of the Universe, and he 
sees to it that the former are worthy, and is assured 
that the latter is good. For the fate which is 
allotted to each man is swept along with him in the 
Universe as well as sweeps him along with it.? 

And he bears in mind that all that is rational is 
akin, and that it is in man’s nature to care for all 
men, and that we should not embrace the opinion of 
all, but of those alone who live in conscious agree- 
ment with Nature. But what sort of men they, 
whose life is not after this pattern, are at home and 
abroad, by night and in the day, in what vices they 
wallow and with whom—of this he is ever mindful. 
Consequently he takes no account of praise from such 
men, who in fact cannot even win their own approval. 

5. Do that thou doest neither unwillingly nor 
selfishly nor without examination nor against the 
grain. Dress not thy thought in too fine a garb. Be 
not a man of superfluous words or superfluous deeds. 
Moreover let the god that is in thee? be lord of a 
living creature, that is manly, and of full age, and 
concerned with statecraft, and-a Roman, and a ruler, 
who hath taken his post as one who awaits the signal 
of recall from life in all readiness, needing no oath 
nor any man as his voucher. Be thine the cheery 
face and independence of help* from without and 
independence of such ease as others can give. It 
needs then to stand, and not be set, upright.* 


1 Or, more abstractly, is conditioned no less than con- 
ditions. 2 ii. 13. 17 ; iii. 6. 
3 But see vii. 7. 474, 15, § 35 vi. 12. 


53 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


o. Ei pév xpetrrov etpioners évy TO av- 
Opatrive Bie Sucatocdvvns, adn Geias, owppoovrns, 
avdpeias, Kal xabarag Tob apkeia bat eauT A THV 
Sidvoudy gov év ols Kata Tov ovyov TOV 6pObv 
mpdooovTa ge Mapéxerat, Kal TH ei wappevy év 
Tots s dm poarper@s aTrovepouévors—el TovTOU, pnpi, 
Kpeirrov Tt opds, én” éxeivo €& Odns Ths buxiis 
TPATOMEVOS TOD apiatou elpioKopévou amroNave. 

Ei 8é pn dev KpeiT Tov paiverat avTov Tov évidpu- 
pévou év gol Saipovos, Tas Te idias opyas 
UmoreTaXoros éauT@, Kal Tas pavracias + 
etdfovtos, Kal TaV aicOnrindy TEel\TE@V, WS O 
Leoxpatns édeyev, éavrov adetAKuKoTos, Kal Tois 
Oeots itroTetaxdtos éavTov, Kal Tav avOperTav 
mpoxnoouévov — ef TovTov mavTa Ta adAdrAa 
piKpoTepa. Kal evTeheaTepa eUplonets, pndevi 
x@pav didou é Erépo, mpos 0 péras dak kal arro- 
Kdivas ovK ere amepiaT datos To ayabov éxeivo 
TO idvov Kal TO cov TpoTimav SvIjon avTixad- 
HRoOat yap TO AOytKO Kal TodTiK@! ayaO@ ov 
Oé pts ove OTLOOV _ ETEpOYEVES, olov TOV Tapa TOV 
TOAN@DY EraLvov 7) apxas 7) ToODTOD 1) 7) arrohavcets 
noovav. mavTa Taira, Kav Tpos odiryou évap- 
pote S6En, natexpatncev advo Kal TapyveryKev. 

Xd Sé, dyui, awrA@s Kal édrevPépws EXod TO 
Kpeitrov Kal tovTov avréxou: “ Kpeittov dé To 
auudépov.” el ev TO WS AOYLKO, TODTO THpEL Et 

\ \ e / > , > UA 7 
dé To ws Cow, arodnvar Kal atigpws hirAaccE 


1 rontiug PA: moditing Gat. 





1 iii. 4, § 3, 12, 16, or good ‘ genius,’ but cp. iii. 5, Oeds. 
54 





BOOK III 


6. If indeed thou findest in the life of mana 
better thing than justice, than truth, than temper- 
ance, than manliness, and, in a word, than thy mind’s 
satisfaction with itself in things wherein it shews 
thee acting according to the true dictates of reason, 
and with destiny in what is allotted thee apart from 
thy choice—if, I say, thou seest anything better 
than this, turn to it with all thy soul and take thy 
fill of the best, as thou findest it. 

But if there appears nothing better than the very 
deity! enthroned in thee, which has brought into 
subjection to itself all individual desires, which 
scrutinizes the thoughts, and, in the words of 
Socrates, has withdrawn itself from all the entice- 
ments of the senses, and brought itself into subjec- 
tion to the Gods, and cherishes a fellow-feeling for 
men—if thou findest everything else pettier and of 
less account than this, give place to nought else, to 
which if thou art but once plucked aside, and incline 
thereto, never more shalt thou be able without 
distraction to give paramount honour to that good 
which is thine own peculiar heritage. For it is not 
right that any extraneous thing at all, such as the 
praise of the many, or office, or wealth, or indul- 
gence in pleasure, should avail against that good 
which is identical with reason and a civic spirit. All 
these things, even if they seem for a little to fit 
smoothly into our lives, on a sudden overpower us 
and sweep us away. 

But do thou, I say, simply and freely choose the 
better and hold fast to it. But that is the better which 
is to my interest. If it is to thy interest as a rational 
creature, hold that fast; but if as a mere animal, 
declare it boldly and maintain thy judgment without 


55 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


THY Kpiow povov brws aoparas THv é&étacw 
TOLnoN. 

g. M;) TLULNONS TOTE @S TUudépov ceavTod, 
0 avaryKac el o€ TOTE THY mioTW mapaBivat, THD 
aid@ éyxataditrely, puchjoal Tia, vToTTEvVCAL, 
xatapacacbat, droxpivacbat, er iOuphoat TWOS 
TolXcov Kal TapaTreTag wat ov Seopévov. 0 yap 
Tov éavtov. vodv Kai daiwova kal ta dpyua THIS 
ToUTOU aperiis T poedopevos, Tpayodiay ov Tovel, 
ov otevater, ovK épnpias, ov Tou AnGetas 
Sejoetar: TO péytotov, Cyoer pyre StoKxwv 
pajre pevyov: moTepov d€ él wréov Sudornua 
Xpovov T® copare Teplexopery TH ux 0) 
én édaccov YpHoeTal, OVS oTLOdY avTO pénee: 
Kay yap Hon anradrd\dooced Oar Sén, ob Tas 
eVAUTOS amevow, @s GAO TL TOV aidnuoves Kal 
Koo piws évepryeto Bau duvapeveor € évepynoetov," TOU- 
TO {LOvoV map’ drov tov Biov evAaBovpevos, TO THY 
didvorav év Tivt avoiKEet@ VoEpoD <Kal> TrodLTLKOD 
Swou TpoTH yevéo Bar. 

7 . Ovddev dv &v 7H Siavoiqa tod KeKohas WEVOU 
Kat exxexabappévov muaoes “ovde payy peporva - 
pévov ovee bmrovNov etspors. ove dovvTeni} TOV 
Biov avroi q TET PwOweyn cararapBavet, OS av 
Tis elmot TOY Tpaywdoov po TOD Tero Kab 
Siadpamaticas amadddocecGar. ett Sé ovdev 
Sodhov ovde Kourov, ovde mpocdedeuévoy ovdé 
dmrerX to Wevor, ovdé UrevOuvov ovdEe euporetovr. 

0. Thy brornrrixny Siva céBe. év TavTy 


1 evepyhocwy P: évepynoay A: évepynoeiwy Radermacher. 





1 iii. 16; Epict. iii. 22,§ 16. cp. Plutarch, Sympos. vii. 5 
56 








hs lid 


BOOK III 


arrogance. Only see to it that thou hast made thy 


_ enquiry without error. 


7. Prize not anything as being to thine interest that 
shall ever force thee to break thy troth, to surrender 
thine honour, to hate, suspect, or curse anyone, to 
play the hypocrite, to lust after anything that needs 


walls and curtains.!. For he that has chosen before 


all else his own intelligence and good ‘ genius,’ and 
to be a devotee of its supreme worth, does not strike 
a tragic attitude or whine, nor will he ask for either 
a wilderness or a concourse of men; above all he 
will live neither chasing anything nor shunning it. 
And he recks not at all whether he is to have his 
soul imprisoned in his body for a longer or a shorter 
span of time,? for even if he must take his departure 
at once, he will go as willingly as if he were to 
discharge any other function that can be discharged 
with decency and orderliness, making sure through 
life of this one thing, that his thoughts should not 
in any case assume a character out of keeping with a 
rational and civic creature. 

8. In the mind of the man that has been chastened 
and thoroughly cleansed thou wilt find no foul abscess 
or gangrene or hidden sore. Nor is his life cut short, 
when the day of destiny overtakes him, as we 
might say of a tragedian’s part, who leaves the 

stage before finishing his speech and playing out the 

piece.* Furthermore there is nothing there slavish 
or affected, no dependence on others or severance 
from them,‘ no sense of accountability or skulking to 
avoid it. 

9. Hold sacred thy capacity for forming opinions. 

2 Sen. N.Q. vi. 32, ad fin. 3 xii. 36; Sen. Hp. 77 
4 viii, 34. 


57 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


70 wav, wa bTroAN Wis TO Hryewovtk@ cov pnKére 
éyyévntar avaxodrov0os TH pioe Kal TH TOD 
ANoytxod Edou katacKkevh. abn dé érayyéAreTaL 
ampoTTwciayv Kat THY Tpos avOpa@Trous olKEelwaty 
Kal THY Tots Deois axonrovbiav. 

“ Idvra ov pias, tabra pova Ta orya 
TUveXe” Kal ere TUPpYNMOVEvE, bte povov <7] 
écactos Td Tapov toto Td axapiatoy: Ta Sé 
adr\a 7 BeBiwtat 7 év ddyjr@. juKpov pev ody O 
fm éxaotos, pixpov dé TO THs Yhs yevidsov btrov 
fh puxpov € Kal 9 pnkiotn vatepodnpia, Kal 
attn 5& xata Siadoxyyv avOpwtapiov tayioTta 
teOvn£opévov Kal ovK eidoTwV OSE EauTOUS, OUTUYE 
TOV TpoTarat TeOvNKOTA. 

wa’. Tots dé eipnpévoirs Tapactipacw ev ere 
TpocéoTw, TO Spov 7 Uroypadiy ael troveicOar 
Tod Urotimtovtos havtacTod, WaTE avTO OTrotoV 
éoTt Kat ovciav yupvov 6rov b¢ brov Sinpn- 
pévas BrEérrewv, kal TO tdcov 6voua adTtod Kal Ta 
ovowata éxeivov, €€ av auvexpiOn Kal eis & 
dvarvOjoerat, éyeuv Tap EavTo. 

Ovder yap OUTS peyaroppootvns TOUNTLKOD, 
@S TO héyXewv 06@ Kal adnbeia & ExagTov TOY 
<év> 7 Big v bmomumTovT@y Sivacbat Kal TO del 
obras eis aura opav, dare ouvemtBadrew, oTroL@ 
Twi TO Koo me orroiay Twa ToUTO xpetav Tapex- 
omevov Tiva pev eeu akiav ws ™mpos TO éXov, Tiva 
5€ @s mpos Tov avOpwror, ToriTHY dvTA TOAEwS 
THS GVOTATNS, HS al NoLTTAaL TrOAELS HoTEP oiKiaL 
eiaiv» ti éoti, Kal éx tivey ouyKéxpitat, Kal 

ii. 14. 2 iv. 3, §3; viii, 21, 
3 xii, 10. 18, 





58 


BOOK III 


With that it rests wholly that thy ruling Reason 
should never admit any opinion out of harmony 
with Nature, and with the constitution of a rational 
creature. This ensures due deliberation and fellowship 
with mankind and fealty to the Gods. 

10. Jettison everything else, then, and lay hold 
of these things only, few as they are; and remember 
withal that it is only this present,! a moment of 
time, that a man lives: all the rest either has been 
lived or may never he. Little indeed, then, is 
a man’s life, and little the nook of earth 2 whereon 
he lives, and little even the longest after-fame, | 
and that too handed'on through a succession of 
manikins, each one of them very soon to be dead, 
with no knowledge even of themselves, let alone 
of a man who has died long since. 

11. To the stand-bys mentioned add one more, 
that a definition or delineation should be made of 
every object that presents itself, so that we may 
see what sort of thing it is in its essence? stripped 
of its adjuncts, a separate whole taken as such, 
and tell over with ourselves both its particular 
designation and the names of the elements that 
compose it and into which it will be disintegrated. 

For nothing is so conducive to greatness of mind 
as the ability to examine systematically and honestly 
everything that meets us in life, and to regard 
these things always in such a way as to form a 
conception of the kind of Universe they belong 
to, and of the use which the thing in question 
subserves in it; what value it has for the whole 
‘Universe and what for man, citizen as he is of 
the highest state, of which all other states are 
but as households; what it actually is, and com- 


59 


w 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


nr \ \ 
Tocov Ypovoyv wépuKe Trapapévety TOdTO, TO THV 
nr rn fol \ 
havtaciay pot viv Trovobdy: Kal Tivos apeTHs pos 
, 4 
avToO XpEla, olov nuepoTynTos, avdpeias, adrnGeias, 
/ a fal 
misTews, apereias, a’TapKelas, TOV NOLTOV. 

Avo Sei ep’ Exdotov A€yew, TodTO pév Tapa 
Geod Heer TodTO Sé Kata Thy ciAAnEW Kal THY 
cuppnpvopernv ctyKXwoL Kal THY ToLAvTHY 

fal \ nr 
avvrevéiy te kai tTUynv: TovTO Sé Tapa Tod 
ouphvrou Kal cuyyevods Kal Kowwvod, ayvoobvTos 

/ <4 > lal \ 7, > / b] yey ) \ > 
HEVTOL O TL AUT@ KaTa vow éoTiv. GX ey@ oOvVK 

a \ an lal n \ ol 
ayvow: Sia TOvTO XpO@pat av’T@ Kata TOV THs 
Kowwavias pucikoy vowov evvws Kal dixaiws: dua 
pévtot Tov Kat akiap év Tois pécos avoTOYaCopat. 

b] \ \ n a 
iB. “Eav to mapov évepyns éropevos TO 

n A / al 
op0@ Aoyo éoTrovdacpévas, éppwpévas, EvLEVaS, 
/ n 
Kal pondev tapeutropevpa,' adda Tov éavTOD 
daipova Kkabapov éot@ta THpHS, ws ei Kai Hon 
amosobvat Séou- éav TodTO cuvaTTTNs pwndev Trept- 

, \ 4 b] \ a 4 \ 
pévov pnde hevywv, GAA TH Tapovon Kata 

fol @ , / 
dvow évepyeia Kal TH, Ov Aéyers Kal POEeyyn, 
e - ial > 4 > i > / ‘ y \ 
npwikh adrnbeia apxotvpevos, edSaraes. atu € 
ovdels 0 TOUTO KwADG aL SuUVapEVOS. 

/ A e > \ > \ \ ” \ 

wy’. “Oemep oi iatpol del ta dpyava Kal 

/ \ a 

olonpla Tpoxelpa Exovat pos TA aidvidia TOV 
\ , 

Oeparrevpatov, odtw Ta Sdypata od Erowpa exe 

n , rf 

mpos TO Ta Oeia Kal avOpwrwa eidévat, Kal Tav 


1 rapeumopedy Gat.: Perhaps év wapeumopevmate. 





1 Notice the fondness of Marcus for compounds of ovy- and 
his use here of alliteration, cp. xii. 14. 


60 


BOOK III 


pounded of what elements, and likely to last how 
long—namely this that now gives me the impression 
in question; and what virtue it calls for from me, 
such as gentleness, manly courage, truth, fidelity, 
guilelessness, frugality, and the rest. 

In each case therefore must thou say: This has 
come from God ; and this is due to the conjunction of 
fate and the contexture o ig the world’s web and some such 
coincidence and chance ; 1 while that comes from a clans- 
man and a kinsman and a fellow, albeit one who is 
ignorant of what is really in accordance nith his nature. 
But I am not ignorant, therefore I treat him kindly and 
justly, in accordance with the natural law of neighbour- 
liness ; at the same time, of things that are neither gare. 
nor bad, my aim is to hit their true worth. 

12. If in obedience to right reason thou doest the 
thing that thy hand findeth to do earnestly, 
manfully, graciously, and in no sense as a by-work,? 
and keepest that divine ‘ genius’*® of thine in its 
virgin state, just as if even now thou wert called 
upon, to restore it to the Giver—if thou grapple this 
to thee, looking for nothing, shrinking from nothing, 
but content with a present sphere of activity such as 
Nature allows, and with old-world truth in every’ 
word and utterance of thy tongue, thou shalt be 
happy in thy life. And there is no one that is able 
to prevent this. 

13. Just as physicians always keep their lancets 
and instruments ready to their hands for emergency 
operations, so also do thou keep thine axioms ready 

for the diagnosis of things human and divine, and 


2 ep. Dio 71. 6, § 2 (of Marcus), oddév év rapépy@ obte Edeyev 
obre eypawer ote émolet. 
3 iii. 6, § 2. 


61 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Kal TO puxporatov OUTW TOLELY, WS Tis apporépov 
T pos adrnra cuvdécews peprnpevor. oUTE yap 

avOpomivoy Tt dvev THs él Ta Ocia cvvavadopas 
ev Tpdakers oUTE EuTrAadLy. 

8. Mnxéts TAaVG: ovTE yap TA UTopynudtia 
Tou MéANELS AVAYLWOCKELV, OUTE TAS TOV ApKYaiwv 
‘Popaiov ral ‘EAAgver m pagers, cal Tas ék TOV 
TUYYpPAaLUaTov éxdoyds, as els TO Yipas cauT@ 
ametieco. omedde ody eis TéXos,} kal Tas KEevas 
érridas adels cavT@ Bonde, ei ti cou péret 
ceavTon, Ews ekeorw. 

ve ~. Od«K i ioace wood onpaiver TO KET TEL,” 70 
oTreipew, TO wvetc0aL, TO Hovyaterv, TO Opav TA 
mpaxtéa, 6 ovK opOarpois yiverat adr érépa 

\ 497, 
Tut dyer. . 

is’. Lapa, Pux, vous’ THLATOS alcOynoets, 
Wuyis oppai, vow Sdypata. TO pév pedi 
pavtastiKnds Kal tay Pooknpudtor, be 
vevpoo maa teia Dau oppnTiKas Kal TOV Onptey 
Kal TOV _avopoyuver Kal Parapid0s ral Nép- 
wyos* TO O€ TOV voor MyeHova exey éml Ta 
-paivopeva Kcabijxovta, Kal Tov Oeovs pay vomttov- 
ToYV Kal TOV THY martpida eyKaTanXerT OVT@OV Kal 
Tov <nav‘> trototyTwr, émedav KrElowaL TAS 
Oupas. 


2 Ki oby ta Xowra® Kowd éort mMpos TA eipnueva, 


} eis réAos P: ei OéAers AC. 
2 oxdmrtew ** to delve” Polak. 3 «weto@a Richards. 
4 <mav> Cor. 5 For r& Aoiwa I would prefer toadra. 





1 j,e. the human and the divine. 
2 It is not clear whether Marcus refers to the present book. 
He uses a similar word for the discourses of Epictetus (i. 7). 


62 


BOOK III 


for the performing of every act, even the pettiest, 
with the fullest consciousness of the mutual ties 
between these two. For thou shalt never carry out 
well any human duty unless thou correlate it to the 
divine, nor the reverse. ° 

14, Go astray no more ; for thou art not likely to 
read thy little Memoranda,? or the Acts of the Romans 
and the Greeks of Old Time,? and the extracts‘ from 
their writings which thou wast laying up against 
thine old age. Haste then to the consummation and, 
casting away all empty hopes, if thou carest aught — 
for thy welfare, come to thine own rescue, while it 
is allowed thee. 

15. They know not how full of meaning are—to 
thieve,® to sow, to buy, to be at peace, to see what 
needs doing, and this is not a matter for the eye but 
for another sort of sight. 

16. Body, Soul, Intelligence: for the body sens- 
ations, for the soul desires, for the intelligence axioms. 
To receive impressions by way of the senses is not 
denied even to cattle ; to be as puppets® pulled by 
the strings of desire is common to wild beasts and to 
pathics and toa Phalaris and a Nero. Yet to have 
the intelligence a guide to what they deem their 
duty is an attribute of those also who do not believe 
in Gods and those who fail their country in its need 
and those who do their deeds behind closed doors.’ 

If then all else is the common property of the 


3 ji. 2. Some have seen here a reference to a history written 
by Marcus himself. 

4 See Fronto, ad Caes. ii. 10, excerpta ex libris sexaginta 
n quinque tomis. Le tr s ei. 2. 

7 Must undoubtedly refer to the Christians, who were 
accused precisely of these three things—atheism, want of 
patriotism, and secret orgies. cp. also, i. 6; vii. 68; viii. 
48, 51; and see note pp. 381 ff. 


63 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Aoumroy TO tOvov éore tod § ayabod pirely 
pev Kal doraferBa Ta ovpPBaivovra Kal ovy- 
kr@Oopeva advTo: Tov dé évdov év TO ornber 
iOpupévov Saipova Py pipe nde OopuBeiv byho 
havTaciov, ara thewy Statnpeiv, Koo pias é7r0- 
pevov 09, pare pbeyyopevov TL mapa Ta arn Oi 
bnte évepyoovTa Tapa Ta Sikata. et Se aTLCTOU- 
ow avT@ mavtes avo pwrot, ore aTOS Kal aidnp- 
aves Kal _ eudpas Boi, ouTe xareraiver ra 
TOUTOY, ouTE TapaTpeTrer ar THS 0600 THs ayovans 
emt TO TéXOS TOV Biou, ep’ & det ety xabapor, 
HOU XLOY, edhuTor, aBidoT@s TH éavTod poipa 
ovynppmog Lévor. 


64 


BOOK III 


classes mentioned, there is left as the characteristic 
of the good man to delight in and to welcome what 
befalls.and what is spun for him by destiny ; and not 
to sully the divine ‘ genius’ that is enthroned in his 
bosom,' nor yet to perplex it with a multitude of 
impressions, but to maintain it to the end ina gracious 
serenity, in orderly obedience to God, uttering no 
word that is not true and doing no deed that is not 
just. But if all men disbelieve in his living a simple 
and modest and cheerful life, he is not wroth with 
any of them, nor swerves from the path which leads 
to his life’s goal, whither he must go pure, peaceful, 
ready for release, needing no force to bring him 
into accord with his lot. . 


1 iii, 6, § 2; St. Paul, 1 Cor. iii. 16. 


65 


BIBAION A 


a’. To évdov kupredor, btav Kata puow exn, 
ovTws éornxe T pos Ta oupPBaivovta, date ael 
mpos TO Suvarov Kal d18dmevov petatidecbar 
pgdios. ohgy yap droreTarypevny ovdepiav pire, 
aXNA oppa pep 7 pos Ta <m po>nyovpeva * pe?” 
bmeEarpérews: To dé avrevoaryopevov ohyy € éauT@ 
movel, domep TO mp, Sray emeKparh TOV éTEpL- 
TUT TOVTOV, op Gv ap pixpos Tus AVXVOS éo Béo On: 
70 dé Naper pov Top TaxloTa eE@netooev éavT@ 
Ta errupopovpeva Kal KaTnvdrwoev Kal é& avTav 
éxeivov él “petlov npOn. 

B’. Mrnéev é évépynya eixh} pn de adXrws 7) KaTa 
Je@pnpa oupmdnpwricoy THS TéEXVNS évepyeta0a 

Y ‘Avaxwpyoers avtois Snrobow, aypouxias 
Kal aiytarovs Kal épn el@bas Séxai ob Ta TOLaDTA 
padiota Tobey. Grov Sé TodTO idtwTLKOTATOV 
éotiv, é£ov is av wpas eOeAHons eis EavTov ava- 
yopetv. ovdayod yap ovTe novyLl@Tepoy ovTE 


1 <mpo> Gat. 





1 iii. 6, § 2, ete. cp. Lucian, Somn. 10, 4) Wuxh, brep cov 
Kupl@Taroy éori. 

+ 7.e. conditionally or as far as circumstances will allow, 
vi. 50. cp. St. James, Ep. iv. 15. 

3 v, 20; vi. 50; Sen. de Prov. 2. 4 ii. 5 ete. 


66 


BOOK IV 


1. Tuat which holds the mastery! within us, 
when it is in accordance with Nature, is so disposed 
towards what befalls, that it can always adapt itself 
with ease to what is possible and granted us. For it 
is wedded to no definite material, but, though in 
the pursuit of its high aims it works under reser- 
vations,” yet it converts into material for itself any 
obstacle that it meets with, just as fire? when it gets 
the mastery of what is thrown in upon it. A little 
flame would have been stifled by it, but the blazing 
fire instantly assimilates what is cast upon it and, 
consuming it, leaps the higher in consequence. 

2. Take no act in hand aimlessly‘ or otherwise 
than in accordance with the true principles perfective 
of the art. 

3. Men seek out retreats for themselves in the 
country, by the seaside, on the mountains, and thou 
too art wont to long intensely for such things. But 
all this is unphilosophical to the last degree, when 
thou canst at a moment’s notice retire into thyself. 
For nowhere can a man find a retreat more full ot 

5 e.g. Lorium, Lanuvium, Alsium, Centumcellae, Praeneste, 
Baiae, Caieta, all holiday resorts of Marcus, see especially 
Fronto de Fer. Als. Nab. p. 223 ff. cp. x. 15, 23. 

8 cp. Arethas on Dio Gnrva. xx. 8, wh obv Beatiorn kar 
AvoiteAeotdtn macev 7 eis abtoy avaxépnots. See below 
iv. 3, § 4; vii, 28. 67 


: F.2 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


atpayyovéctepov avOpwros avaywpel i) eis THY 
éavtod Wuynv' waric® batts exer &vdov Toadra, 
eis & éyxipas &v don ebpapeia edOds yivetat 
THv dé edpudperav ovdév AAXO Aéyw 1) EVKOTULa>Y. 
TUVEXYOS oby didov ceauT® TAUTHY THY avaxwp- 
now, Kat avavéov ceavtov. Bpayéa 5é ecto 
Kal oTorxyer@dn, & evOds aTavTycavTa apKécer 
eis TO Tacav tdaviav amoxdicat,) Kal arro- 
Téuwar ce py Suoyxepaivovta éxeivois, ep a 
érravépyn. 

Tin yap Suoyepaivas; TH TOV avOpeTrav Kaxia; 
dvahoyiodpevos TO Kpipa, OT TA RoyiKA Coa 
arAnrov evexev yéyove, kal Gtr TO dvéyerOar 
pépos THs Sixatocuvys, Kal Ott dKovTes apapTav- 
ovet, Kal moco. On SiexOpevoarres, UToTTED- 
cavTes, plonoaytes, Siadopatic bértes éxTéravTat, 
teréppwvtalt, Tavov ToTé, GANA Kal Tots éx TOV 
dr\ov atroveuopévois Svoyepaivers; avavewod- 
pevos TO SieCevypévov: “"Hrou mpovo.a, 7) dTopot,” 
kal €& bcwv amedeixyOn, StL 6 Kdcpos w@oavel 
TOMS. GAAA TA GoyaTiKd Gov arpeTar ETL; 
évvonoas Ott ovK émipiyvuTa deiws 7) Tpayéws 
Kwovpéeve mvevpate » Sudvoia, éredav anak 
éavtnv aTordByn Kal yvapicn Thy idiay éEovciav: 
kal oiTrov boa Tepl Tovou Kal HdovAS aKnKoas 
Kal cuyxatédov. 

"AXAG 76 SoEdpiov oe TEepioTTdceEl; amTriO@v eis 
TO TaXOS Tis TdvTwY AjOns, Kal TO ydos TOD ep’ 

1 pacay avthy aroxddoat PC: dmroxAciont AD : Adrny Reiske, 


aviay Gat., abdny Lofft. Many accept the last, but it does 
not suit the next clause and would also require <thy>. 





1 For éyxiwas cp. St. James, Ep. i. 25, wapaxdwas. 
2 vii. 22, 63; xi. 18, § 3. * vill. Vig, 1x%..28, 39. 


68 





BOOK IV 


peace or more free from care than his own soul— 
above all if he have that within him, a steadfast 
look ! at which and he is at once in all good ease, 
and by good ease I mean nothing other than good 
order. Make use then of this retirement continually 
and regenerate thyself. Let thy axioms be short 
and elemental, such as, when set before thee, will 
at once rid thee of all trouble, and send thee away 
with no discontent at those things to which thou art 
returning. 

For with what art thou discontented? The 
wickedness of men? . Take this conclusion to heart, 
that rational creatures have been made for one 
another ; that. forbearance is part of justice; that 
wrong-doing is involuntary ;? and think how many 
ere now, after passing their lives in implacable 
enmity, suspicion, hatred, and at daggers drawn 
with one another, have been laid out and burnt to 
ashes—think of this, I say, and at last stay thy 
fretting. But art thou discontented with thy share 
in the whole? Recall the alternative: Either 
Providence or Atoms !* and the abundant proofs 
there are that the Universe is as it were a state.‘ 
But is it the affections of the body that shall still 
lay hold on thee? Bethink thee that the Intelli- 
gence, when it has once abstracted itself and learnt 
its own power,’ has nothing to do with the motions 
smooth or rough of the vital breath. Bethink thee 
too of all that thou hast heard and subscribed to 
about pleasure and pain. 

But will that paltry thing, Fame, pluck thee aside ? 
Look at the swift approach of complete forgetfulness, 


4 ii. 16 ad fin.; iv. 4; x. 15; xii. 36. St. Paul, Philip- 
pians iii. 20. 5 v. 14. 


69 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


éxdrepa ametpov aidvos, Kat TO Kevov THs 
arnxnceos, Kal TO evpeTadBorov Kat axpttov 
TOV evpnpety * Soxovvtwv, Kal TO oTevov ToD 
TOTOU, ev @ Teptypaer at. bAn Te yap » Yi 
oTLypi}, Kal TAVTNS TOOTOV yovtdiov 7) a kaToixnors 
aitn; wal évtadv0a mocot Kal oloit tives of 
eTralver OpMevol; 

Aout ov ov pépyngo THS _Umoxwpijcews THS 
els TOUTO TO aryptSvov €avTov" Kal po TaVvTos 
a) ome pnde KaTevTelvou, adhe EXevOepos Eco 
Kal 6pa Ta Tpaypata ws avnp, ws avOpwTos, 
os TohiTns, @S Ovnrov Spor. év 6€ ois 
mpoxelpoTatois, eis & eyxuypess, abra éoT@ 
Ta dvo. ey pév, OTe Ta T pdypara ovx 
aTTEeT aL THS Puss arn’ &&o foTneev aT pepl- 
opvTa: ai 6é OXI oELs ex povns TiS évdov 
dTodppeas. érepov dé, Ott TavtTa tabra boa 
opas door ovdero peraBdanrnret Kal ovK €TL 
éorau Kat dcr dn petaBorais avros Tapa 
TeTUXNKAS, TwExX@s dvavoov. ‘6 Kdapos, 
aAXoiwors: 0 Bios, Urodyypus. 

&. Ei 70 voepov piv Kowov, cal 0 Noyos, Kal” 
dv AoyiKoL €opev, KOLVOS* ei TOUTO, Kal O TpoT- 
TAKTLKOS TOV ToNTéwv 1) pu) AOYOS KoLVOS* E 
TOUTO, Kal 0 VOMOS KOLWWOS* el TOUTO, TOAITAi éopeV* 
el TOTO, ToALTEUpaTOS TLVOS peTEYOMEV* EL TOUTA, 
0 KOcpos @oavel TONS EaTi. Tivos yap arXoU 

1 ep’ juiv PADC: cignuciv Gat.: perhaps é¢’ quar 
evpnpmeiv. 

1 iii. 10; viii. 21. 
2 ii. 15; iv. 7; xii. 22. A maxim of Democrates, a Pytha- 


gorean; cp. Shak. Hamlet ii. 2. 256, “7, There: is nothing 
either good or bad but thinking makes it so” ; Tennyson : 


7° 





BOOK IV 


and the void of infinite time on this side of us and on 
that, and the empty echo of acclamation, and the 
fickleness and uncritical judgment of those who 
claim to speak well of us, and the narrowness of the 
arena to which all this is confined. For the whole 
earth is but a point, and how tiny a corner! of it 
is this the place of our sojourning! and how many 
therein and of what sort are the men who shall praise 
thee ! 

From now therefore bethink thee of the retreat into 
this little plot that is thyself. Above all distract 
not thyself, be not too eager, but be thine own 
master, and look upon life as a man, as a human 
being, as a citizen, as a mortal creature. But 
among the principles readiest to thine hand, upon 
which thou shalt pore, let there be these two. One, 
that objective things do not lay hold of the soul, but 
stand quiescent without ; while disturbances are but 
the outcome of that opinion which is within us. A 
second, that all this visible world changes in a 
moment, and will be no more; and continually be- 
think thee to the changes of how many things thou 
hast already been a witness. ‘The Universe—muta- 
tion : Life—opinion.’? 

4. If the intellectual capacity is common to us all, 
common too is the reason, which makes us rational 
creatures. If so, that reason also is common which 
tells us to do or not to do. If so, law? also is 
common. If so, we are citizens. If so, we are 
fellow-members of an organised community. If so, 
the Universe is as it were a state *—for of what 
‘* All things are, as they seem, to all.” Some have been found 
to say that even matter has no objective existenee. 


3 vii. 9. cp. Aur. Vict. Epit. xvi. 4, Mundi lea seu Natura. 
4 iv. 3, § 2. 


71 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


djce tis TO ThV avVOpwOTTeV Tay yévos KOLO 
a , : iol iol 
TorTevpatos petévew; éxeiBev Fé, ex THs KoWns 
TAUTNS TOAEWS, Kal AUTO TO VOEpoYV Kal NoryLKOV 
a 4 \ a 
Kal vomikoy hpiv:  Wd0Ev; BoTEp yap TO yew@dés 
n \ 
fot ATO TLVOS YS aTromEeueplaTal, Kal TO UypoV 
ad’ étépov otovyeiov Kal TO mvevpaTiKov aro 
mnyns tuvods Kal TO Oeppov Kai Tupa@des Ex Tivos 
an a \ 
idias whys (ovdev yap éx TOU pmdevos EpxeTat, 
@oTEp uno eis TO OVK bv atrépyeTat), OUT@ 8H 
Kal, TO voepov HKee TroGév. 
é. ‘O Odvatos Totodtos, olov yéveois, PvoEews 
pUOTHPLOY, TUYKPLaLs EK TOV AUT@V TTOLYELwD, 
8 , 4 > > as ee be > 933-2 
<dcaxpiois>?* eis Tada Orws 5é ovK ef’ & av TIS 
> / > \ \ \ tn a a , 
aicxuvdein: ov yap Tapa 70 Es TH voep@ Sow 
ovde Tapa TOV Adyor THs TapacKeEUTs. 
Lal lel 4 
¢. Tadrta ottws bro tov ToLovT@Y TépuKE 
/ PI 3 / € \ an \ / 
yiverOa é& avaykns: o 8 TodTO wn Bérov 
0é ‘ a 2t 2A %: Bf ¢ 8° > a 
éder THY cuKHY oTOV pH exe. SAWS S Exeivo 
la 
péuvnoo, Ste évTos OduyioTOV Ypovov Kal avd Kal 
ovtos teOvnkecOe: peta Bpayv Sé ovdé dvopa 
Duav UroreupOnoerat. 
X / 
f’. "Apov thv vrodAn Wu, hptat To BERAappar’ 
D \ 6 OL » 5 ¢ , 
apov To “ BéBAappat,” HpTar n BraBn. 
9. “O xetp@ adtov éavtod avOpwrov ov -roLEl, 
TovTO ovde Tov Biov avTod yxeipw Trovel, ovdE 
4 ” 4 BA 4 
Bramres ove EEwOev ove Evdobev. 
> / e lal / , 
@. ~°Hvayxactar 7 Tod cupdhépovtos vars 
TOUTO TrovEiV. 


l anyis PC: ys AD: mvo%s Schenkl. 2 <Sidnpiots> or 
<didaAvois> Gat. 3 We should expect xatackedns. 





1 Lit. the pneumatic, here = 7d depades (x. 7, § 2). 
2 vii. 64. ev. dy. 


72 





' BOOK IV 


other single polity can the whole race of mankind 
be said to be fellow-members?—and from it, this 
common State, we get the intellectual, the rational, 
and the legal instinct, or whence do we get them? 
For just as the earthy part has been portioned 
off for me from some earth, and the watery from 
another element, and the aerial! from some source, 
and the hot and fiery from some source of its 
own—for nothing comes from the non-existent, any 
more than it disappears into nothingness—so also the 
intellect has undoubtedly come from somewhere. 

5. Death like birth is a secret of Nature—a com- 
bination of the same elements, a breaking up into 
- the same—and not at all a thing in fact for any to be 
ashamed of,? for it is not out of keeping with an 
intellectual creature or the reason of his con- 
stitution. 

6. Given such men, it was in the nature of the 
case inevitable that their conduct should be of this 
kind.2 To wish it otherwise, is to wish that the fig- 
tree had no acrid juice.t As a general conclusion 
call this to mind, that within a very short time both 
thou and he will be dead, and a little later not 
even your names will be left behind you. 

7. Efface the opinion, 7 am harmed, and at once 
the feeling of being harmed disappears ; efface the 
feeling, and the harm disappears at once.® 

8. That which does not make a man_ himself 
worse than before cannot make his life worse ® 
either, nor injure it whether from without or within. 

9. The nature of the general good could not but 
have acted so. 


4 xii. 16. cp. Bacon, On Revenge. 
5 iv. 3, § 4; vii. 14, 29; ix. 7; xii. 25. © ii. LL; vii. 64, 


73 


MARCUS AURELIUS 
7 fal a 
U. “Ore wav To cvpBatvov Sixaiws ovpBaiver: 
6, éav axpiBos Tapapurdcons, eb piers” ov 
evo povov Kara 70 éfijs, Gn’ ote Kara TO 
Sixatoyv Kai @s av bd TIVOS Trove MOVTOS 70 Kar’ 
afiav. Tapapuhacce ovv, os np&o* Kal, 6 Tt 
av TOLHs, ov TovT@ Trotel, ovv TO ayabos elvat, 
Kal? o 0 vevontat idtws 6 aya0os. TovTO éml Tacns 
évepyeias aate. 
ia’. M7 toadra brorduBave, ola o UBpivov 
, CG, A , / ? 7 > , 
Kptvet 7} old oe Kpivery BovreTat> GAXr’ ide avTa, 
omoia Kat adnOevay éotw. 
Ul 4, / e / yv 2 aN Lad 
iB’. Avo ravtas érowumorntas exew dei Sei 
THY pév, Tpos TO TpaEaL povov, STrEp av Oo THs 
an \ n / ig / > ’ 
Baowuxijs Kal vopobercis Aoyos bToBarry, €7 
apereia avOpomey Thy 6é, mpos 70 petabea Ban, 
éav apa TI maph StopOav Kal HeTaryov amo TLVOS 
oinoews. THY pévToL peTaywryiy ael amd TLVOS 
mibavoTntos ws Sixaiov 7 Kowwperods yiverOat, 
Kal Ta Tapat nova * TovavTa povov eivat Sei, 
ovux ore 700 7) 7 evdofov epavy. 
uy. Aoyov EXE; ‘éxo.” Tt ovv ov xpa; 
TOUTOU yap TO éavTou TOLOUVTOS Ti GAO eres; 
8. “Evuréotns ws pépos. evahavicOnon TO 
/ ‘ a \ b) fa} ‘ > \ 
yevvnoavTt’ padrrov b€ avarnpOijon eis Tov 
AOyov av’Tod TOV oTEppaTLKOY KaTa peTaBorny. 
te. IloAAa ALBavwrod Bordpia eri Tod 
avtod Bopod: TO péev tmpoxatérmecer, TO 5 
Lcd / ’ > / 
datepov: dtadéper 8 ovdér. 


1 rapanatova A. 





1 x. 25. 2 cp. Capit. xxii. 4. 
3 vii. 73; ix. 42 ad jin. 4 ii, 3. 
5 The primal Fire and the eternal Reason are one and the 


74 





BOOK IV 


10. Note that all that befalls befalleth justly. 
Keep close watch and thou wilt find this true, I do 
not say, as a matter of sequence merely but as a 
matter of justice also, and as would be expected 
from One whose dispensation is based on desert.! 
Keep close watch, then, as thou hast begun, and 
whatsoever thou doest, do it as only a good man 
should in the strictest sense of that word. In every 
sphere of activity safeguard this. 

11. Harbour no such opinions as he holds who 
does thee violence, or as he would have thee hold. 
See things in all their naked reality. 

12. Thou shouldest have these two readinesses 
always at hand ; the one which prompts thee to do 
only what thy reason in its royal and law-making 
capacity shall suggest for the good of mankind ; the 
other to change thy mind,? if one be near to set thee 
right, and convert thee from some vain conceit. 
But this conversion should be the outcome of a 
persuasion in every case that the thing is just or to 
the common interest—and some such cause should 
be the only one—not because it is seemingly pleasant 
or popular. 

_ 13. Hast thou reason? J have. Why then not 
use it? For if this performs its part, what else® 
wouldest thou have ? 

14. Thou hast subsisted as part of the Whole.* 
Thou shalt vanish into that which begat thee, or 
rather thou shalt be taken again into its Seminal 
Reason ® by a process of change. 

_ 15. Many little pellets of frankincense fall upon 
| the same altar, some are cast on it sooner, some later : 
but it makes no difference. 


same, and held to contain the seed of all things. cp. Just. 
| Apol. ii. 8, 13 for Adyos omepuatixds used of Christ. 
75 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ts’. “Evros dna 7 LE p@v Beds avtois dofes, 
ols vov Onptov Kal miOnkos, éav avaxapyrys err | 
Ta Soypara Kal Tov oeBac pov Tob Noyou. 

ue . My as popia pérXrwv ern Chv. TO Xpeov 
emnpTytae’ &ws ois, & &as efearw, aryabos yevoo" 
oN. “Oony evo xoMay © Kepdaiver 6 0 [1 Prérov | 
tt 0 mrnotov el7rev i) empager 7) 2 dvevonOn, GNXG | 
povov ti avTos Tove, iva avTo TobTo Sixasov 7 
Kal Gotov' +H? KaTa Tov ayabov i) pérav + 700s 
meptBrérec Oar, Grn ‘éri Tihs ypapphs Tpéxerv 
opBor, pa Stepprmpévov.’ 

0’. ‘O meph THY va tepopnpiay € em TOnMevos ov) 
pavraterar, OTe Exactos TOV Hepvnpevev avTov 
TaXLoTa Kat autos * atroBavetrat: eiva mah 
[wal avros| 0 éxeivov meetin meXpt Kal 
Tica  pynun aro Bh dca amrropevey . eal 
o Bevvupevov mpoiovca. vrofov 8, Ste Kat 
abdvarou pev ot _pEpune opevot, advaros S 7) 
pny: Tt ouv TOUTO mpos oé; Kal ov eyo, OTe} 
ovdev 7 pos TOV TeOvnKora ana T pos TOV Sovra 
th 0 eTrawos; may dpa. by oikovopiav Tova: | 
mapins +> yap viv dKaipos THY puoveny Sdow, 
GAXouv Tivos Exopuevos AOYyou owTrOv.t 


1 cioxoArtav Gat.: aoxorAtay PA. | 
2 4 Thave written this for # PA: ’Aya@ava Xyl.: def yap 
Tov ayabdy Morus: %AAwy for wéAay Stich. Perhaps pédAav 





7 










<tAAwy>. 3 <kal abris> P. 

4 érronuévay PA: amrropévwy Schultz. 

5 wapins .. . éxduevos Gat.: mapts PA: éxduevoy P: éxo- | 
pnéevny AD 





1 There was a Greek proverb : } 6eds 4 Onptov (Arist. Pol. . 
i. 2, Hth. vii. 1). Plut. Stoic. Parad. speaks of conversion | 
by philosophy from a @nplov to a 6eds. See Justin’s clever 
application of this proverb, Apol. i. 24, 


76 


BOOK IV 


16. Ere ten days are past, thou shalt rank as a god 
with them that hold thee now a wild-beast or an 
ape,! if thou but turn back to thy axioms and thy 
reverence of reason. 

17. Behave not as though thou hadst ten thousand 
years to live. Thy doom hangs over thee. ‘ While 
thou livest, while thou mayest, become good. 

18. What richness of leisure doth he gain who has 
no eye for his neighbour’s words or deeds or thoughts,? 
but only for his own doings, that they be just and 
righteous! Verily it is ndt for the good man to peer 

-about into the blackness of another’s heart,? but-to 
‘run straight for the goal with never a glance aside.’ 
_ 19. He whose heart flutters for after-fame* does 
not reflect that very soon every one of those who 
remember him, and he himself, will be dead, and 
their successors again after them, until at last the 

entire recollection of the man will be extinct, 
handed on as it is by links that flare up and are 
quenched. But put the case that those who are to 
remember are even immortal,® and the remembrance 
immortal, what then is that to thee? To the dead 
man, I need scarcely say, the praise is nothing, but 
what is it to the living, except, indeed, in a subsidiary 
way?® For thou dost reject the bounty of nature 
unseasonably in the present, and clingest to what 
others shall say of thee hereafter.’ 

2 iii, 4 ad init. 3 iv. 28. ; 
| * ii, 17; iil, 10; viii, 445 x. 34, 5 iv..33. 

6 iv. 19, 51; xi. 18, § 5. The Greek word covers the mean- 
ings expediency, management, or means toan end. We use it 
| in a sort of double sense in the expression economy of truth. 

7 Marcus is perhaps finding real fault with himself for 


caring so much what people said of him; see Capit. xx. 5; 
xxix. 5, But the reading is doubtful. 


77 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


K. Tay TO: Kar om@aoby Kanov é& éautob 
anor €or, Kal ep éavTo KaTaniyel, OUK éXov 
pépos éavToo TOV émawop. ovTe your xeipov 4) 
Kpeir Tov yiverat To émrawovpevov. ToT dye 
Kal éml Tov KoworTépov Kahov heyouevaov: olov 
éml TaV Okay Kal éml TOV TeXviK@v Kata- 
cKevad waTo@Y: TO ve 61) 6 dvT@s KaNOV Tuvos x pciav 
exe; ov paddov a7] VOHOS, ov Haddov v7) anrybeva, 
ov paAXov 7) evvola, a aides. TL TOUTw@Y La TO 
érrawetc0ar kadov eat, 4) eyopevov hbeipetat; 
o waparydvov yap éavtob xelpov yiverau, €av 2) 
erawhrar; ti 6€ ypuads, éhépas, Toppipa, ipa, 
paxaiprov, avOvrANor, devdpuduov; 

ka. Ki Svapevovow ai puxat, TOS avTas eg 
audtov xepet 0 _anp; Ilés 8€ 9 yh Xopel Ta TOV 
éx TOTOUTOU aidvos Oamrropeveov cOpara; domep 
yap év0dbde % TovTwvy <peTa> moony Tia emt 
Svapoviy petaBory kal didduors yepav adros 
vexpois Trovel, obras at eis TOV aépa peta Tdpevat 
puxat, él Tooov ovppeivacal, petaBaddovor 
Kab XEovTat kal é€artovtat eis TOV TOV bXwv 
oT EppaTeKoy Aoyov avahapPavopevar, Kal TOUTOV 
TOV _TpoTrov X@pav tals mpora wvorkrlouevaes 





TapeXovow. TOUTO o av TL atroxpivatto ép’ vmro- 


Oécer TOD Tas puxas dtapéverv. 


Xp dé py povov evOupeta bar TO THOS TOV 


Oarrropévov | ouTw@at TOUATOD, GANA Kal TO TOV 
EXATTNS HEpas éc Oopévev Cdov bd’ NOV TE 
1 pds Hvtwa PA: én) moohy Rend.: <pera> Cas. 


4 vii 15. 2 ep. Tzetz. Chil. vii. 806. 





3 iii. 3; vi. 24; vii. 32, 50; viii. 25, 58; xii. 5. The Stoic 


doctrine on this point was not very definite, but it was 


78 


BOOK IV 


20. Everything, which has any sort of beauty of its 
own, is beautiful of itself, and looks no further than 
itself, not counting praise as part of itself. For 
indeed that which is praised is made neither better 
nor worse thereby. ‘This is true also of the things 
that in common parlance are called beautiful, such 
as material things and works of art. Does, then, 
the truly beautiful need anything beyond? Nay, 
no more than law, than truth, than kindness, than 
modesty. Which of these owes its beauty to being 
praised, or loses it by being blamed? What! Does 
an emerald! forfeit its excellence by not being 
praised? Does gold, ivory, purple, a lyre, a poniard, 
a floweret, a shrub ? 

21. If souls outlive their bodies, how does the air 
contain them? from times everlasting? How does 
the earth contain the bodies of those who have 
been buried in it for such endless ages? For just as 
on earth the change of these bodies, after continuance 
for a certain indefinite time, followed by dissolution, 
makes room for other dead bodies, so souls, when 
transferred into the air, after lasting for a certain 
time,® suffer change and are diffused and become 
fire, being taken again into the Seminal Reason of 
the Whole, and so allow room for those that subse- 
quently take up their abode there. This would be 
the answer one would give on the assumption that 
souls outlive their bodies. 

But not only must the multitude of bodies thus 
constantly being buried be taken into account, but 
also that of the creatures devoured daily by ourselves 


mostly held that souls might exist till the next cyclical 
conflagration, when they became merged into the Adyos 
onepuatixds. Marcus wavers in his belief. 


79 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Kal TOV addov Sov. bcos yap apiO wos KaT- 
avanioxetat Kal odtwat mos Odmrerar ép Tots 
Tov Tpehouevav capac’ Kal duos Séxerar 1 
yopa avTa dia tas éEaipatocets, dia Tas els TO 
aepades i) mup@des adrowwoers. 

Tis é emt TOUTOV 1) ioropta Ths adnGeias; Svaipe- 
ous els TO UALKOY Kal els TO aiTL@bes. 

KP. M7) arroppép Bea Bar ann’ emt maons 
opuns To Oikaov - amodidevat nal éml mdons 
gavtacias cafe Td KATANNT TROD. 

Ky. Tay por cvvappoter, 6 col evdppoaror 
éorw, @ Koope. ovdéy pot ™ pow pov oveé dypipov 
TO gol edarpov. may pow KapTos, 6 pépovow ai 
cal pat, @ puors: €x OU wayTa, év gol TavTa, 
eis oé mayra. éxeivos pey Pets “Tone piry 
Kéxporros.” od dé ove épeis, “ 0 mo pirn Avos;” 

2 fa ‘Odéya Tphooe, " onaiv, “ et pédreus ev- 
Ouproew” pijrrore dpewvov TavayKaia ™pacoet, 
Kal boa O TOU pice moheTiKod Sou oyos _aipet 
Kal ws aipel; TOUTO yap ov povov THD amo Tob 
Kaos mpdooew evOupiav péper, arra wal TH 
amo TOU odbya mpdacew, Ta TreloTa yap, ov 
éyouev Kal Tm pdooopev ovK avaryraia évTa édy TLS 
TEpLern, eVTXONWTEPOS Kal arapaxrorepos état. 
d0ev det Kal map exaota éavTov UT omy nT KEL, 
fn TL TOUTO OV TAY avayKaiwyv; Sei 5é un povoy 
mpakes Tas pn avayKxaias Tepiapeiy adda Kal 

1 cp. Fronto, ad Caes. i. 6; Athenag. Apol. 36. Apuleius 
(Met. iv. ad init.) calls beasts the living tombs of condemned 
criminals. Longinus (de Subl. iii.) inveighs against the trope, 
as used by Gorgias of Leontini. vii. 29. 


3 Nature, God, and the Universe were identical in the 
Stoic creed ; see Sen. N. Q. ii. 45. 


80 





BOOK IV 


and the other animals. How great is the number 
consumed and thus in a way buried ! in the bodies of 
those who feed upon them! And yet room is made 
for them all by their conversion into blood, by their 
transmutation into air or fire. 

Where in this case lies the way of search for the 
truth? In a separation of the Material from the 
Causal.” us) 

22. Be not whirled aside; but in every impulse 
fulfil the claims of justice, and in every impression 
safeguard certainty. 

23. All that isin tune with thee, O Universe,’ is 
in tune with me! Nothing that is in due time for 
thee is too early or too late for me! All that thy 
seasons bring, O Nature, is fruit for me! All things 
come from thee, subsist in thee, go back to thee.* 
There is one who says Dear City of Cecrops®! Wilt 
thou not say O dear City of Zeus? 

24. If thou wouldest be tranquil in heart, says the 


_ Sage,® do not many things. Is not this a better 


maxim : do but what is needful, and what the reason 
of a living creature born for a civic life demands, 
and as it demands. For this brings the tranquillity 
which comes of doing few things no less than of doing 
them well. For nine tenths of our words and deeds 
being unnecessary, if a man retrench there, he will 
have more abundant leisure and fret the less. 
Wherefore forget not on every occasion to ask thyself, 
Is this one of the unnecessary things? But we must 
retrench not only actions but thoughts which are 

4 St. Paul, Rom. xi. 36, 2& abrod 80 abrod eis abrdy Ta mavTa. 

5 Seemingly a Fragment from Aristophanes. 

6 Democritus (Stob. i. 100), roy edOupeto bar wéAAovTa xXph Mh 
ToAAa Tphoce ; iii. 5; Sen. de Tran. 12, Hanc stabilem animi 


sedem Graeci evOuuiay vocant, de qua Democriti volumen egreg- 
ium est: ego Tranquillitatem voco. Sr 


G 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


gavtacias: obtws yap ovde mpakes TapédXKovc- 
at émakoXovOnoove tv. 
ke. Ileipacov ras cor xwpei Kal 6 TOD 
ayabod avOperov Bios Tod apecxopévou pév Tois 
€k TOV OdwV aTrove“opévols, apKoupévou bé TH 
7, a 
idia mpate dixaia nat d:abécer edpevei. 
/ € , s > a y” \ fal A 
ks’. “E@paxas éxeiva; ide kal tadta. ceavTov 
Ln Tdpacce’ AAwoov ceavTov. dapapTdve TIS; 
€avT@ apaptaver. cupPéBnKé coi TL; KarAdS* &K 
Tov Okov aT apyhs cot ovyxabeiwapto Kal 
, n \ lal \ > ¢ 
cuvexdobeto Tav TO cupBaivov. Td & drop, 
Bpaxds o Bioss Kepdavtéov TO Tapov adv ev- 
, \ 7 a > / 1 
hoyorrig Kat dixn. vie diverpevos.! 
Ko. “Hrow xoopos Svateraypévos 7) KuKewv 
lA 2 / > \ 4 ee \ 
+ cvprrepopnpévos” pév, ANNA Kocpos.t 7 év col 
pév Tis Koopos vUpictacOa Svvata, év Sé TO 
TavTl akoopia, kal Tavta ovTws TavTev s.a- 
Kexpiuévov Kal Siaxeyvpévov kal cvpraborv; 
Kn’. Mérav 480s, Orv 700s, wepicKeres 00s, 
Onpiades, Booxnuatasdes, madapr@des, Baxikor, 
7 , , ’ 
KiBdnrov, Boporoyxov, KaTnALKOV, TUpaVYLKOD. 
> / , e \ ’ \ > 
KO. Ei Eévos Kocpouv 6 pa yvopifov ta év 
cal c 
avT@ ovta, ody Artov Eévos Kal 6 wr yvopilov Ta 
/ ¢ 4 \ \ , 
yivopeva. uyds, 0 hevywr TOV TodLTLKOY AOyor" 
1 Gvemmepws A. 


2 cuumeduppévos Schultz, but cp. Plato, Phaed. 253 x: 
Rendall reads aAAd phy Kéopos }. 





1 iv. 37; ix. 37. Dio (71. 34 §§ 4, 5) says of Marcus oddey 
mpoomotntor eixe, and he is a far better authority than Capit. 
xxix. 6 and xx. 1-4. 2 ix. 4, 38: 3 iii. 11; iv. 34. 


82 

















BOOK IV 


unnecessary, for then neither will distracting actions 
follow. ° 

25. Try living the life of the good man who is 
more than content with what is allotted to him out 
of the whole, and is satisfied with his own acts as just 
and his own disposition as kindly: see how that 
answers. 

26. Hast thou looked on that side of the picture? 
Look now on this! Fret not thyself; study to be 
simple.!. Does a man do wrong? The wrong rests 
with him.? Has something befallen thee? It is well.’ 
Everything that befalls was from the beginning 
destined and spun ® for thee as thy share out of the 
Whole. In a word, life is short. Make profit of 
the present by right reasoning and justice. In thy 
relaxation be sober. 

27. Hither there is a well-arranged Order of things 
or a medley that is confused,> yet still an order. 
Or can a sort of order subsist in thee, while in the 
Universe there is no order, and that too when all 
things, though separated and dispersed, are still in 
sympathetic connexion ? 

28. A black character,6 an unmanly character, 
an obstinate character, inhuman, animal, childish, 
stupid, counterfeit, shameless, mercenary, tyrann- 
ical.’ 

29. If he is an alien in the Universe who has no 
cognizance of the things that are in it, no less is he 
an alien ® who has no cognizance of what is happening 
in it. He is an exile, who exiles himself from civic 

Ve Nd Ovi. LU: eiy. (8. 

7 Marcus here in his vehemence seems to violate his own 
gentle precepts. He must be thinking of some monster of 


iniquity, such as Nero. 


8 iv. 46. cp. 1 St. Peter, iv. 12. 
83 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Tuprés, 6 Karapiov TO voep@ Ompater TTwXKOS, 6 
evoers € érépouv Kal py mdvra & éyov Tap éavrod Ta 
eis Tov Biov Xpyoywa aTroorn pa Koo pou, 0 
adiaTapevos Kal xwpitor é éavTov TOO THIS Kowijs 
puicews oyou bua 708 Sucaperteip Tois oUp- 
Baivovory: éxeiyn yap éper TobT0, n Kal oe 
TperyKev’ ATOTXLT MA TOAEWS, 6 THY idiay Wuyny 
THS TOV Noyixay amocxitov, pas ovens. 

r. ‘O pév xopts XeT@vos prrocogel, o 6é 
xwpis BiBXiov- Giies ouTos Hpiryvpvos, e "Aptous 
ovK EXO, " pnai, “ Kal éupivo TO hoy.” ey@ be 

“ tpopas Tas é« Tov padnudtav ovK éyo, Kal 
EMpEVO.’ 

ra’. To TEXviOV, 0 éuales, pirer, TOUT® Tpoc- 
avaTravov" TO dé Um ohouTov TOD Biov békenbe, 
@s Oeois wey ereteTpohws Ta cEeavTOD TdavTAa ec 
dds THS puxiis, avO parrov dé pndevos pre 
TUpavvoy ponte SodXov ceavTov Kadioras. 

re’. *Erevona ov Noryou Xap TOUS él Ouveo- 
Taciavod Kaipous, der tadtTa mavta* yapodv- 
Tas, TaLdsoTpopovvTas, vocodyTas, aToOvncKoVTas, 
ToNEmouvTas, EéopTalovTas, EwmTopEevopEevous, yewp- 
yoovtas, KoNaKevovTas, av0adifopuévous, UTromTev- 
ovtas, émuBovdevovtas, amobaveiy Tivas evyo- 
pévous, yoyyvfovtas émi tots tapodow, épavtas, 
Oncaupivovtas, wmateias, Bacireias émriOup- 
ovvTas. ovKody éxeivos ev Oo TovTwv Bios ovK 
ete ovdapod. 

Iladuw é emt Tous Katpovs TOUS Tpaiavod pertain Oe 
Taw Ta avTa Tavta: TéOvnKE KaKelvos O Bios. 





1 $t. Matt xiii. 15. ? ii, 16. 
3 viii. 34. cp. St. Paul, Rom. xii. 5; 1 Cor. xii. 20 f. 


84 





BOOK IV 


reason ; blind, he who will not see with the eyes of his 
understanding !; a beggar, he who is dependent on 
another, and cannot draw from his own resources all 
that his life requires; an imposthume? on the 
Universe, he who renounces, and severs himself from, 
the reason of our common Nature, because he is 
ill pleased at what happens—for the same Nature 
brings this into being, that also brought thee ; a limb 
cut off from the community,’ he who cuts off his own 
soul from the soul of al] rational things, which is but 
one. 

30. One philosopher goes without a shirt, a second 
without a book, a third yonder half-naked: says he, 
I am starving for bread, yet cleave I fast to Reason ; and 
I get no living out of my learning, yet cleave I to her. 

31. Cherish the art, though humble, that thou hast 
learned, and take thy rest therein ; and pass through 
the remainder of thy days as one that with his whole 
soul has given all that is his in trust to the Gods, and 
has made of himself neither a tyrant nor a slave to 
any man. 

32. Think by way of illustratiou upon the times of 
Vespasian, and thou shalt see all these things : man- 
- kind marrying, rearing children, sickening, dying, 
warring, making holiday, trafficking, tilling, flattering 
others, vaunting themselves, suspecting, scheming, 
praying for the death of others, murmuring at their 
own lot, loving, hoarding, coveting a consulate, 
coveting a kingdom. Not a vestige of that life of 
theirs is left anywhere any longer. 

Change the scene again to the times of Trajan. 
Again it is all the same ; that life too is dead. In like 


4 See a characteristic anecdote of Marcus’ mother, Capit. 
vi. 9. 


85 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Opotws Kai Tas GAdas emiypadas Ypovev Kal 
drov eOvav émiBewper, Kal BréTE Toco KaTeEV- 
Tabévres weTa pixpov errecov Kat avervOnoar eis 
Ta oTolxela. pdrdiota 5é avatroAnTtéov éxeivous, 
ods avros eyveos Keva. OT LEVOUS, agévtas Tovety 
TO KaTa TY iSiav KaTacKevny Kal TOUTOU arplé 
erOar Kal TovUT@ tpKeiabar. dvaryeatov dé 
AS TO pepvincOar, 6 OTe Kal 1 ema poopy Kad? 
éxdorny mpatw idiav akiav éxer Kal ouppeTpiav. 
oUTeS yap ovK amodvarretrets, éav ro) ert 
Té€ov 7) Tpoone Tept Ta éXdoow KaTayivn. 

Ay’. Ai maha ournbers AeEeus yoconpara 
vov. ovTws ov Kal Ta dvopaTa ToaY TadaL 
TOAVULYHT@V VOV TPOTOY TLVA YAOoOoOHnpPATA éoTL, 
KaprX0s, Kaicwv, Ovorecos, Aévtatos,! car 
oriyov S€ kal Xkeriwv, cal Katov, eita Kal 
AdbyovoTos, eita, Kal “ASpravos Kal ‘Avtovives. 
e€itnha yap mavtTa Kal pv0ddn Tax) yiveras: 
Taxy dé Kal TavTedns AjOn Katéywoer. Kat 
TavTa Neyo éri TOV Gavpacres TOS haprbavrav. 
of yap Aovrol dua TO exmvedoar “ ducToL, 
amvaoto. Ti € Kat éotiv 6AwsS TO aEeiuvynoTor; 
dXov Kevov. Ti ovv eat, Tept 0 Set arrovdnv 
ela pepe Iau; évy tovto, Stavora Sitxala Kab 
mpagtes KowaviKal Kal doyos olos paymore 
Siarpevoac bar Kal duabeots dorrafonevy may 70 
oupBaivov as dvaryKaiov, os yvopyov, @s at’ 
apxyAs ToravTns Kal mnyns péov. 


1 ObdAe~os PA: OvodAdyeoos Mo”: Acovvaros PA: Aev- 
tatos Wyse. 





1 iii. 11 ad fin. 2 vii. 6. 
86 





BOOK IV 


manner contemplate all the other records of past 
time and of entire nations, and see how many after 
all their high-strung efforts sank down so soon in 
death and were resolved into the elements. But 
above all must thou dwell in thought upon those 
whom thou hast thyself known, who, following after 
vanity, neglected to do the things that accorded 
with their own constitution and, cleaving steadfastly 
thereto, to be content with them. And here it is 
essential to remember that a due sense of value ! 
and proportion should regulate the care bestowed on 
every action. For thus wilt thou never give over in 
disgust, if thou busy not thyself beyond what is 
right with the leSser things. ° 

33. Expressions once in use are now obsolete. So 
also the names of those much be-sung? heroes of old 
are in some sense obsolete, Camillus, Caeso, Volesus,? 
Dentatus, and a little later Scipio and Cato, then 
also Augustus, and then Hadrianus and Anto- 
ninus. For all things quickly fade away and become 
legendary, and soon absolute oblivion encairns them. 
And here I speak of those who made an extraordin- 
ary blaze in the world. For the rest, as soon as the 
breath is out of their bodies, it is, Out of sight, out of 
mind. But what, when all is said, is even ever- 
lasting remembrance >? Wholly vanity. What then 
is it that calls for our devotion? This one thing: 
justice in thought, in act unselfishness and a tongue 
that cannot lie and a disposition ready to welcome 
all that befalls as unavoidable, as familiar,’ as issuing 
from a like origin and fountain-head. 


3 Volesus, or Volusus, was the family name of the Valerii. 
Valerius Poplicola must be meant, the obsolete name adding 
to the point. 4 Hom. Od. i. 242. oiv. 19. 6 iv. 44. 


87 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ro. ‘Exov ceavrov tH KrwOo0t cuveridisov, 
Tapéyov avvvicat olotici mote mpdyyace 
Bovxrerar. 

re. lav ebypepov, cai To pvnpovedov Kal Td 
pvnpovevopevov. 

As’. Oewper Sunverdrs mavra. KaTa petaBodny 
yevopeva. Kal eOifou é évvoeiv, Ore ovdev oUTas iret 
n TOV dX@v pars @$ TO TA évta petaBanrrew, 
Kal movetv véa Guova. ore pa yap Tporrov Twa 
may TO Ov Tod é& avrob éoopévou. ov dé pova 
oméppata pavtaly Ta eis yhv 1) pntpav Kata- 
Barnopenn TovTO dé Niav iStorexov. 

Me "H8y reOvHEn, Kal ovT@ ovTE aTroDds, 
obTe ardpaxos, ovTe avironros TOU BraBiva 
av eEwdev, ovre reas Tpos wavTas, ovTE TO 
ppoveiv év ove TO Sixacomparyeiv TUBE uevos. 

Ay’. Ta ayepoviKa avTav bidBrere, Kal Tous 
ppovipous, ola pev pevyouaw, ola 5é Su@bKovow. 

0. Ev aror pip HYEMOVLK® KaKov oov oux 
ipioratae ovee pny év TW TPOTH Kal ETEpOLOT EL 
TOU TEPLEXOVTOS. Tov odY; SOU TO TrEpl KAK@V 
vroXapuBSavov coi éott. TovTO obv pH UTONApB- 
avéTo, Kal TavTa ev exe. KaV TO éyyUTaT@ 
avTOv, TO GwpudTLoY, TéuvnTal, Kaintal, dia- 
muioKnrat, OnTNTAL, Gpas TO UToNapBavov TeEpl 
TOUTEV poptov novyatére TOUTETTL, KpweTo@ 
pyre KaKov TL elvat pajre ayabov, 6 émians 
Sivarat KaK®@ dvipi Kab ayab@ oupBaivew. r) 
yap <xal T@ Tapa dvow>' Kal TO KaTa Hvbow 

1 <xal TG mapa piow> Cas. Gat. 





1 ep. Herodian (i. 2, § 4) of Marcus, rois mpoolovras Befiov- 
uevos, and Aristides, ad Reg. §112 (Jebb). 


88 


BOOK IV 


34. Offer thyself whole-heartedly to Clotho, letting 
_ herspin thy thread to serve what purpose soever she 
will. 

35. Ephemeral all of them, the rememberer as 
well as the remembered ! 

36. Unceasingly contemplate the generation of all 
things through change, and accustom thyself to the 
thought that the Nature of the Universe delights 
above all in changing the things that exist and 
making new ones of the same pattern. For in a 
manner everything that exists is the seed of that 
which shall come out of it. But thou imaginest 
that only to be seed that is deposited in the earth or 
the womb, a view beyond measure unphilosophical. 

37. A moment and thou wilt be dead; and not 
even yet art thou simple, nor unperturbed, nor free 
from all suspicion that thou canst be injured by 
externals, nor gracious! to all, nor convinced that 
wisdom and just dealing are but one. 

38. Consider narrowly their ruling Reason, and 
see what wise men avoid and what they seek after.? 

39. Harm to thee cannot depend on another’s 
ruling Reason, nor yet on any vagary or phase of 
thy environment. On what then? On the power 
that is thine of judging what is evil. Let. this, 
then, pass no judgment, and all is well. Even if 
its closest associate, the poor body, be cut, be burnt, 
fester, gangrene, yet let the part which forms a 
judgment ® about these things hold its peace, that is, 
let it assume nothing to be either good or bad, which 
can befall a good man or a bad indifferently. For 
that which befalls alike the man who lives by the 


2 cp. iil. 4 ad init. This precept does not really contradict 
what is said in iii. 4 etc. "x1, 20. 4 ji. 11 ad med. 


89 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Boobyte enions ovpBaiver, TOUTO OUTE KaTA PvoW 
€oTiv ovTE Tapa puow. 
we ‘Ds € éy Sov TOV Koo MOV play ovotay Kal 
ux piav eméXov TUVEXOS érruvoeiv" Kal TOS 
els aia Onow pay THY TOUTOU mavTa avadiborar 
Kal TOS Opyy peg mavTa mpdooel Kab TOS 
mayra mavTov TOY yewopeveov cuvaitia’ Kai ola 
TLS 1) ounars Kal TUMpENPUTLS. 
pa’. “Vuydpuov ei Bactafov vexpor,” ws "Ext- 
KTNTOS Edeyev. 
pB. Ovd& éore Kakov tots ev petaBory 
yuvopsvors @s ov0d€ ayabov <tois> ex peTaBorrs 
UpraTapEevors. 
py’. Tlorapos TUS EK TOV yevopeveov Kat peda 
Biavov 0 ai@v: dpa Te yap On exaorov Kab 
Tapevnvertat, Kal GAO Trapadpépetar, TO Oé 
évexOnoetat. 
pe. Tay 70 ovpBaivov ovTws ovvndes Kal 
yreprpon, @S TO podov ev TO éapt Kal oT opa 
év 7o Oéper TovobToy yap Kal vooos wal Gavatos 
i Braodnpia Kal émiBovrAn Kat boa Tovs 
ite p604 evppaiver 7 AvTrei. 
pe. Ta ef fs del Tots TPONyNTAPEVOLS oixeios 
eriyivetat’ ov yap olov KataplOunats Tis éotiv 
ar npTNHEVOS * Kal povov TO KaTnvary kag LEvov 
éxouea, arXa ouvadera eUAoyOS" Kal aomep 
CUVTETAKTAL TUVNppoTpeVaS TA SVTA, OUTWS TA 


1 Ganptnpévor Gat. 





1 A Stoic doctrine, Diog. Laert. Zeno. 36. 
2 For avadldoc0a, cp. v. 26. > 11, 11. 
4 Not now found in his works. Swinburne has ‘‘ A little 


go 


re 


BOOK IV 


rule, and the man who lives contrary to the rule, of 
Nature, is neither in accordance with Nature nor 
contrary to it. 

40. Cease not to think of the Universe as one living 
Being,' possessed of a single Substance and a single 
Soul; and how all things trace back to its single 
sentience ;? and how it does all things by a 
single impulse ; and how all existing things are joint 
causes of all things that come into existence; and 
how intertwined in the fabric is the thread and how 
closely woven the web.’ 

41. Thou art a little soul bearing up a corpse, as 
Epictetus said.* 

42. Nothing is evil to that which is subject to 
change, even as there is no good for that which 
exists as the result of change. 

43. As a river® consisting of all things that come 
into being, aye, a rushing torrent, is Time. No 
sooner is a thing sighted than it is carried past, and © 
lo, another is"passing, and it too will be carried away. 

44, Everything that happens is as usual and 
familiar,6 as the rose in spring and the fruit in 
autumn. The same applies to disease and death 
and slander and treachery and all that gladdens the 
foolish or saddens them. 

45. That which comes after always has a close 
relationship to what has gone before. For it is not 
like some enumeration of items separately taken 
and following a mere inevitable sequence, but there 
is a rational connection ; and just as existing things 
have been combined in a harmonious order, so also 


soul for a little bears up this corpse which is man” (Hymn 
to Proserpine). cp. Ignat. ad Smyrn. 5 vexpopdpos. 
5 ii, 17; v. 23; vi. 15 (Heraclitus), 6 iv. 33. 


91 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


yevopeva. ov Scadox7y Wirnv adra Oavpactny 
TWA oiKkeloTnTa. éupaiver. 

ps’. "Ael tod ‘“Hpaxnrertetov peuvqcOar bre 
“ wis davaros bdwp” ryevécOar, kal “ bdaTos 
Oavatos aépa” yevécOat, kai “dépos tip,” Kal 
EuTranw. peuvjoOar 5é Kal “Tov émiiavOavo- 
Hévou, } 1) 0d0s ayet"” Kal Ste  @ paddioTa Sunver- 
ary opthodar,” Oyo 7 Ta Oda Stocodvru, “* TOUT@ 
Siadépovras” kab “ols xa? neepav eyxupodar, 
TadTa, avtois &éva paiveras” kat Ste ov Set 

“@omep Kab0evdovtas Toleiv Kat réyerv” Kal 
yap Kal tote Soxodpev rroveiy Kal rAéyev" Kal 
bre od Set “ maitdas TOKE@VOY,” 1 rovtéott KaTa 
apirov, “ Kabore mapedypapev.” 

pe. “Qarrep el Tis oot Gedy elzrev, ére avpvov 
teOvnén i) Twavtws ye els Tpitnv, odK ér av 
Tapa peya émouod TO els tpitny padRov u) 
avptov, el ye wn eoxaTos dryevv7ns el: TOCOV yap 
éore TO peTagy; oUTws Kal TO els jToNXoo TOV 
eros padrov } avpiov pndev péya. elvar vomite. 

py’. ’Evvoetv TUVEXOS TOOL pep _latpot 
amorebuiKact TOAAGKLS Tas odpis wumép Ttav 
appe®ctov. cvoTacartes’ TOTOL 5é pwadnpwaTtiKol 
a\Xwv Oavatous ds TL meya Tpoemovres® TOoOL 
dé hirdcogor, mepl avarou » aavacias pupia 
SraTewdpevor Toco 5é apiateis Tohhovs Gro- 
Kreivavtes’ mocot S€ TvUpavvor é€ovoia >vyav 


1 roxéwv Gv PAD: toxedvov Rend. This Ionic word was 
recovered for Meleager by Headlam (Anth. Pal. vii. 79). 





1 vi. 38; vii. 9. 
2 A favourite with Marcus, see Index II. 3 vi. 42. 


92 


a. re, 


Se ee 


BOOK IV 


all that comes into being bears the stamp not of a 
mere succession but of a wonderful relationship.! 

46. Always bear in mind what Heraclitus? said: 
The death of earth is to pass into water, and the death 
of water to pass into air, and of air to pass into fire, 
and so back again. Bear in mind too: the wayfarer 
who forgets the trend of his way, and that men are at 
variance with the one thing with which they are in the 
most unbroken communion, the Reason that administers 
the whole Universe; and that what they encounter 
every day, this they deem strange; and that we must 
not act and speak like men asleep —for in fact even in 
sleep we seem to act and speak ;—and that there 
should be nothing of the children from parents style, 
that is, no mere perfunctory what our Fathers have 
told us. 

47. Just as, if a God had told thee, Thou shalt 
die to-morrow or in any case the day after, thou wouldest 
no longer count it of any consequence whether it 
were the day after to-morrow or to-morrow, unless 
thou art in the last degree mean-spirited,’ for how 
little is the difference!®—so also deem it but a 
trifling thing that thou shouldest die after ever so 
many years rather than to-morrow. 

48, Cease not to bear in mind how many physicians 
are dead after puckering up their brows so often 
over their patients; and how many astrologers after 
making a great parade of predicting the death of 
others ;7 and how many philosophers after endless 
disquisitions on death and immortality; how many 
great captains after butchering thousands*; how 
many tyrants after exercising with revolting insolence 

4 cp, the story of Mycerinus (Herod. ii. 129), and 
M. Arnold’s poem. 5 Sen. V.Q. ii. 59 ad med. 

6 Or interval, cp. iv. 50. 7 iii. 3. Epict. iii. 10,15. § ibid. 

93 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


peta Sewod ppvdypatos ws abavator Kexpnpévor 
mocar d€ TONES GAa, WW odTwS eiT@, TEOVN- 
Kkacw, “EXixn cal Tlopmrnio: cal “Hpxrdvov cal 
Garrat avapiOunrot. 

"EmuOt O& Kal bcous oldas, GdXov én” AAO 6 
pev TOUTOV Kndevoas eita éfer an, o 6é exeivov" 
mavTa o€ év Bpaxet. TO yap ddov, Karvoeiy a ael Ta 
avOporiva os eprjpepa Kal evTeNi, Kal ex Ges bev 
pvEdpiov, avptov 5é Tapiyos 7) téppa. TO akapiatov 
oy TovTOV TOD Xpovov Kara puow due Betv, 
Kab ihe Katanioat, @s ay é éhaia TET ELpos 
yevouevn Erimtev evpnuodoa Tv éveyxodoav 
Kal ydpw eidvia 7@ pvcavre dévdpy. 

(Be. “Opovov eivat TH aKa, 7 Sunvends Ta 
Kipara Tpoapyacerar 9 Oe éorne, Kal Trepi 
aura Koumlferau Ta preyunvarta ToD Béaros. 

- Aruyisé eyo, ore tobTO How ouvéBn.” ovpevoor 
Gdn’ ‘ evTUXS eyo, Ore TOUTOU pot ovpBeBn- 
KOTOS dAUTTOS SiaTen ouTe ome <Tov> mapovTos 
Opavopevos ouTe <10> émr.ov poRoupevos.” 
ovpSivar pep yap. 70 ToLobTo mavtt édvvato: 
duos dé od Tas éml TOUT@ ay SueTéhecer. dua 
tL ovv éxeivo paddov arvynpa TovTo eUTUXN MA} 
éyeus dé dXws arixnya avOpamov, 0 d ovK éorw 
amroTevy pa Tis puoews ToD avOpwrrov; amro- 
Tevypa be THS pucews TOU avOporrov evar Soxel 
oot, } Ha) mapa To BovAnpa tis hicews avtob 
cor; ti ovv; TO Bovhnpa pepddnnas: py Th 
ovy TO oupBeBnkds TodTO Kwrver oe Sixatov 





1 Lucian uses it, Charon 23. 
* x. 34. This is invariably referred to 6 uév, ‘‘ another 
closed his eyes,” but it must surely answer to rodror. 


94 





BOOK IV 


their power of life and death, as though themselves 
immortal ; and how many entire cities are, if I may 
use the expression, dead,} Helice and Pompeii and 
Herculaneum, and others without number. 

Turn also to all, one after another, that come 
within thine own knowledge. One closed a friend’s 
eyes and was then himself laid out, and the friend 
who closed his,? he too was laid out—and all this in 
a few short years. In a word, fail not to note how 
short-lived are all mortal things, and how paltry— 
yesterday a little mucus,® to-morrow a mummy or 
burnt ash. Pass then through this tiny span of time 
in accordance with Nature, and come to thy journey’s 
end with a good grace, just as an olive falls when it 
is fully ripe, praising the earth that bare it and 
grateful to the tree that gave it growth. 

49. Be like a headland of rock on which the 
waves break incessantly; but it stands fast and 
around it the seething of the waters sinks to rest. 

Ah, unlucky am I, that this has befallenme! Nay, but 
rather, lucky am I, that though this has befallen me, 
yet am I still unhurt, neither crushed by the present 
nor dreading the future. For something of the 
kind could have befallen everyone, but everyone 
would not have remained unhurt in spite of it. Why 
then count that rather a misfortune than this a good 
fortune? And in any case dost thou reckon that a 
misfortune for a man which is not an aberration from 
his nature? And wouldst thou have that to be an 
aberration from a man’s nature, which does not 
contravene the will of his nature! What then? 
This will thou hast learnt to know. Does what has 
befallen thee hinder thee one whit from being just, 


3 vi. 13. 
95 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


eivat, peyadowvyov, c@dpova, eupova, am pomr- 
@TOD, adianpevo tov, aidypova, érevdepor, Tada, 
ov TapovTov % pvows n TOD avOporrov amréxel 
Ta dia; péuvnoo ovrrov emt TavTos TOD els 
AUTHY GE Tpoaryouévov, TOUT@ xpHaAas 7 
Soypare: “Ovx ore ToUTO arUXn pA, GXXA TO 
pépey avo ryervataas evTUXNMA. 

v'. "Tdt@tixov per, Spas 5é dvuoTtiKov Bon? npa 
™ pos Oavarov Kxatadpovna ty ) avaTroAnots TOV 
YAla xpos évOraTpiypavTov Tp Shy. TL ov avtois 
Tréov 7) TiS a@pPOLS; TaYTwWS TOU TOTE Kewral, 
Kabdcxvavos, Paros, *lovAavos, Aérudos, H el 
TLS TOLODTOS, Ot moAovs éEnveyxay, eita éEnvéxO- 
no ay" dov, puxpov éore To SidoTnpa, Kal 
tobTo 80 dc@v Kal pe” oioy éFavThovpevov kal 
ev ole Topatio; Hn ouv os mpaypa. Prérre 
yap orice TO axaves Tob aidvos, Kal TO Tmpoow 
ado arevpov. év 67 TouT@, TL Stahéper 0 TpL- 


HE pos TOU Tpeyepnviou; 


va’. ?Eni thy oUVTOLOY ael Tpexer ovvTomos Oé 
) KATA puow, Gore KaTa TO Dyéo TaTov may 
Néyew Kal mpdocet. amarha ce yap U} 


TovavTn mpodecrs KOT OY Kal otpateias, | Kal 
Taons oixovopias Kat Komrweias. 


1 erparyyelas (vacillation) Stephan. But Pollux in his Ono- 
masticon, dedicated to Commodus in Marcus’ lifetime, rejects 
the word. 





1 iv. 48, § 2. 2 iv. 47. 
3 rpryephvios, a clever conflation between tpryépwy and 
Tephvios, an epithet of Nestor from a town in Messenia. 


fe 


96 





. 


BOOK IV 


high-minded, chaste, sensible, deliberate, straight- 
forward, modest, free, and from possessing all the 
other qualities, the presence of which enables a 
man’s nature to come fully into its own? Forget 
not in future, when anything would lead thee 
to feel hurt, to take thy stand upon this axiom: 
This is no misfortune, but to bear it nobly is good 
fortune. 

50. An unphilosophical, but none the less an 
effective, help to the contemning of death is to tell 
over the names of those who have clung long and 
tenaciously to life. How are they better off than 
those who were cut off before their time? After all, 
_ they lie buried somewhere at last, Cadicianus, Fabius, 
- Julianus, Lepidus, and any others like them, who 
after carrying many to their graves were at last 
carried to their own.! Small, in any point of view, is 
the difference ? in length, and that too lived out to 
the dregs amid what great cares and with what sort 
of companions and in what kind of a body! Count 
it then of no consequence. For look at the yawning 
gulf of Time behind thee, and before thee at another 
Infinity to come. In this Eternity the life of a baby 
of three days and the life of a Nestor of three 
centuries * are as one.* 

51. Run ever the short way; and the short way is 
the way of Nature, that leads to all that is most 
sound in speech and act. For a resolve such as this 
is a release from troubles and strife, from all mental 
reservation ® and affectation. 


4 cp. Ecclesiasticus, xli. 4. 5 iv. 19. 


97 


BIBAION E 


a’. "Op pou 6 orav ducoKvas eEeyetpn, mpoxetpov 
éot@, dtu “ él avO prov epryov eyelpopat” ere 
ody" ducKohaive, el mopevopar érl TO moveiv, ov 
Evexev yeyova, Kal ov xapuv T porpy wa eis Tov 
Koo (ov; H ert tobTo karecKevac pat, iva KaraKelp- 
€VOS €V oTpeparious éwauTov Oddo; ; AXA TodTO 
iotov.” TpOs TO iberC at oby yeyovas; dros 5é 
od * T pos metowv,® ) Tpos évépyetar ; ov Brérrets 
Ta gutdapia, Ta orpovdapia, TOUS pUpENKas, TOUS 
apaxvas, Tas pedooas TO tovov To.ovaas, To4 
Kal’ abras gvyKpoToucas Koo Lov; émerta ov ov 
Oéreus Ta dvOporica Toueiv; ov TPEXELS él TO 
KaTa TH ony pow; «Adda Sef Kal avaTrav- 
eoOar.” pnp Kayo" Edeoxe HEVTOL Kal ToUTOU 
pétpa 2) pros: edwxe pévTOU ral Tob éoGiew wal 
mivew" Kat wos ov vmrép Ta HET pa, imép Ta 
apKodvra mpoxwpeis év 5é Tais mpdkeow ovK Ett, 
arn’ évtds Tod duvarod. 


1 +i obv Menag. 2 ob PAD: ot Schmidt. 

3 pouty P: <rd> moety Cor.: roinow Wilam. 

4 roy PD: ovyxocpuotoas P. 

wae Su 

2 Marcus in younger days was an early riser, getting up 
even at 3 o’clock (Fronto, ad Caes. iv. 5) or 5 o’clock (ibid. 


98 








BOOK V 


1. Ar daybreak,! when loth to rise,? have this 
thought ready in thy mind: J am rising for a man’s 
work, Am I then still peevish that I am going to do 
that for which I was born and for the sake of which 
I came into the world? Or was I made for this, that 
I should nuzzle under the bed-clothes and keep my- 
self warm? But this is pleasanter. Hast thou been 
made then for pleasure, in a word, I ask thee, to be 
acted upon or to act? Consider each little plant, 
each tiny bird, the ant, the spider, the bee, how they 
go about their own work and do each his part for the 
building up of an orderly Universe. Dost thou then 
refuse to do the work of a man? Dost thou not 
hasten to do what Nature bids thee. But some rest, 
too, is necessary. I do not deny it. Howbeit Nature 
has set limits to this, and no less so to eating and 
drinking. Yet thou exceedest these limits and ex- 
ceedest sufficiency. But in acts it is no longer so; 
there thou comest short of the possibility. 


iv. 6). He admits sleepiness of habit (ibid. i..4; v. 59), but 
says it is so cold in his bedroom that he can scarcely put his 
hands outside his bedclothes. Fronto constantly urges him 
to take more sleep (ibid. ii. 5; v. 1,2; de Fer. Als. 2, Nab. 
p. 227): sleep as much as a free man should! At the last he 
suffered dreadfully from insomnia, see Galen xiv. 3 (Kiihn) ; 
Dio 71. 24, § 4. ' 


99 
H 2 


2 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Ov yap gircis ceavtov: ere Tot Kal THV 
gvcw av cov Kal to BovAnpa TavTyns édirers. 
ddror Sé tas téyvas éavt@yv irodvTes ovy- 
KaTaTyKovTaL Tols Kat avTas épyois ddouTOL 
Kai dowtor ov Thy piow THY ceavTod éXNacooV 
TYmas 7) O TOpEUTIS TI TOPEUTLKHY, i) 0 OpXNaTHsS 
THY OpXnoTLeiy, i) 0 Piddpyvpos TO apryvpiov,' 
0 Kevodokos tO So€dpiov. Kal ovdto, Stray 
mpootabacw, ote payely ote KxorpnOfvar 
Pédkovot padrov 7) Tadta ocvvav&ev, mpos a 
Suadépovrar: col Sé ai xowwrvixal mpdakes ed- 
TEAEO TEpat daivoytat Kal hocovos omovdns aEvat; 

B. ‘Os ebxorov av@cacOa Kai atanreias 
Twaicav pavtaciav [THv] 6xAnpav 7) avoixeroy Kal 
evOvs év radon yadyvn elvat. 
ry. "Aksoy éavrov xpive mavtos oOyou Kal 
épyou Tov Kata pio: Kal wy oe TeptoTTaTw! 7 
éraxorov0odcd Tivav pméprpis 7) ROyos, GANG, Et 
Kadov mempayOar 7) cipnoOa, ur) ceavTov aT- 
akiov. éxeivor wey yap id.ov ayepovtkov Exovat Kal 
idia opp xp@vtTar. & ov pn TreptBrérrov, GAN 
evOelav Tépatve axorov0ay TH pice TH idia Kal 
TH Kown pia de audotépwy TovTaY % odds. 

&. ITlopedopa: Sua tov cata diow, péxpt 
Tecov avaTavoopal, évatroTrvevaas ev TOUT, €& 
ov Kal?’ jpépav avarrvéw, Tec@y bé eri TtovTe, éE 
ov xal TO oTreppadtiov o0 TaTHp wou cuvéreEe Kal 
TO aipatiov 1) unTnp Kal TO yardKTLov 7 Tpodds* 

1 Cor. for raperndrw. 





1 ep. of Marcus himself naudros nad ppovrio: retpuxwuévos 
(Herodian i. 3, § 1) and Julian, Conviv. 407. See Plutarch’s 


too 





BOOK V 


For thou lovest not thyself, else surely hadst thou 
loved thy nature also and to do her will. But others 
who love their own art wear themselves to a shadow 
with their labours over it, forgetting to wash or take 
food.t But thou holdest thine own nature in less 
honour than the chaser of metal his art of chasing, than 
the dancer his dancing, than the miser his money- 
bags, than the popularity-hunter his little applause. 
And these, when they are exceptionally in earnest, 
are ready to forgo food and sleep, so that they 
forward the things in which they are interested. 
But dost thou deem the acts of a social being of less 
worth and less deserving of attention ? 

2, How easy a thing it is to put away and blot 
out every impression? that is disturbing or alien, 
and to be at once in perfect peace. 

3. Deem no word or deed that is in accord with 
Nature to be unworthy of thee, and be not plucked 
aside by the consequent censure of others or what 
they say,® but if a thing is good to do or say, judge 
not thyself unworthy of it. For those others 
have their own ruling Reason and follow their 
own bent. Do not thou turn thine eyes aside, but 
keep to the straight path, following thy own and 
the universal Nature; and the path of these twain 
is one.* 

4. I fare forth through all that Nature wills until 
the day when I shall sink down and rest from my 
labours, breathing forth my last breath into the air 
whence I daily draw it in, and falling upon that 
earth, whence also my father gathered the seed, and 
my mother the blood, and my nurse the milk ; whence 


story of Nikias the painter (de Sene Polit. 4 ; Non posse suav. 
vivere sec. Hpicur. 11). vii. 29; viii. 47. 
3x. ll. ep. 1 St. Peter, ii. 90, 4 iv, 29. 
ro} 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


e& ov Kal? jwepav ToToUToLs ETECL Booxopas, Kal 
apdevouat, 0 0 péper pe TaTODYTA, Kal eis TOTAadTA 
> 
amoxpwjevov avT@. 

é. Apipornta cov OUvUK exovar Gavpacat. 
éotm* adda _erepa TONN4, ep ov OvK exeus 
etmreiv a Ov yep mepuKa. EKeiva Ovv mapéxov, 
dmep bra éotiv emt col, TO ai Bomror, TO TELVOY, 
70 peperrovor, | TO ah iAdovor, TO cpeprpiporpov, 
TO oduyodeés, TO evpevés, TO édevGepor, TO atrépiao- 
ov, TO adbdvapov, TO peyanretov.! ouK aicOdavy 
TOTa HON mapéxer Bar duvdpevos, ep’ ov ) ovdepia 
apvias cal dverruTndevoTNTOS mpopacis, 6 Spas ete 
KATO pévEeLs Exon; i) Kai yoryucew, Kal yNo- 
ypever Oar, Kal KONAKEVELY, KAL 70 CWMATLOV KaT- 
avteac bau, Kab apecxever Oat, Kat TeprrepeveOau, 
Kal Tocaita pimtavecOar TH uy Ova TO adds 
Kateokevdobar avayxdty; ov, a Tors Oeods. 
andra. TOUT@Y pep Tanrat dmnddax Gar edvvaco* 
povov €, e« apa, ws BpaduvTepos Kal évoTrap- 
aKxorov0ntoTEpos KkataywocKkec0at' Kal todTo dé 
aoKnTéov pn TapevOvpoupéevm nde ewhirndodvte 
TH veobeia. 

Fc ake pév tis €or, Otay TL deEcov mept Twa 
mpatn, TpOoXelpos Kab Aoyicacbar avT@ THY nap. 
o Oe {Tos TOUTO pev ov TPOXELpOS, dddws HEVTOL 
Tap eauT®, @s rept XPE@o TOV Siavocirat Kal 
oldev, 0 TeTroinkxev. 0 Sé€ TIS TpOTOV TLVa Ovde 

1 Gueyadetov Rend. 
1 vii. 67; cp. Fronto, ad Ant. i. 2. 
2 cp. Hor. Ep. i. 1. 28-32. 3! ep, .i! 5. 
+ cp. Aristides, ad Reg. § 114 (Jebb) of Marcus, ovdenlas 
noovais ATTnuévos; and Fronto, de Fer. Als. Nab. p. 225, 


volpem facilius quis tibi quam voluptatem conciliaverit. 
102 








MERE TT SEITE 


BOOK V 


daily for so many years I am fed and watered; 
which bears me as I tread it under foot and make 
full use of it in a thousand ways. 

5. Sharpness of wit men cannot praise thee for.! 
Granted! Yet there are many other qualities of 
which thou canst not say: I had not that by nature.? 
Well then, display those which are wholly in thy 
power, sterling sincerity, dignity, endurance of toil,® 
abstinence from pleasure.*| Grumble not at thy lot, 
be content with little,° be kindly, independent, 
frugal, serious, high-minded. Seest thou not how 
many virtues it is in thy power to display now, in 
respect of which thou canst plead no natural in- 
capacity or incompatibility, and yet thou art 
content still with a lower standard? Or art thou 
forced to be discontented, to be grasping, to flatter, 
to inveigh against the body, to play the toady and the 
braggart, and to be so unstable in thy soul, because 
forsooth thou hast no natural gifts? By the Gods, 
No! but long ere now couldest thou have shaken 
thyself free from all this and have lain under the 
imputation only, if it must be so, of being somewhat 
slow and dull of apprehension. And this too thou 
must amend with training and not ignore thy 
dulness or be in love with it. 

6. One man, when he has done another a kindness, 
is ready also to reckon on a return.’ A second is 
not ready to do this, but yet in his heart of hearts 
ranks the other as a debtor, and he is conscious of 
what he has done® But a third is in a manner not 

5 cp. i. 5; Julian, Conviv. 427. 

§ Or humble, if we read aueyadciov, but cp. v. 9. 

7 St. Luke vi. 34; xiv. 12. 


8 Sen. de Benef. ii. 6. But see the speech of Marcus to his 
soldiers (as reported by Dio, 71, 26, §2) on the revolt of Cassius. 


I03 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


older, 0 memroinxer, adda Sporos: éoTiv aprédo 
Borpuv éveyxovon Kab Hyder ado ™pogeTt- 
Enroven pera To atrak Tov i6cov KapTov evnvox- 
éval, @S trmos Spay, KUOV ixvedoas, pédiooa, 
pen Tomoaca. avO por os & <éy>! ed Tonoas 
OuK emBoarar,” anda peta Baiver ep’ Erepov, @S 
dpm edos éml TO wadw €v TH @pa Tov BoTpUP 
every Kev. 

“"Ev tovtous ovv Set elvat toils tpoTrov Tiva 
aTrapaKkoXov0ntws avTo TrotovaL;” vai. “’AXAN 
avTo Ttodto Sei tapaxorovbciv: idvov yap 
gyot tod Kowveovicod TO aia bavec Oat, ore 
KOWOVLKOS _evepyel, Kal vn Ata Bovrea Bar Kat 
TOV KOLV@VvOV aicbécOar.” arnOés pév éoti, 6 
Aéyers” TO oe viv Aeyomevov mapecdéyn Sa 
TOUTO eon els éxeivav, Ov 7 poTepov érreuvnoOnv: 
Kal yap EXELVOL NOYLKH TLVE miBavornre maparyov- 
Tat. éav dé _Gedjons ouveivat, Ti twoté éott TO 
Aev/opevor, i) poBod, mw fn Tapa TOUTO Tapaditns 
TL Epyov KOLVMVLKOD. 

Es Evy “AOnvaiwr ‘“Toov, voop, ) pire 
Zed, Kata Tis apoupas THS "AOnvaioy Kal TOV 
mediov.” Hrot ov det evyerOat } odtTws aTAOS 
Kal eevdepas. 

". ‘Orrotov TL é€oTL TO Aeyouevov, 6re ** oup- 
éragev 0 ‘Aokdnr ios TOUT@ immaciay, n puxpo- 
Aovoiar, 7) avuTodnotay™” TowovTov éote Kal TO 
ouvétake TovTm 7 TaY Grwv dats VvoTOV, 7 

1 <@y> cp. x. 8. 2 émonara AD, 
1 vii. 73; ix. 42,§4. cp. Fronto, de Nep. 2 ad fin. 
2 xi. 4; xii. 29. 
3 e.g. a man who acts on the precept, ‘‘ Let not thy left 


104 





BOOK V 


conscious of it, but is like the vine that has borne a 
cluster of grapes, and when it has once borne its due 
fruit looks for no reward beyond,! as it is with a 
steed when it has run its course, a hound when it has 
singled out the trail, a bee when she hath made her 
comb. And so a man when he hath done one thing 
well, does not cry it abroad, but betakes himself to a 
second,’ as a vine to bear afresh her clusters in due 
season. 

A man then must be of those who act thus as i were 
unconsciously? Aye. But surely he must be conscious 
of what he is doing, for it ts, we are told, the peculiar 
attribute of the man of true social instincts to be aware 
that he puts such instincts into practice,? and by heaven 
to mish that his fellow should be aware of it too. True; 
but thou misconceivest the present argument, and 
wilt consequently be of the number of those whom I 
mentioned before ; for in fact they are led astray by 
reasoning which has a plausible look. But if thou 
thinkest it worth while to understand what has been 
said, fear not that thou wilt be led thereby to neglect 
any social act. 

7. A prayer of the Athenians: Rain, Rain, O dear 
Zeus, upon the corn-land of the Athenians* and their 
meads. Hither pray not at all, or in this simple and 


_ frank fashion. 


8. We have all heard, Aesculapius has prescribed for 
so and so riding exercise, or cold baths,> or walking bare- 
foot. Precisely so it may be said that the Universal 
Nature has prescribed for so and so sickness or 


_ hand know what thy right hand doeth,” must act so designedly. 


+ cp. Pausan. i. 24, § 3. 
5 See the amazing story of an icy bathe prescribed so to 
Aristides (Sacr. Serm. ii. 529, Jebb ff.). 


105 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


THpwoL, 7} aToBoArAny 7) AXXO TL TOY TOLOUTOY. 
Kal yap éxel TO “ovvérake” tovodroy TL onpaiver: 
érake ToUT@ TodTO ws KaTaAANAOY Tpods dyievay: 
Kal évtadda 70 cupBaivoy éExdot@ TéTaKTal Tas 
avT@® KaTadANAOY TpOS THY Eipappevnv. OUTwS 
yap Kat “cvpBaivew” adta hiv Néyopev, @s Kal 
Tovs TeTpaywvous AiOous év Tois Teiyeow 7 ev 
tais mupapict, ‘ovpBaivew’ oi Texvitas Néyovet, 
cuvappolovtes GAAHAOLS TH TOLG UVPETEL. Gros 
yap appovia éotl pia, Kal OoTEp ex TaVT@V TOV 
TOLATOV O KOTMOS TOLODTOY THua TupTANpODTAL, 
obTas €x TaVToY TOV aiTioy 7H Eiuappévyn TOLAvTH 
aitia ovprAnpodtar. voovor dé, 5 réyo, Kal ot 
Téreov idtatar: haci yap, “Todto épepev avTo.” 
ovKody TOUTO TOUT@ épépeTo, Kal TOTO TOUTw 
cuveTaTteTo. Sexapeba otv avitd, ws éxeiva, 
&o ’AckAnmids cuvtatte. moda yodv Kal év 
éxelvors éotl tpaxéas adrdr\ga aoralopeda TH 
érrids THS rytetas. 
To.odtov Ti cou SokeitTw, avuvols Kal cuVYTédAELA 
TaV TH Kowh dvoe SoxotvvTwr, olov %) on Uyiera: 
Kal oUTws aomavou Tay TO ywopevor, Kav aTnVvEoT- 
epov doch, dia TO éxeioe ayeuv, él THY TOU KOo MoU 
byievav, kai THY Tov Atos evodiay Kal edirpayiav. 
ov yap avy TodTO Tit Efeper, ci py TO GAM CUD- 
épepev. ovde yap 1) TUXODGA duos Peper TL, 6 
Hh TO Storxovpév@ wT’ adtis KaTadAHAOV eoTLV. 
— Odxodv Kata Sto Royous otépyew xpi TO 
cupBaivoy gor Kal? &va pév, btt col éyiveto, 
106 ; 





BOOK V 


maim. or loss or what not of the same kind. For, in 
the former case, prescribed has some such meaning as 
this: He ordained this for so and so as conducive 
to his health; while in the latter what befalls each 
man has been ordained in some way as conducive 
to his destiny. For we say that things fall to us, 
as the masons too say that the huge squared 
stones in walls and pyramids fall into their places, 
adjusting themselves harmoniously to one another 
in a sort of structural unity. For, in fine, there is 
one harmony of all things, and just as from all 
bodies the Universe is made up into such a body as 
it is, so from all causes is Destiny made up into 
such a Cause. This is recognized by the most 
unthinking, for they say: Fate brought this on him. 
So then this was brought on this man, and this 
prescribed for this man. Let us then accept 
our fate, as we accept the prescriptions of Aes- 
culapius. And in fact in these, too, there are many 
“bitter pills,’ but we welcome them in hope of 


health. 


Take much the same view of the accomplishment 


_ and consummation of what Nature approves as of thy 


_ health, and so welcome whatever happens, should it 


even be somewhat distasteful, because it contributes 
to the health of the Universe and the well-faring 
and well-doing of Zeus himself. For he had not 
brought this on a man, unless it had _ brought 
welfare to the Whole. For take any nature thou 
wilt, it never brings upon that which is under its 
control anything that does not conduce to its 
interests. 

For two reasons then it behoves thee to acquiesce 
in what befalls: one, that it was for thee it took 


107 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Kal gol ovvetatteto, Kal mpos GE Tas elyxer, 
avobev éx tov mpecBuTadTwv aitiovy avy- 
KrwoOopevov' Kal’ étepov Sé, bt TH TO Grov 
dioixobvtTt THS Evodias Kal Tis auVTEXELas 

\ \ 4 n ipl > a \ 207 
Kal vn) Ata THS cuppovis abriis Kal TO dia 
eis Exaotov HKov aitiv éoTiv. mnpovTat yap 
TO OAOKANpOD, eav Kal OTLOdY SiaKd ns THs cuv- 
apeias Kal ovveyxeias, WoTEP TOV popiwv, OUTw 
67) Kal TOV aitiwov. SiaxomTes 5é, dcov émi coi, 
btav dSveapeoThs, Kal TpoTroy Tia avazpeis.} 

0. My otxyaive pnd aravdav pndé aro- 
dvometeiv, ef py) KaTaTUKVOUTAaL GOL TO amo 
Soyudtov opbav éxacta tmpaccew* adda €EK- 
xpovabévta Tadw érraviévar Kal acpeviterr, ei TA 
TrELw avOpwmixotepa, Kal gireiv TodTO, éfp’ 6 
érmravépyn Kal pi) OS TpoOs Tralaywyov Tiv 
hirocodiav éraviévary aX ws ol dpOardpuevTes 
mMpos TO oToyyapiov Kal TO wWOV, MS AAXOS TPOS 
KaTaT AAC MA, WS TpPoS KaTaLOVHTLY. ovTwS yap 
ovdevy émidetEn TO TelOapxeiv TO AOYH, GAA 
TMpocavaravon avT@. péuvnoo oé, Stu diro- 
copia pova Oérer, & % vows cov Oére od dé 
adro HOeres od Kata hiow. “Ti yap TovT@V 
mTpoonvértepov; 1%) yap Hoov7 ovxt S:a TovTO 
oparnret; ardra Oéacat, ei mpoonvéctepoy peyado- 
woyia, €devOepia, amroTns, evyvopoovvn, 
OOLOTNS. avTHS yap Ppovncews TL TpoanVvéaTeEp- 

1 Gvawpis PA. 





! Or, from above. 2 cp. Sen. Ep. 74. 
108 


BOOK V 


place, and was prescribed for thee, and had reference 
in some sort to thee, being a thread of destiny spun 
from the first | for thee from the most ancient causes ; 
the other, that even what befalls each individual is the 
cause of the well-faring, of the consummation? and 
by heaven of the very permanence of that which 
controls the Universe. For the perfection of the 
Whole is impaired, if thou cuttest off ever so little of 
the coherence and continuance of the Causes no less 
than of the parts. And thou dost cut them off, as 
far as lies with thee, and bring them to an end, when 
thou murmurest. 

9. Do not feel qualms? or despondency or dis- 
comfiture if thou dost not invariably succeed in 
acting from right principles; but when thou art 
foiled,t come back again to them, and rejoice if on 
the whole thy conduct is worthy of a man, and love 
the course to which thou returnest. Come not back 
to Philosophy as to a schoolmaster, but as the sore- 
_ eyed to their sponges and their white of egg, as this 
patient to his plaster and that to his fomentations. 
_ Thus wilt thou rest satisfied with Reason, yet make 
no parade of obeying her. And forget not that Philo- 
_sophy wishes but what thy nature wishes, whereas 
thy wish was for something else that accords not 
with Nature. Yes, for it would have been the acme 
of delight. Ah, is not that the very reason why 
pleasure trips us up? Nay, see if these be not more 
delightful still: high-mindedness, independence, 
simplicity, tenderness of heart,® sanctity of life. 
Why what is more delightful than wisdom herself, 


3 Lit. be nauseated (cp. viii. 24). 4 v. 36. 
5 Galen xii. 17 (Kiihn) calls Marcus ciyvépwr, wérpios, 
| hwepos, mpaos. 


109 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ov; dTay TO anTaLoToOV, Kal evpovy ev Tac THs 
TapakorovOntixhs Kal émiotnpovixhs Svvdpews 
évOupnOys. 

/ \ \ / 3 tA / \ 
U. Ta pév mpdypata év tovaitn TpoTov TWA 
> 4 > , oA / > > / 
eyxahuyer EOTLY, WOTE prrocogors OUK ohuyous 
ovee Tots Tuxovow eofe TavTanacw aKaTa- 


AnTTA elvat' mAIv avrois ye Tots LreuKois. 


dvoxatddnmra Soxel: Kal maoa » Hetépa ovy- 
nar dbects peTAT TOT rob yap o dpetramToros ; 
pétiOe toivuv em” adta Ta bmoxkeipeva, @s Oduryo- 
ypova Kal evTedAn Kal duvapeva ev KTHCEL 
Kwatdov % Topyns ) AnaTOD eivar. peTa TODTO 
ere emt Ta TOV cup Biovyrev On, ov onus 
éotl kal Too Naplerrarou dvacxéoban, iva pn 
Aéyo, bre Kat éavTov TLS poyes UTOuEver. 

"Ev towtte otv bodw xa pore Kal Tooaurn 
5 ityF an > , \ 
ptoet Tis Te ovotas Kal Tod xpovou, Kal Tis 

/ \ fal 
KWHoews Kal TOV KLVOULEeVwWY, TL TOT éaTl 
TO éxtipnOivac % TO 6rwWS orovsacbivar 
Suvdpevov, ovd émivod. Tovvavtiov yap det 
Trapapv0ovpevoy éavTov Tepiuéver THY huorKry 
vow, Kal pn acxdrAXxgc TH SiatpiBH, adda 
TOUTOLS povols TpocavarraverOar' evi pev TO, 
éte ovdey cupBynoeTai pol, 6 ovyl Kata THY 
TOV heov pvou éoriv: _érép@ 8é, 674 eeort oot 
pondev mpdooew mapa TOV é mov Gedy Kat Saipova. 
-ovdels yap o avayKaoov TOUTOV mapahvar. 





as) IIpos Tt TOTE dpa vov KPa pa TH epavTod 


Wuxh;” map Exacta TodTo émavepwrav éavTor, 





1 vi. 34. cp. Sen. Hp. 81. 


2 iv. 50; ix. 3. For a qualifying picture to this very | 


pessimistic view see vi. 48. 
‘IIO 


BOOK V 


when thou thinkest how sure and. smooth in all 
its workings is the faculty of understanding and 
knowledge? 

10. Things are ina sense so wrapped up in mystery 
that not a few philosophers, and they no ordinary 
ones, have concluded that they are wholly beyond 
our comprehension : nay, even the Stoics themselves 
find them hard to comprehend. Indeed every 
assent we give to the impressions of our senses is 
liable to error, for where is the man who never errs? 
Pass on then to the objective things themselves, how 
transitory they are, how worthless, the property, 
quite possibly, of a boy-minion, a harlot, or a brigand.! 
After that turn to the characters of thine associates, 
even the most refined of whom it is difficult to put up 
with, let alone the fact that a man has enough to do 
to endure himself.? 

What then there can be amid such murk and 
nastiness, and in so ceaseless an ebbing of substance 
and of time, of movement and things moved, that 
deserves to be greatly valued or to excite our ambition 
in the least, I cannot even conceive. On the 
contrary, a man should take heart of grace to await his 
natural dissolution, and without any chafing at delay 
comfort 3 himself with these twin thoughts alone : the 
one, that nothing will befall me that is not in accord 
with the Nature of the Universe ; the other, that it 
is in my power to do nothing contrary to the God 
and the ‘genius’ * within me. For no one can force 
me to disobey that. 

11. Zo what use then am I putting my soul? Never 
fail to ask thyself this question and to cross-examine 


3A favourite word. cp. iv. 31; v. 9=‘* to take rest in.” 
4-71. 13; iii. 5 ete. 


ITr 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Kal eferatew, TL pol éote viv év TOUT TO Hopi, 
3 67) TYE HOVLKOY Kadovel; cal Tivos dpa vov exo 
Wx; pare masdiov; pnTe perpakiov; are 
yuvarcapiou; fate “Tupdvvov; ntl KTHVOUS; 
HTL Onpiou; 

iB’. “Orota Twa €oTl Ta TOIS ToAAOIS 
doxodvta ayaba, Kay évredbev Aa Bors. el yap 
TLS émLvonjaevev vrdpyovTd Twa ws adybas 
ayabd, olov ppovnow, coppoowvny, Sixavoowyny, 
avdpiav, ouK ay Tara T poeTtLvonjaas ere dxoboat 
Suvn Gein TO “ taro Tov ayabav:”! od yap epap- 
pocet. Ta dé ye Tols modXois pawopeva ayaba 
T poeTrvonaas TLS, éFaxovoerat Kal pedis déferau, 
os oixelws err ueyoMeVvov TO Umd TOD Kopexod 
elpnuévov. ovTws Kal oi Toddol havtafovtar THY 
diagopdv. ov yap ay TodTo pev odv* mpoc- 
éxomre Kah anngtovro 70 dé¢ éml tod mdovTou 
Kal TOY TpOos Tpupny ) Sdéav eve AN PH LAT OV 
mapedexope0a os ixvoupéves Kab daoteiws etpn- 
pévov. mpoOr odv ral épora, ei tiuntéov Kal 
ayaba dTohnm Tov Ta Tovatra, ov T poem tvon- 
Bévreov oixelws ap errupéporto TO TOV KeKTNMEVOV 
aura imo THs edtropias ‘ ‘ou EXEL, Strot xeon: 

uy’. “EE aiti@dous Kat vALKod ouvéoTnKa* 
ovdétepov Sé TovTwy eis TO py dv POapHcetat, 


1 7) 5rd 7G GryabG: 7d Morus: tv &yabov Nauck. 
2 oty Lofft for ob: Rendall keeps od and translates 
** would not fail to shock.” 





1 se, as in the case of things really good. 
2 From Menander Frag. 530 (Kock). The substitution of 
mtvon for xéon would mitigate the coarseness of the phrase, 


Ii2 





BOOK V 


thyself thus: What relation have I to this part of 
me which they call the ruling Reason? And whose 
Soul have I got now? The Soul of a child? Of 
a youth? Of a woman? Of a tyrant? Of a 
domestic animal? Of a wild beast? 

12. What are counted as good things in the estim- 
ation of the many thou canst gather even from this. 
For if a man fix his mind upon certain things as really 
and unquestionably good, such as wisdom, temper- 
ance, justice, manliness, with this preconception in 
his mind he could no longer bear to listen to the 
poet’s, By reason of his wealth of goods ; for it 
would not apply. But, if a man first fix his mind 
upon the things which appear good to the multi- 
tude, he will listen and readily accept as aptly 
added the quotation from the Comic Poet. In 
this way even the multitude have a perception of 
the difference. For otherwise this jest would 
not! offend and be repudiated, while we accept 
it as appropriately and wittily said of wealth and 
of the advantages which wait upon luxury and 
popularity. Go on, then, and ask whether we should 
prize and count as good those things, with which 
first fixed in our mind we might germanely quote 
of their possessor, that for his very wealth of goods 
he has no place to ease himself in.* 

13. I am made up of the Causal 8 and the Material, 
and neither of these disappears into nothing, just 


and we might then cp. Diog. Laert. Diog. 6 and Arist. 4, 
passages in which we are told that the philosopher being taken 
to a magnificent house where spitting was forbidden spat in 
his host’s face, explaining that he could find no other place. 

3 The Efficient, or Formal, or Formative principle, here 
the Soul, but the Soul itself consists of a causal element 
(vods) and a material (rd mvevpdriov). 


113 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


@oTep ovdé ék TOD Ha) dros iméarn. ovKodY 
catataxOijoerar may pépos epov KaTa petaBodyy 
eis pépos Te TOD Koopou, Kal Tad éxeivo els 
érepov pépos TL To Kdopov petaBanre?, Kal dn 
eis atreipov. Kata TovavTny bé pweTaBorjy Kayo 
iméotnv Kal ot eve yevynoavtes, Kal éravidyTt 
eis GAO atreipov. ovdev yap KwAVEL oTwS 
pdvat, Kav Kata Tepiddovs TemTepacpévas oO 
Koo pos SioiKnTat. 

wo. “‘O Royos Kal 1 Aoyexn Téxvyn Suvapers 
cialy éavtais apxovpevar kal toils Kal’ éautas 
epyous. Oppavrar | pev oby a8 THS oixeias 
apxiis, odevovor Oé eis TO mpoxeiwevov Tédos" 
Kal? o xatopIwcers ai TovadTat mpagers ovouat- 
ovTat THD opboryra THS 0606 onpatvovaat. 

te. Oddev tovTwv pyntéov avOp@Tov, & av- 
pore, Kado avO paras é€otw, ovK émiBdadrew. 
OvK éoru amaurnpata avporov, ovee emraryyedn- 
erae aura % TOD ad parrou pvors, ovee Teheto- 
TnTES clot THS TOD avO porrov picews. ov Toivuv 
ovdé TO TéosS év avtois éott TO avOpore Kel p- 
Evov, OVE YE TO TUT ANPOTLKOY Tod téXous, TO 
ayabov. ere et Te TOUT@Y HV émuBardov TO 
avO pare, ovK av TO omepppoveiy avTav Kal Kar 
efaviotac bar émBaddov mV, ovde €TraLveTOS iy 
0 ampoobeh ToUT@Y éaUTOY TapEeXopuEvos OVO wy 
O éMaTT@TLKES éavTob éy Tit TOUTw@Y ayabds Hr, 
eimep TadTa ayaba 7p. vov 86 dowmep Telo 
Tus aparpav éauTov TOUT@Y i) Towovtev étépwv 
yh Kat adarpovpevos TL TOUT@OV AVEXNTAL, TOTMOE 
paddov ayabos é éoTw. 

i’. Ola av words havtacOhs, ToradvTn ToL 


IT4 








BOOK V 


as neither did it come into existence out of nothing. 
So shall my every part by change be told off! to 
form some part of the Universe, and that again be 
changed into another part of it, and so on to infinity. 
It was by such process of change that I too came into 
being and my parents, and so backwards into a second 
infinity. And the statement is quite legitimate, even 
if the Universe be arranged according to completed 
cycles.? 

14. Reason and the art of reasoning are in them- 
selves and in their own proper acts self-sufficing 
faculties. Starting from a principle peculiar to them, 
they jouriiey on to the end set before them. Where- 
fore such actions are termed right acts, as signifying 
that they follow the right way. 

15. Call none of those things a man’s that do not 
fall to him as man. They cannot be claimed of 
aman; the man’s nature does not guarantee them ; 
they are no consummations of that nature. Conse- 
quently neither is the end for which man lives placed 
in these things, nor yet that which is perfective of the 
end, namely The Good. Moreover, if any of these 
things did fall to a man, it would not fall to him 
to contemn them and set his face against them, 
nor would a man be commendable who shewed 
himself independent of these things, nor yet would he 
be a good man who came short of his own standard 
in any of them, if so be these things were good. 
But as it is, the more a man can cut himself free, 
or even be set free, from these and other such 
things with equanimity, by so much the more is he 
good. 

16. The character of thy mind will be such as is 


1 viii, 25. 2 v. 32; xi. 1. See Index III. (reptodo:). 


ITs 
12 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


D4 € / / e \ a 
éorar 4 Sidvora: Barrerar yap bd Tov havtac- 
tov 4 Wyn. Bdarte obv aditiy tH cuveyeia 
TOV ToLOvVTwY davTaci@v: olov Sti, Smov Chv 
éotw, éxet kal ed Chv: ev avrn be Shy éortiv: 
4 BA \ — a > > n \ , 4 
éotw apa kal ed Shy dv addr\H. Kal wadw Ste 
ovTep Evexev Exactov Kateckevactat, [pos 6 
5 xatecKxevactat,| mpos TodTo pépetat' mpos 
& héperar Sé, €v TovT@ TO TédXOsS avTOD: Srrav Sé 
TO TéXOS, exel Kal TO ouudépoy Kal tayabov 
e / \ »” > \ an fa) 4 
éxdotov' TO apa ayadov tod Aoyxod Ldou 
Kowwvia. OTL yap pds KoWwaviay yeyovaper, 

/ / x > 3 > \ 4 \ 
marat Sédextar. % ovK Hw evapyées Ste TA 
xelpm TY KpeTTOVMY Evexev, TA O€ KpEITTHO 
GdMjdov; Kpeitta Sé Tov pev aiyov Ta 
éurpuya, Tov 5é éurptyov Ta NoyiKd. 

er 

wf. To ta adtvata SiéKew parixov’ addivar- 

ov 6€ TO TOvs Havrous pH ToLadTa TLva TroLeiv. 
U 2OX > \ / a > \ / 

in’. Ovddéev oddevi cupBaiver, 6 ovyl mépuxe 
dépew. adrAw Ta a’Ta cupBaiver Kal row 
ayvoov, 67 cupBERnKer, 7) eriderxvipevos peyado- 
hpoctvnv evotabel wal axdkwtos péver.  Sevvov 
ovv ayvouay Kal apécKxevav ioxyupotépas elvas 
ppovicews. 

‘A > \ bm € a 
0. Ta mpdypata avta ov8 omwctiody 
hs amtetat, ovdé exer eicodov mpos wuyny, 

ovde Thera ovdée Kivioas uyny Sivatar TpETrEL 

1 The words in brackets omitted by A, which however adds 


dtafter rodro. After the first carecx. Gat. inserts pds TodTo 
KaTecKevaorat. 





1 vii. 3; Sen. Hp. 95. 2 viii. 9. cp. Sen. Hp. 28. 
*'H.. I; iii. 4, § 1. pa 
5 vii, 55; xi. 18, § 1; Sen. Hp. 65 ad fin. 

116 





BOOK V 


the character of thy frequent thoughts,’ for the 
soul takes its dye from the thoughts. Dye her 
then with a continuous succession of such thoughts 
as these: Where life is possible, there it is possible 
also to live well.— But the life is life in a Court.2, Well," 
in a Court too it is possible to live well. And again: 
A thing is drawn towards that for the sake of which it 
has been made, and its end lies in that towards which 
it is drawn and, where its end lies, there lie also its 
interest and its good. The Good, then, for a rational 
creature is fellowship with others. For it has been 
made clear long ago* that we were constituted for 
fellowship. Or was it not obvious that the lower 
were for the sake of the higher® and the higher for 
the sake of one another? And living things are 
higher than lifeless,° and those that have reason than 
those that have life only. 

17. To crave impossibilities is lunacy ; but it is 
impossible for the wicked to act otherwise.’ 

18. Nothing befalls anyone that he is not fitted 
by nature to bear.’ Others experience the same 
things as thou, but either from ignorance that 
anything has befallen them, or to manifest their 
greatness of mind, they stand firm and get no hurt. 


_A strange thing indeed that ignorance and vanity 


should prove stronger than wisdom ! ® 

19. Things of themselves cannot take the least 
hold of the Soul, nor have any access to her, nor 
deflect or move her; but the Soul alone deflects 


5 cp. Chrysippus: 7d (gov rod wh Cou Kpeirrov. 

7 iv. 6; vii. 71; xi. 18 ad fin. ; Sen. de Ira ii. 31. 

8 viii. 46; x. 3; St. Paul, 1 Cor. x. 13. 

® ep. Sen. Ep. 36 ad fin. : turpissimum si eam securitatem 
nobis ratio non praestat, ad quam stultitia perducit. 


117 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


6€ Kal Kxwet avtTi éavtTny porn, Kal oiwy av 
K plat eov Kataktioon éavTHy, ToradTa éavTh Trovet 
Ta TpocupEerT@Ta. 

Kw. Ka érepov per oyov nuiv éotw obicend- 
TaTov avO pwros, Kad dcov ev Trowntéov avrovs * 
Kal dveKT€ov" Kad daov b€ évioravTai TWES eis 
Ta oixela epya, &y 7 TOV adiapopov | prot ryiverau 
0 avO perros ovx Ho oov A HALOS Y avepos 7) 
Onpiov. oo Tovtwy oé évépyera pév Tes euro 
toOein av opuns 5é Kal dsabécews ov yivetas 
éuTodra Ota THY UTeEaipecty Kal THY TeEpt- 
TpoTnv. TepiTpémer yap Kal peOiotnot Tay TO 
THs évepyelas KoOAvUA 7 Sidvota eis TO Tpo- 
myoupevov" Kal mpo épyouv yivetat TO Tod Epyou 
ToUTOU eextixov" Kal mpo 0600 TO THs 0d00 
TavTNs evo TaTLKOD. 

ka. Tov ép 7@ Koo wp TO KpaTLoTov Tipe" 
éote be tobTo TO maou _Xp@pevov Kal TavTa 
Suérrov. opotws Sé Kal TOV év ool TO. Kpara Tov 
Tina éore dé TODTO TO exelvp oporyeves. Kal yap 
él cov TO Tots addows Xp@pmevov TOUTS €oTL, Kal 
0 o0S Bios b UT TOUTOU Ovotxet ran, 

KB. “O TH more ovK éort BraBepov, ovoe 
TOV TONTHY Brarret. éml mdons THS TOU 
BeBrad0ar pavtacias todTov émaye Tov Kavova: 
ei 1) TOALS UITO TOvTOU un BArAdTTETAL, OVE eyw 
BéBrappar ei 5é 4) Words PBAdrTETAL, ovK 
opytotéov tT BAaTTOVTL THY TOMY. TL TO 
Tapopwpevor; * 


1 More correctly airév.- * sc. GAG Setxréov before rf Gat. 





1-vi, 8. 2 xi. 16, 3 iv. 1; vi. 50. 


118 





BOOK V 


and moves herself,! and whatever judgments she 
deems it right to form, in conformity with them she 
fashions for herself the things that submit themselves 
to her from without.? 

20. In one respect a man is of very close concern 
to us, in so far as we must do him good and forbear ; 
but in so far as any stand in the way of those acts 
which concern us closely, then man becomes for me 
as much one of things indifferent as the sun, as the 
wind, as a wild-beast. Though a man may in some 
sort fetter my activity, yet on my own initiative and 
mental attitude no fetters can be put because of the 
power they possess of conditional action® and of 
adaptation to circumstances. For everything that 
stands in the way of its activity is adapted and 
transmuted by the mind into a furtherance of it,* 
and that which is a check on this action is converted 
into a help to it, and that which is a hindrance in 
our path goes but to make it easier. 

21. Prize the most excellent thing in the Universe ; 
and this is that which utilizes all things and controls 
all things. Prize in like manner the most excellent 
thing in thyself;5 and this is that which is akin to 
the other. For this, which utilizes all else is in thee 
too, and by it thy life is governed. 

22. That which is not hurtful to the community 
cannot hurt the individual.6 Test every case of 
apparent hurt by this rule: if the community be not 
hurt by this, neither am I hurt; but if the com- 
munity be hurt, there is no need to be angry 
with him that hath done the hurt,’ but to enquire, 
What hath he seen amiss ? § 


4 iv. 1; x. 31 ad finy 5 vi. 16 ad fin. 
6 v. 35; vi. 54. 7 v, 35. 8 xi. 13. 


119 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ky. TlodXdKes evOvpov 70 TAXOS THIS Tapa- 
popas kal vreEaywyis TOV ov Tov Kal yevopmeveov. 
a) Te yap ovcia olov TOTApos év Sinvexet poor 
Kal ai evépryera év ouvexéot petaBonrais, xal Ta 
aitia év Hupiaus Tpotrais, Kal oyedov ovden € éoTOS, 
Katt TO mapeyyus 700¢ dimetpov Tob! Trapexn- 
KoTosS T Kal pEdAOVTOS axaves, ¢ ® Tavta evahay- 
iSeran. TOS obv ov pepos o év TOUTOLS puo@pevos 
v} TTH[EVOS 0 oxeTmaon T as év TIL YpoV@ Kai 
eh papov <av> evoxdyoavte; +? 

KO. Méuvnoo tis cupmaons ovcias, hs Ody- 
to TOV peTeXELS” Kal ToD ovpTraVTOS ai@vos, ov 
Bpaxd Kal dxapator cou Sudornma apwpiorat 
Kab THs eiwapperns, 7s TOoTOv el Pépos; 

xe. “AXXos dpapraver Tt eis eué; dyperau’ 
iSiar € exer ddecrw, iiav € évépyerav. eyo viv exo, 
6 pe Oére vov exer n Kou? puars, Kal mpdoow, 6 
pe viv pda cew Bénee 7) a eu puors. 

ks’. To HyyepoveKov Kab Kupiedov Tis uxis 
gov pépos aTpeT TOV ErT@ a) Tis év Th capKi 
Aelas 7) Tpayelas KWycEws' Kal pH oVYKpPLW- 
éoOo, annra TeprypapeT@ éauTo Kal meptopiteTo 
Tas qTeioes éxeivas év Tois popios.  dTav be 
avabiWavTae KATA THD érépay + * oupmddevav els 
THv Sidvorayv, @S ev THMATL HvYOLEVO, TOTE TPOS 
pev tHv alcOnow ghvatxny odvcav ov Tetpatéov 
avTiBaive, Thy 6 vTOAN Wi THY ws TrEpl ayabod 
#) KaKkod pn TpooTLOéTw TO HYyEwovrKoV €& EauTod. 

1 rot te PA. 

2 wuxpdy P: évoxanoovr: Lofit: évoxAjody 7: Fournier. 
The future sense seems required. 


3 érépwy < érépois > Schenk : : wepav Rend. (cp. Sext. Emp. 
adv. Math. ix. 80): nuerépay Rich, 


120 





BOOK V 


23. Think often on the swiftness with which the 
things that exist and that are coming into existence 
are swept past us and carried out of sight. For all 
substance ! is as a river in ceaseless flow,? its activities 
ever changing and its causes subject to countless 
variations, and scarcely anything stable; and ever 
beside us is this infinity of the past and yawning 
abyss of the future, wherein all things are dis- 
appearing. Is he not senseless who in such an 
environment puffs himself up, or is distracted, or 
frets as over a trouble lasting and far-reaching ? 

24. Keep in memory the universal Substance, of 
which thou art a tiny part ; and universal Time, of 
which a brief, nay an almost momentary span has 
been allotted thee; and Destiny, in which how 
fractional thy share ? 4 

25. Another does me some wrong? He shall see 
to it.6 His disposition is his own, his activities are 
his own. What the universal Nature wills me to 
have now, that I now have, and what my nature 
wills me now to do, that I do. 

26. Let the ruling and master Reason of thy soul 
be proof against any motions in the flesh smooth or 
rough. Let it not mingle itself with them, but 
isolate and restrict those tendencies to their true 
spheres. But when in virtue of that other sympathetic 
connection these tendencies grow up into the mind 
as is to be expected in a single organism, then 
must thou not go about to resist the sensation, 
natural as it is, but see that thy ruling Reason 

-adds no opinion of its own as to whether such is 
good or bad. 
1 Or, Being. 2 iv, 43; vii. 19. 3 xii, 32. 
4 Epict. i. 12, 26. 5 St. Matt, xii. 4, 24. 
121 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Ko. Lutiv Bevis. uth dé Geois 0 TUVEXOS 
devavos avrots Thy EavTod Wuyny a dpeo Komévny pev 
Tois atrovepopéevors, Totodcay b€é, baa BovreTaL 6 
Saiuov, ov éExadoT@ TpooTadTny Kal Hyemova oO 
Zeds eOaxev, atrooTmacpua éavtod. ovtos 5é éoti 
0 éxdoToU vous Kal oyos. 

KN’. To ypdowv. pHTe opyity; pare T® 0fo- 
oTOmep bpyttn; Ti ool Tomoet; ToLovToy o Tope 
EXEL, TovavTas pddas exeu avaryKn TOLAUTHVY aTrO- 
popav d amo TOLOUT@V yiverOau. «ANN 0 dvOpwmos 
Aoyov EXEL, pyot,t Kat Svvarar cuvvoew ép- 
toTavov, TL TANUMEAEL.” ED Gor yévoLTO’ ToLyap- 
ovv Kal ov rOxyou exes: Kivncov NoyiKH Siabécer 
Aoyixnvy SidBeciv, SetEov, tropvnoov. ei yap 
érrater, Oepatrevoets Kal ov xpela opyijs. 

Outre tpaywdds ote Téopyn. 

KO’. ‘Os efedOov Si Siavon, obras évraba 
Shy eeorey. éav 6é a7) emiTpeToat, TOTE Kal Tou 
fhv &&O0- obTws pévro1, @s pander KaKOV madoXov. 
as Karrvos, Kal amrépxopa.’ ti avTo Tparyya 
Soxeis; EXPL dé pe TovodTov ovdev ebdyet, péveo 
edevO Epos, Kab ovdeis pe K@AUEEL moveiv & Oro: 
Oéro Sé? Kata hiow Tod NoyiKOD Kal KoLwwVLKOD 
Eaou. 

ne ‘0 Tob dXoU vos KOWOVLKOS. ae 
yoov Ta Xxelpo TOV KperTTOveDr &vexev' Kal Ta 
KpeiTr@ add7prous TUL ppoTer. opas, TOs omérage, 
ovvérate, kab Td Kat akiav améveev éxdoros 

1 gtioe AD. 2 <ra>. 
1 ii. 1, 4; xii. 26, 30. 
2 Epict. i. 14, § 12 éwirpowoy éxdorm mapéornae (sc. Zeus) 
tov Exdorov Saluova kat mapédwxe puddoce aitoy aiT@. 


122 








BOOK V 


27. Walk with the Gods! And he does walk with 
the Gods, who lets them see his soul invariably 
satisfied with its lot and carrying out the will of that 
‘ genius,’ a particle! of himself, which Zeus has given 
to every man as his captain and guide *—and this is 
none other than each man’s intelligence and reason. 

28. If a man’s armpits are unpleasant, art thou 
angry with him? If he has foul breath? What 
would be the use?) The man has such a mouth, he 
has such armpits. Some such effuvium was bound 
to come from such a source. But the man has sense, 
quotha! With a little attention he could see wherein he 
offends. I congratulate thee! Well, thou too hast 
sense. By a rational attitude, then, in thyself evoke 
a rational attitude in him,’ enlighten him, admonish 
him. If he listen, thou shalt cure him,‘ and have no 
need of anger. 

Neither tragedian nor harlot. 

29. Thou canst live on earth as thou dost purpose 
to live when departed. But if men will not have 
it so, then is it time for thee even to go out of life,° 
yet not as one who is treated ill. ’Z%s smoky and J go 
away.6 Why think it a great matter? But while 
no such cause drives me forth, I remain a free man, 
and none shall prevent me from doing what I will, 
and I will what is in accordance with the nature of a 
rational and social creature. 

30. The intelligence of the Universe is social. 
It hath at any rate made the lower things for the 
sake of the higher, and it adapted the higher’ 
to one another. Thou seest how it hath sub- 
ordinated, coordinated, and given each its due lot 


3 x. 4; Epict. ii. 8, § 11. + cp. St. Matt. xviii. 15. 
®» See on iii. 1. cp. viii. 47. 
6 Kpict. i. 25, § 18; iv. 10, § 27. - Ty, 16. 


123 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Kal Ta KpatioTevovTa eis Opovolay adAAH@V 
ovuvnyayev. 

ra’. lds mpooevijvetar péxpe viv Oeois, yov- 
edo, adedgois, yuvaunt, TEKVOLS, didacKdrors, 
Tpopedar, pirors, _oixelors, oiKéTals ; €l Tpos 
TAVTAS TOL peXpL VV éoTL TO 

“Myre twa péEar eEatovov, pnte <tt> eimeiv.” } 

avapipwnokov Sé Kat ov oiwy SvednrvOas Kai 
ola iypKecas Umopeivas. Kal OTL mans On TOL 
a) toropta Tod Biov kal TeheuTaG ” v) Aevroupyia: 
cal TOoa On TAL Kad, Kal TOTwY pev HdOVOY 
Kat “Tove drrepeides, T0o a dé évoofa Tapetoes, 
els Oaous 6é a aryvepovas evryvO Lov éryévou. 

rB’. Ava ti cuyxeovery a arexvor Kal apadets 
puxat & EVTEXVOV Kal ema Ti pova; tis oov bexn 
EVTEXVOS Kal eT TH LOD; y) eidvia apyny Kal 
Tédos, Kal Tov oe ods THS ovatas SinkovTa AOyoV 
Kal Sua mavros Tob aidvos KAT TepLooous TETAY- 
pévas oikovomodvtTa TO Trav. 

dy’. ¥ Ooov ovdéra oT 000s n CKENETOS, Kal 
iro évopa i) ovee évopa TO 6€ & dvopa podos Kab 
annXn pa. 7a dé é év TO Bio wodvtipnta Keva Kal 
camTpa Kal piKpa Kal xvvidia diadakvoueva Kal 
maoia Soman yerovta, eita evOds xdalovTa. 
miotis dé Kal aides Kat dixn Kal adjOera 

TI pos "Odvptrov ard xOoves edpvodeins.” 

1 Marcus quotes this line in a form that does not scan. 


cp. Vii. 39 if the text is correct. P 
2 reXevtala AD; tedea P: redevra Schenkl. 


1 Hom. Od. iv. 690. 
2 x. 36. There is no Pharisaism here, as some have most un- 
warrantably asserted. * cp, St. Paul, 1 Cor. i. 27 (Auth. Vers.). 


124 








BOOK V 


and brought the more excellent things into mutual 
accord. 

31. How hast thou borne thyself heretofore 
towards Gods, parents, brothers, wife, children, 
teachers, tutors, friends, relations, household ? Canst 
thou say truly of them all to this day, 


Doing to no man wrong, nor speaking aught that is evil ?} 


And call to mind all that thou hast passed through, 
all thou hast found strength to bear ; that the story 
of thy life is now full-told and thy service is ending ; 
and how many beautiful sights thou hast seen, how 
many pleasures and pains thou hast disregarded, 
forgone what ambitions, and repaid with kindness - 
how much unkindness.? 

32. Why do unskilled and ignorant souls confound ® 
him who has skill and has knowledge? What soul, 
then, has skill and knowledge? Even that which 
knoweth beginning and end, and the reason that 
informs all Substance, and governs the Whole from 
ordered cycle to cycle‘ through all eternity. 

33. But a little while and thou shalt be burnt 
ashes or a few dry bones, and possibly a name, 
possibly not a name even.> And a name is but sound 
and a far off echo. And all that we prize so highly 
in our lives is empty and rotten and paltry, and we 
but as puppies snapping at each other, as quarrel- 
some children now laughing and anon in tears. But 
faith and modesty and justice and truth 
Up from the wide-wayed Earth have winged their flight 

to Olympus.® 

Sis me 7. 5 viii. 25; xii. 27. 

® Hesiod, Op. 197. cp. Eur. Med. 439 and Lucian, Nigr. 16, 


who, speaking of Rome, says much the same of alias and 
dperh and Sixaocdvn. See also Dio 71, 24, § 2. 


125 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Ti ov étt TO évtav0a Katéexov; eiye Ta Bev 
aicO@nra evpeTaBrnra kal ovx éorara: Ta dé 
aio Onrnpra duvdpa cal evTapaTim@ra avo bé 
TO wuydpiov avabupiacis ad’ aiparos: To 6é 
evdoripeiv Tapa ToLovToLs Kevov. Tt ow; Tept- 
pevets! Thems tHv elite oBéow elte petdotacwy. 
7 \ > / c X bd] / " SaaY 2 a /, > 
éws 5é éxeivns 6 Katpos épiotatat, Ti adpKxet; tis 
+ EN \ ‘. / \ > a 2 , 
adro 7) Oeods pev céBeww Kal edpnpetv, avOpe@Tovs 
dé ed motelv, Kal “ avéxer Oar” avTav Kat “am 
éexerbau” 6 boa dé évtos bpwv Tov xpeqdiov - Kar 
Tob mvevpartiou, TavTa peuvincOar pnte oa dvtTa 
pyre él col. 

nO’. Advacat dei evpociv, eitye Kal evodety,? 
” \ COA e / \ / A 
elrye Kal 066 vrohapBdvew cal Tpaccew. dvo 
tabtTa Kowa TH TE TOV Geod Kal TH Tod a0 parrov 
Kal mayTos oyexod S@ov Wexn: TO py éuTrooLe- 
eoOau t on dou" Kal TO &v TH Sicacey biabécer 
Kal mwpdager exew To dyabdv, Kal évrad0a tiv 
dpeEw aTronjyely. 

7 > \ n >. / 
re’. Ei pyre xaxia éotl todto éun pte 
>. 7 \ / : pam, / \ \ / 
évépyeia Kata Kakiav éunv nte TO KoLvov BaTT- 
14 wy NV > a , / \ / 
etal, TL bTép avTod Siapépopar; tis 5€ BrABn 
TOU KoOWOD; 

A. My OdoaxEpas TH pavracia ouva mab. 
eo Oat: Gra Bon Geir bev Kata Siva Kat Kat’ 
afiav' Kay eis Ta péoa éXaTTOVTAL,® pn MéVTOL 

/ eS] / \ \ ” 
BraBnv atts davtdfecOar, Kkaxov yap Bos. 
> ? ¢ ¢ / 2 \ \ a n 
aXnN a 0 yépav atreav Tov TOD OpeTTod 

1 mrepyméevers PA: mepiuevets Wilam. 
2 Lofft and Stich. for evSew A, ddeveu P. 
3 édarr@vra has no subject: éAarro? 71 Cor. 





1 vi. 15. cp. Tzetz. Chil. vii. 803; viii. 223. 
126 i 





BOOK V 


What then keeps thee here ?—if indeed sensible 
objects are ever changing and unstable, and our 
faculties are so feeble and so easily misled ; and the 
- poor soul itself is an exhalation from blood!; and 
to be well-thought of in such a world mere vanity. 
What then remains? To wait with a good grace for 
the end, whether it be extinction or translation.” 
But till our time for that be come, what sufficeth ? 
What but to reverence the Gods and to praise them, 
to do good unto men and to bear mith them and 
JSorbear,? but, for all else that comes within the 
compass of this poor flesh and breath, to remember 
that it is not thine nor under thy control ? 

34. Thou hast it in thy power that the current of 
thy life be ever fair, if also ‘tis thine to make fair 
way, if also in ordered way to think and act. The 
Soul of God and the souls of men and of every 
rational creature have these two characteristics in 
common : to suffer no let or hindrance from another, 
and to find their good in a condition and practice of 
justice, and to confine their propension to this. 

35. If this be no vice of mine nor the outcome of 
any vice of mine, and if the common interest does 
not suffer, why concern myself about it? And how 
can the common interest suffer ? 4 

36. Bé not carried incontinently away by sense- 
impressions, but rally to the fight as thou canst and 
as is due. If there be failure ° in things indifferent, 
think not there is any great harm done; for that is 
an evil habit. But as the greybeard (in the play) 

2 Marcus never seems to have made up his mind which it 
was to be. See iv. 21 ; viii. 25; xi. 3. 

3 These two constituted for Epictetus the whole ‘‘ Law 


and the Prophets ” ; see Aulus Gellius xvii. 19. 
OV 22 svt. 54. 5 v. 36. 


127 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


pouBov ann tet Hepvnpevos, bre popes, oUT@s ovY 
Kal @Oe téret TOL yin Kanrov! emt TOV éuBorov,t 
avOporre, émeAdbov, ti tadTa Hy 3 ‘2 Nai: annra 
ToUTOLS mepiaTrovdac Ta.” dua todT ody Kal aod 
pw pos yern: 

’Eyevounv toré, omrovdnTroTe catarehbeis, 
eUworpos avO porros: TO dé “ evpuopos,” ayabny 
potpay ceauT® amroveipas: aryabat 6 potpar 
ayabai tpotral wWryxijs, ayabal oppai, ayabai 
mpakers. 


1 ened rf ylverat nadbv Xyl.: eyeadray Cor. @reira rf might 


_ be read. 


128 





ae 


BOOK V 


taking his leave reclaimed his foster-child’s top, not 
forgetting that it was but a top, so do thou here also.! 
Since indeed thou art found haranguing on the 
hustings, O Man, hast thou forgotten what this really 
means? Aye, but people will have it. Must thou too 
be a fool in consequence ? 

Time was that wheresoever forsaken? I was a 
man well-portioned ; but that man well-portioned is 
he that hath given himself a good portion ; and good 
portions are good phases of the soul, good impulses, 
good actions. 


* It is not known what Marcus alludes to. The following 


words are unintelligible. 
2 Or overtaken (ratadnpbels), 


129 


BIBAION $s’ 


a. ‘H tav drov ovcia edrreOys nai edtpeTrys 
0 be TAavTHY Stok @v ovyos ovdepiay év éavT@ 
aitiay éyet TOD KaKoTroLeiy: KaKiay yap ovK exee 
ove€ TL KaK@s Trowel ovee Bramrerat Tl om 
éxeivov. travta 5&é Kat éxeivov yiverat Kal 
mepatvera. 

B.. My diagépou, morepov puyav ) Qanrr0- 
pevos TO 7 péTrov moveis, cal ™TOTEpoV puoratov 
i) ixavas bmvov EXO, Kal OTE pov KAKOS dxovov 
a7] evpnLoUpevos, Kal OTE pov am obvina Kev i) 
m™ paTTov TL dXoiov. _ bia yap TOV BiwTiKaY 
m pafewv Kal abrn éort, wal? iv amobuijcxopey’ 
apket ovv Kal éml TavTns ‘TO mapov ev Gécbar.” 
y'. "Eo Prére- pndevos Tpary patos MHTE 7) 
idta moLoTns payre 4 akia TaparpexéTo Ge. 

& . Lldvra ra UrroKelpeva TaXLoTa petaBanreil, 
kal nro €xOupuabnoera, eimep Hvwtar 7 ovcia, 
) oxedacOnaeTaL. 

e’. ‘O S20rndv RAoyos olde, TAS StaKeipevos, 
Kal Ti roel Kal émi Tivos dr. 





1 Not so all Stoics ; cp. Sen. de Prov. 5: non potest artifex 
mutare materiem. 
2>vi. 22. 


130 








A ae 





BOOK VI 


1. Tue Universal Substance is docile! and ductile ; 
and the Reason that controls it has no motive in 
itself todo wrong. For it hath no wrongness and 
doeth no wrong, nor is anything harmed by it. But 
all things come into being and fulfil their purpose as 
it directs. 

2. Make no difference in doing thy duty ? whether 
thou art shivering or warm, drowsy ° or sleep-satisfied, 
defamed or extolled, dying or anything else. For the 
act of dying too is one of the acts of life. So it is 
enough in this also to get the work in hand done well. 

3. Look within. Let not the special quality® or 
worth of anything escape thee. 

4. All objective things will anon be changed and 
either etherialized into the Universal Substance, if 
that indeed be one, or dispersed abroad.” 

5. The controlling Reason knows its own bent and 
its work and the medium it works in. 


3 Galen (xiv. 3, Kiihn) says of Marcus that, owing to the 
theriac which he prescribed him, cvvéBawev aitg@ vuardCew 
Kapwd@s ev Tais donucpais apdteowy. 
~ 4 ep. Sen. Ep. 77 ad fin.: Unum ex vitae officiis, mori. 

oe saying of the ‘‘ Wise Men.” See Suidas. cp. Luc. 

Necy. 21. It was a trait of Marcus, Dio 71. 26, § 4. 

= that which makes a thing what i€ is. 
7. viii. 25 ad fin. ; x. 7, § 2. 


131 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


x. “Apiotos tpéTos Tod aptverOar TO fr) 
éEouotova bar. 

¢’. ‘Evi réprov cal mpocavaravov, T@ amo 
mMpdkews Kowwvikhns petaBaivew emi mpakw 
KOLWW@VLKHY ovV pynien Geod. 

nq. To TyYEHoveKov éore 70 éavTo éyeipov Kal 
Tpémov Kal Trovoby Mev éauTo, otov ay kal Oéry, 
mowbv 88 éavt@ datverOar wav 7d cvuBaivor, 
olov avTo Oédeu. 

0. Kara tiv tov bdrov iow Exacta Trepaiv- 
eTal, ov yap Kar’ addy ryé Twa, dtow ijTOU 
eEwbev Teplexoucay  é€utreptexouévny evdov 7) 
éfo amrnpTnperny. 

U. “Hrot xuxeov cal avtewtroKxn Kal oKed- 
acpos 4) &vaots Kal td&is Kal mpovora. et pev 
ovv Ta TpoTepa, Ti Kal émiOup@ cixaim ovy- 
Kpiwate Kal dupp@ torotit@ évdiatpiBewv; ti Sé 
oot Kal péree a&ddov Twos 7 Tov O7rws Tore > aia 
ylverOan”; Ti de Kal Tapdo copa; ngeu yap ér 
ee 6 oKedacuos, 6 Te av Tro. ei dé Oarepa 
éott, oé8wo Kal evotald Kal Oappd To 
dvotKovvTt. 

ta’. “Otay avayxacOns wo Toy TEPLETTIK 
oToy oiovel SuatapaxOivat, taxéws eras eis 
éauTov Kal 7) omép Ta dvarynaia éEioraco Tod 
puOpmod- éon yap eyKparéarepos THs appwovias 
TP TuvEX aS els auriy emavépxer au. 

“UB. Bi par pide Te dua elyes Kal pntépa, 





1 cp. Epict. Frag. 130. So Diogenes, being asked ‘ How 
shall I avenge myself of mine enemy?” said, “‘ By behaving 
like a gentleman,” Plut. de Leg. Poet. 5. 


132 


eteaniee n 





BOOK VI 


6. The best way of avenging thyself is not to do 
likewise.! 

7. Delight in this one thing and take thy rest 
therein—from social act to go on to social act, keeping 
all thy thoughts on God. 

8. The ruling Reason it is that can arouse and 
deflect itself, make itself whatever it will,? and 
invest everything that befalls with such a semblance 
as it wills. 

9. In accordance with the Nature of the Universe 
is accomplished each several thing. For surely this 
cannot be in accordance with any other nature, that 
either envelops it from without, or is enveloped by 
it within, or exists in external detachment out- 
side it. 

10. Hither a medley and a tangled web® and a 
dispersion abroad, or a unity and a plan and a 
Providence. If the former, why should I even wish to 
abide in such a random welter and chaos? Why care 
for anything else than to turn again to the dust at 
last.t Why be disquieted? For, do what I will, the 
dispersion must overtake me. But if the latter, I 
bow im reverence, my feet are on the rock, and I 
put my trust in the Power that rules. | 

11. When forced, as it seems, by thine environment 
to be utterly disquieted, return with all speed into 
thy self, staying in discord no longer than thou 
must. By constant recurrence to the harmony,° thou 

“wilt gain more command over it. 
12. Hadst thou at once a stepmother and a mother 


2 y; 19, 3 iv. 27; vil. 50. 

4 Hom. J/. vii. 99; cp. below, vii. 50. 

> ep. Dio Chrys. xxxii. 676 R. tw ris apyovias rijs xara 
puow. 


133 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


éxeivnv T av @Oeparreves, Kal Guws  éemdvodds 
col Tpos THY pnTépa auvexNs eyiveTo. TOUTO 
go. viv éoTw aur Kat 7 prrocogia: Moe 
TOAREKLS era Kal mpocavaTravov TaUTy, bv 
iy Kal Ta éxel oot avexta haivetat Kat av év 
avtois avEeKTos. 

vy. Olov On TO pavraciay Aap Bavew emi 
TOV yo cal TOV TOLOUT@V eadipor, 6 ore veKpos 
ovTOS ixOvos, ovTos O€ vexpos EpviBos 7 xolpou: 
Kal TadwW Oru 6 Panepvos Xu AapLov €oTL 
orapudou, Kat y) mepiTroppupos Tpixta _Tpo- 
Bartiov aipario KOYXNS dedevpéva: Kal ert TOV 
Kara THY ovVovoiav évTEpiouv mapa pipes Kat 
peTad Twos oTracpod pvEapiov ExKxpiois’ olat by 
avrTal elow ai pavracias cabixvovpevar avTay 
Ta Tpaypwarav Kal dueEvoborat ée avTav, OOTE 
opay, oid Twa ToT éoriv: oUT@s det rap Gdov 
tov Biov troveiv Kai, Orrov Nav afvoniora Ta. 
mpaypara pavraterar, amoyupvooy avTa Kal 
THY evTéAevav avTav Kkafopav Kal THD iatopiav,t 
ep’ 4) ceuvvveTat, Tepiatpely. Senos yap o Todos 
Taparoyirths Kal, re Soxeis padota Tepl Ta 
emovoaia KatayiverOar, TOTEe padioTa KaTa- 
yonTever. Spa yoov, 6 Kparns ti mepi avtod 
Tov Eevoxpdatovs éyer. 

wo. Ta mrelota, av  wANOds Oavpdtet, eis 
yevixotata avayetat, Ta bd eEews 7) hUoews 
cuvexopeva, RiOovs, EvAa, ouKas, dprédous, 





1 Sen. Hp. 103. 
2 For life in kings’ soph see Lucian, Calumn. 10, and 
Icaro-Men. 16. 3 ep. Lucian, Dem. § 41. 


4 cp. Tzetz. Chil. vii. sol. Pe reads veuptov for évteptov. 
134 





BOOK VI 


thou wouldst pay due service to the former, and yet 
thy constant recourse would be to thy mother. So 
hast thou now the court and philosophy for step- 
mother and mother. Cease not then to come to the 
latter and take thy rest in her,! whereby shall both 
thy court life seem more tolerable? to thee, and thou 
to thy court life. 

13. As in the case of meat and similar eatables 
the thought strikes us, this is the dead body of a fish, 
this of a fowl or pig; and again that this Falernian is 
merely the juice of a grape-cluster, and this purple- 
edged robe is nought but sheep’s wool? steeped 
in the blood of a shell-fish; or, of sexual inter- 
course, that it is merely internal attrition and the 
spasmodic excretion of mucus *—such, I say, as are 
these impressions that get to grips with the actual 
things and enter into the heart of them, so as to see 
them as they really are, thus should it be thy life 
through, and where things look to be above measure 
convincing, laying them quite bare, behold their 
paltriness and strip off their conventional prestige. 
For conceit is a past master in fallacies and, when 
thou flatterest thyself most that thou art engaged 
in worthy tasks, then art thou most of all deluded 
by it. At any rate, see what Crates has to say about 
none other than Xenocrates.® 

14. Objects admired by the common sort come 
chiefly under things of the most general kind, which 
are held together by physical coherence,® such as 
stones and wood, or by a natural unity, such as figs, 


5 It is not known what Marcus here refers to. 

8 cp. Sext. Emp. adv. Math. viii. 2; ix. 81, 7a pev bd As 
étews ovvexerat, TA 5E rd Hioews, TA HE bd WuxHs: Kal Ekews per 
ws AlOor Kad EVAa, picews bE Kabdwep Ta puTd, Wuxis de Ta (Ga. 


135 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


> / \ be ¢ \ nr BJ / / 1 > 
eAalas’ Ta O€ UTO THY OALYM pETPLwWTEPWD *. ELS 
a eS a s TERR \ Se 
Ta UTO Wuyis, olov Toimvas, ayéXas: Ta be UO 
T@Y ett YapleoTépwv eis TA UTO AOYLKAS Woy, 
> fi iol > \ \ \ By 
ov pévtot KaGodKhs, adrAa Kalo TexVIKH 7 
addws Tas évtTpexys, 1) KaTa Wirov TO TAHOOs 
> / nan id \ x A 
avéparooav KexthoOar. o S€ Wuyi Royexnv 
KaborKnv Kab ToALTLKIY TL@Y ovdev ETL TOV 
BA > "a \ Lg / \ \ e lal 
adrwv éemrotpépetar, Ted atrdvrav Sé Thy éavTod 
Wuynv Royikds Kal KowawvKds Exovoay kal 
fal € lal lol 
Kiwoupevnv Stac@ber Kal TO Opmoyevel eis TOTO 
ouvEepyet. 
ue. Ta pev orevdoer yiverOar, Ta b€ orrevdex 
yeyovévat, Kal Tod ywvouévou Sé HOn TL aTécBN: 
ptoes Kal addoLdoels avaveotor TOY KOTpoV 
Sinven@s, BoTEp TOV ATrELpov aiava % TOD ypovov 
bd Us \ / > Set / b] \ 
adidrerTrT0s popa véov dei trapéyetar. év OH 
a a , 4 a 
TOUT@ TO TOTAaU@ Ti av TIS TOUTM@Y THY Tapa- 
> an 
Oeovtwy éxtiprjocev, ep od othvar ovK eEeoTwV; 
rn / 
@omep el Tis TL TOY TapaTreTo“évav oTpovOapiov 
pireiv apxorto: To & Hdn €E ofParpadv aredrnr- 
v0ev. tovovtov 64 Te Kal adThn 7 bw) éExaoTou, 
olov » ad aipatos ava0upiacis Kal » é« ToD 
aépos avamvevols. oToiov yap éote TO amrak 
édxvoar Tov aépa Kal atrododvat, brEep Tap- 
éxacTOV TOLODMEV, TOLOUTOV éoTL Kal TO THY TacaY 
avarrvevotixny Stvapmiv, hv yOés Kal mpwnv atro- 
TeyOels éxtijcw, arododvas éxel, 60ev TO TPOTOV 
éorracas. 
1 <@avpaCoueva> Mor. 


136 





BOOK VI 


vines, olives; and those which are admired by 
persons of a somewhat. higher capacity may be 
classed as things which are held together by a 
conscious life, such as flocks and herds; and those 
which are admired by persons still more refined, as 
things held together by a rational soul; I do not 
mean rational as part of the Universal Reason, but in 
the sense of master of an art or expert in some other 
way, or merely in so far as to own a host of slaves. 
But he that prizes a soul which is rational, universal, 
and civic, no longer turns after anything else, but 
rather than everything besides keeps his own soul, 
in itself and in its activity, rational and social, and 
to this end works conjointly with all that is akin to 
him. 

15. Some things are hastening to be, others to be 
no more, while of those that haste into being some 
part is already extinct. Fluxes and changes per- 
petually renew the world, just as the unbroken 
march of time makes ever new the infinity of ages. 
In this river of change,! which of the things which 
swirl past him, whereon no firm foothold is possible, 
should a man prize so highly? As well fall in love 
with a sparrow? that flits past and in a moment is gone 
from our eyes. In fact a man’s life itself is but as an 
exhalation from blood? and an inhalation from the 
air. For just as it is to draw in the air once into 
our lungs and give it back again, as we do every 
moment, so is it to give back thither, whence thou 
didst draw it first, thy faculty of breathing which 
thou didst receive at thy birth yesterday or the day 
before. 


1 iv. 43; vii. 19. 
2 cp. the parable of the sparrow in Bede ii. 13. 3 v.33. 


137 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


/ ” \ al td \ \ / 
is’. Odrte to Starrveicbat ws Ta puta Tipmor, 
r / 
oUTE TO avaTveiv ws Ta Bocknpata Kal Ta Onpia, 
a \ / 
ovTe TO TUTOVCOaL KaTa havTaciav, ovTE TO 
vevpooTacteiabar Ka?’ opuny, ovTE TO GUVayerdt- 
ecOat, ovTe TO TpépecOat' TovTO yap SpoLov 
ar, 2 / \ / a an 
TO amroxpive Ta mepitToOpara Ths Tpopis. att 
Ss nw > Leal 
Ti ody tipsov; TO KpoteiaOat; ovyt. ovKodv ovde 
TO UTO yAwoo av Kporetabau ai yap Tapa TOV 
TOAMAOY evpnutat KpoTos Yocady. abiinas ovv 
Kat TO Sofdpioy" Ti KaTanelTreTaL Tipwov; b0Ko 
pev TO KaTa& Tiv diay KatacKevny KivetoOat 
\ ” x7? A \ e > f- »” 
Kai ioxecOa, ef 6 Kal ai émipérerat ayovor 
\ a a 
Kat ai Téxvar. } Te yap TéxvN Taca TodTO 
otoyatetat, va TO KatacKxevacbey émiTndeios 
\ oe 
éyn mpos TO épyov mpos 5 KaTecKkevactar 6 
¢ fol 
te duToupyos 0 émipedovpevos THs auTédov Kal 
0 TwArodaurvns Kal o Tod KuUVds érripEeOvpEVOS, 
tovtTo (ntei. ai Sé tradaywyia, ai bé &- 
Py / ee mf ) DO 3 \ 
ackanria. émt ti! omevdovow. wde ovv TO 
Timor. 
Kai tovto pev dy ed yn, oddév TOY GAoV 
TEPLTOLNTELS TEAUT@. OV Tavon Kai Garda 
\ a vy > io / A v 
TONKA TiyL@Vv;. ovVT ovv EdXE’OEpos Ean ovTE 
> ul BA > / > / Cal 
avtapKns ovTe atrabns. avaykn yap Ooveiv, 
fal ig rn \ > / > val 
Enrotutreiv, vpopacbat tos aderécOa éxeiva 
duvapévous, émuBovreverv Tois EXovot TO TLO- 
fevov UmTO aod" drAws TepipOar avayKn Tov 
> , X > fol /, \ \ tal 
éxelvav Tivos evden mpoaéts S€ MOANA Kal ToOIS 
1) P: tt AD: perhaps rovti. 
138 





BOOK VI 


16. Neither is it an inner respiration,! such as 
that of plants, that we should prize, nor the breath- 
ing which we have in common with cattle and wild 
animals, nor the impressions we receive through our 
senses, nor that we are pulled by our impulses like 
marionettes,? nor our gregarious instincts, nor our 
need of nutriment; for that is on a par with the 
rejection of the waste products of our food. 

What then is to be prized? The clapping of 
hands? No. Then not the clapping of tongues 
either. For the acclamations of the multitude are 
but a clapping of tongues. So overboard goes that 
poor thing Fame also. What is left to be prized ? 
This methinks : to limit our action or inaction to the 
needs of our own constitution, an end that all occup- 
ations and arts set before themselves. For the aim 
of every art is that the thing constituted should be 
adapted to the work for which it has been constituted. 
It is so with the vine-dresser who looks after the 
vines, the colt-trainer, and the keeper of the kennels. 
And this is the end which the care of children and 
the methods of teaching have in view. There then 
| is the thing to be prized ! 

This once fairly made thine own, thou wilt not 
seek to gain for thyself any of the other things as 
well. Wilt thou not cease prizing many other things 
also? Then thou wilt neither be free nor sufficient 
| unto thyself nor unmoved by passion. For thou must 
needs be full of envy and jealousy, be suspicious of 
those that can rob thee of such things, and scheme 
against those who possess what thou prizest. In fine, 
a man who needs any of those things cannot but 
be in complete turmoil, and in many cases find 


Ma 2 ii. 2 ete. 


139 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


a a / 
Oeois péuherOar: 4 5é THs idias Siavoias aidas 
Kal Top) ceavT@ Te dpeo Tov oe TOLnoEL Kal TOFS 
avO porous evdppoorov Kal Tots Geis ovppavor, 
Toutéotiv érawodvTa, doa éxeivor Siavéwovart Kal 
dvateTayacwy. 
f v / 4 \ al / 
yp Avo, Kato, KiKMp popal Tov oTOLXel@D. 
4 5é THs adperhs Kivnors € év OvVOEMLE TOVTMV, GAA 
besbreone TL Kal 00@ Sucerworrp Tpoiovca 
evooel. 
, / > a a \ % en a 
in’. Oldv éotuv, 6 rotovar. Tods mev emi Tod 
avtov ypovov Kal pel” Eavtav Cavtas avOpertrovs 
evpnpueiy ov OéXovow: adtol dé bo TOV peTa- 
yevertépwv evdnunOhva, ods ovte eldov mote 
ovTe dpourar, mept TOAXNOU TovobvTat. TovTO 
5é éyyus éore TO Aun ivat av, Ort ovxl Kal 
oi mpoyevéotepor tepl cov Adyous evdrpous 
€T OLODYTO. 
/ / v > a \ / 
0. My, ef te adt@ coi dvoxatarovntor, 


TovTo avOpor@ advvatov tUToNauBaver’ adr’ ef 


te avOpoT@ Suvatov Kat oikelov, TodTo Kal 
cEeauT@ EfixTov vomute. 

’ > a / iy / , 
x. Ep tots ywevacvors Kat ovugi Katédpuye 
TUS Kal TH Kepary epparels TANYHY éTroinoev 
adn’ ouTE ervonpawopeda, ouTE TpooKkOTTopLey 


ovte wpopw@pcba totepov ws eTiBovdov: KaiToL 


puratropeba, ov pévtor ws €xGpov ovde. pel’. 


uTowias, GAN éxKkricews evpevods. ToOLODTOV TL 


yevécOw Kal év Tois Aovmrois pépeot Tod Biou: 
ToANa trapevOvpwouca tov olov mpocyupvato- 
pébov. é€eots yap, ws pny, exKriverv, Kai 
pn dev dmomrevew pn dé anéx Ger Oat. 


: 
: 


ka. Ei tis pe edéyEar kal rapactioai HOt, 


140 








BOOK VI 


fault even with the Gods.!_ But by reverencing and 
prizing thine own mind, thou shalt make thyself 
pleasing in thine own sight, in accord with mankind, 


and in harmony with the Gods, that is, grateful 


to them for all that they dispense and _ have 
ordained. 

17. Up, down,? round-wise sweep the elements 
along. But the motion of virtue is in none of these 
ways. Itis something more divine, and going forward 
on a mysterious path fares well upon its way.® 

18. What a way to act! Men are chary of com- 
mending their contemporaries and associates, while 
they themselves set great store by the commendation 
of posterity, whom they have never seen or shall see. 
But this is next door to taking it amiss that thy 
predecessors also did not commend thee. 

19. Because thou findest a thing difficult for thyself 
to accomplish do not conceive it to be impracticable 
for others ; but whatever is possible for a man and in 
keeping with his nature consider also attainable by 


| thyself. 


20. Suppose that a competitor in_the ring has 
gashed us with his nails and butted us violently with 
his head, we do not protest or take it amiss or 
suspect our opponent in future of foul play. Still 
we do keep an eye on him, not indeed as an enemy, 
or from suspicion of him, but with good-humoured 
avoidance. Act much in the same way in all the 
other parts of life. Let us make many allowances 
for our fellow-athletes as it were. Avoidance is 
always possible, as I have said, without suspicion 
or hatred. 

21. If any one can prove and bring home to me 


1 vi. 41. 2-vi, 17 >-iv. 463-7) 28. 37, 53. 
141 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


bte ovx op0as bTroXapRave 3) Tpdoow, dvvarat, 
xaipeov peTaOnoopar Ente yap Tap anyGevav, 
ug’ hs ovdels TO TOTE éBX4Bn. Brdmrerat dé 0 
emipéveov emi Tis éavtob an aTns Kal ayvoias. 
KB. "Ey TO evavtob Keabiicov Tove" Ta dna 
pe ov mepoTr a Hroe yep anpuxa i) addoya, 4) 





TET NAVH Leva Kal THY od0v dyvoouvTa. 

Ky. Tots pev aoryous Soous Kal Kkabonou | 
Tpaypace Kal UTroKeLpevols, WS Aoyov éya@v Noyov' 
pa EXoval, xpe@ peyaroppoves kal erevOépars 
Tois 6€ avO per ots, @s  oyov éxover, xpe® 





KOWOVIKOS. ép’ admace dé Geos émikanrod: Kal 
pi) Seapépou mpos TO Too@ Xpovep TadTa mpakeus: 
apkovat yap Kal Tpels pat ToabTaL. 

/ 

KO. "AréEavdpos o o Maxedov Kal o Opew@Kouos | 
avrod. atroOavovtes eis Tauro KatéoTnoay: TOL | 
yap <av>ernpOnocar eis tods adtovs Tod Koc pou 
omeppatixods NOyous 7) SivecxeddcOncav opoiws | 
els TAS aT opovs. 

/ 0 40 , \ | 
ke. "Ey upnentt, wera Kata Tov QvTOV | 
daxapiatov Xpovov ev ExaoT@ pay apa yivetar 
TopariKa opod Kal puxied? Kal oUT@S ov Gavpa- 
oels, el {mow Tele, padrov dé mavra, Ta 
ywopeva! év TO evi TE KaL OUpTraVTL, 0 dn KOoMOv 
ovouatopev, dua évudictatat. . 
i nee , , eaeae,. , \ 

Ks’, *Kap tis cou mpoBanry, TOS ypadheTat TO 
“Avravivou ) dvopa,” pajre Karevrewopevos Tpooicy 
éxactov TOV cToOLXElwV; Ti odV, éaV épyigwvrat, 





1 ywoueva <Kal yevynta> Schenkl, 





1 iv. 12; vi. 30, §2; viii. 16. 2 iv. 46. 
3 Usually singular in the Greek. See iv. 14. 21; ix. 1. 


142 








BOOK VI 


that a conception or act of mine is wrong, I will 
amend ! it, and be thankful. For I seek the truth, 
whereby no one was ever harmed. But he is 
harmed who persists in his own. self-deception and 
ignorance. 

22. I do my own duty ; other things do not distract 
me. For they are either inanimate or irrational, 
or such as have gone astray and know not the road.” 

23. Conduct thyself with magnanimity and freedom 
towards irrational creatures and, generally, towards 
circumstances and objective things, for thou hast 
reason and they have none. But men have reason, 
therefore treat them as fellow creatures. And in all 
cases call upon the Gods, and do not concern thyself 
with the question, How long shall Ido this? Three 
hours are enough so spent. 

24. Death reduced to the same condition Alexander 
the Macedonian and his muleteer, for either they 
were taken back into the same Seminal Reason ? 
of the Universe or scattered alike into the 
atoms.* 

25. Bear in mind how many things happen to each 
one of us with respect to our bodies as well as our 
souls in the same momentary space of time, so wilt 
thou cease to wonder that many more things—not 
to say all the things that come into existence in that 
One and Whole which in fact we call the Universe— 
subsist in it at one time. 

26. If one enquire of thee, How is the name 
Antoninus written? wilt thou with vehemence 
enunciate each constituent letter? What then? 
If thy listeners lose their temper, wilt thou lose 


4 Marcus puts the two alternatives (Stoic and Epicurean), 
though he does not himself admit the second. 


143 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


byte avtopyin; ovK eEaptOunon mpaws mpoiwv 
&xactTov TOV ypauydtwv; ovTws odv Kal évOdde 
pépvnoo, OTe wav KaOjKov é€& apiOuav Tiwev 
oupTAnpovTa. TovTous Set TypodvTa Kal m2) 
OopuBovpevoy pndé tois dvayepaivovow avte- 
/ / tQa \ / 
duc xepaivovra mrepaivery 080 70 mpoKeipevor. 
r r 
Ko. las wpyov éott, pr eémitpérey Tots 
lal / ° n 
avOpérrots oppav érl Ta haivopueva avtois oixeta 
\ 
Kal oupépovta: Kaito. TpoTov Twa Ov GUY- 
xopeis avTois TodTOo Toely, Stay ayavaKxThs, 
étt adpaptdvover. épovtar yap tTavTwas as 
é€ml oixela Kal ovpdépovta adtots. “’AXN ovK 
” A ” > fal / \ / \ 
éyer oUTaws.” ovKody Sidacke Kal Seixvve pu) 
WYAVAKTOD. 
«kn. @Odvatos avaravra aicOntiKhs avti- 
e a / 
tumias Kal oppnTiKhs vevpootactias Kal dva- 
vontikns SteEdSov Kal THS Tpos THY odpKAa 
NetToupyias. 
Q’ Ai y a > 4 Bi \ lal / 
KO’. Aioxypov éoti, &v & Bim TO cHmd cot 
a 4 \ 
Ky arraved, év ToUT@ THY WuxXnY TpoaTravbar. 
, / \ > + plage \ a 
v. “Opa, py ‘atoxacapwlijs, ph Badjs: 
yiverat yap. THpnoov ody GEeavToV aod), 
ayabov, axépatov, ceuvov, akopayov, tod Scxaiov 
/ a > n / > / 
dirov, PeoceBh, edtpwevn, pirootopyov, éppwpévov 
Tpos TA MpéTovTa Epya. aywvicat, va TOLOUTOS 
, , 27Ar na 7 
cvuppelvys, olov ce NOéAnGE TraLHoaL Pptdocodia. 
> lal A n > , \ e , 
aisod Beovs, cafe avOpwrovs. Bpayvds o Bios: 





Any Riwvs) 28: 
3 viii. 36. So Marcus himself in a letter to Fronto (ad Caes. 


144 


ee ee 





BOOK VI 


thine ? Wouldst thou not go on gently to enumerate 
each letter? So recollect that in life too every 
duty is the sum of separate items.4_ Of these thou 
must take heed, and carry through methodically 
what is set before thee, in no wise troubled or shewing 
counter-irritation against those who are irritated with 
thee. 

27. How intolerant it is not to permit men to 
cherish an impulse towards what is in their eyes 
congenial and advantageous! Yet in a sense thou 
withholdest from them the right to do this, when 
thou resentest their wrong-doing. For they are 
undoubtedly drawn to what they deem congenial 
and advantageous. But they are mistaken. Well, 
then, teach and enlighten them without any resent- 
ment.? 

28. Death is a release from the impressions ot 
sense, and from impulses that make us their puppets, 
from the vagaries of the mind, and the hard service 
of the flesh. , 

29. It is a disgrace for the soul to be the first to 
succumb in that life in which the body does not 
succumb.? 

30. See thou be not Caesarified, nor take that 
dye,* for there is the possibility. So keep thyself a 
simple and good man, uncorrupt, dignified, plain, a 
friend of justice, god-fearing, gracious, affectionate, 
manful in doing thy duty. Strive to be always such 
as Philosophy minded to make thee. Revere the 
Gods, save mankind. Lifeis short. This only is the 


iv. 8): Turpe fuerit diutius vitam corporis quam animi 
studium ad reciperandam sanitatem posse durare. 

4 There was also a ‘‘ philosophic dye”; see Lucian, Bis 
Accus. 8. 


145 
L 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


? ‘ a > / n / ec , \ 
els Kaptros THs émuyetov Cwis, dudBeots ooia Kai 
mpakers Kow@vikal. 

Ildvta as “Avtwvivov pabnrys' TO imép TeV 

\ 

KaTa Oyov Tpaccopévwy evTOVvoY éxelvou, Kal 
TO Opahés travtaxod, Kal TO Gavov, Kal TO 
evdiov 1 Tod mpocwTrov, Kal TO petdixLov, Kal TO 
axevooofov, kal TO Tepl THY KaTadpwW TOV 
Tpaypnatov piroTimwov: Kal ws éxelvos ovK av TL 
bA@s TapiKe, un TpOTepoy ev para KaTLdoVv Kal 
Tapas vojcas kal ws peper exeivos Tors adixas 
avTov peupopmévovs pun) avTipeupomuevos: Kal ws 
25D >Q\ a a te \ > 207 
én ovdev Eotrevdev’ Kal ws diaBoras od« édéxeTo: 

ag 2 \ > > \ > n \ / 
Kal ws axpiBns hv éEeraotns nO@v Kal mpdfewv: 

\ > ? / > / > e / 
Kal ovK overdioTys, ov vopodens, ovy bTorrTnSs, 
ov copioTtys: Kal ws drgLyous apKotpevos, olov 
oikioel, oTpapuvn, écOnTL, Tpopn, vmnpecia 
Kat .@s gtdOmovoes Kal paxpdOvuos: Kal olos 
pév<ew> é€v TH <a’T@>* péyps éEoTrépas bia 
THY LTHY Siartav wNde TOD aTroKpivelY TA TEpLTT- 
@pata Tapa Thy cvvyndn dpav ypynvav: Kal TO 
BéBavov Kai Gpotov év tais didiais avtov: Kal 
To avéxecOat <ta’> avTiBaivovT@Y TappnolacT- 
“KOs Tais yvopuais avtov, kal yaipewv, el Tes 
Serxvvo. Kpeittov: Kal ws OeoceBns yopis Sevor- 
Saipovias: iy ottws evovvedyt@ cor émicTh 1 
TéedXeuTAla Wpa, ws exeive. 

fal / 

ra’. ~“Avavnde xal avaxadod ceavtov, Kal 
2 \ , 2 , v y , 
éEurvicbels Tdadw Kal évvojcas, STL dverpol cor 


1 eGdiov Xyl.: edddiov PA. =? wey ev r@ PA: as in text Cas. 
146 


A eats | 





BOOK VI 
' 
harvest of earthly existence, a righteous disposition 
and social acts. 

Do all things as a disciple of Antoninus.! 
Think of his constaney in every act rationally 
undertaken, his invariable equability, his piety, his 
serenity of countenance, his sweetness of disposi- 
tion, his contempt for the bubble of fame, and his 
zeal for getting a true grip of affairs. How he 
would never on any account dismiss a thing until 
he had first thoroughly scrutinized and clearly con- 
ceived it ; how he put up with those who found fault 
with him unfairly, finding no fault with them in 
return; how he was never in a hurry; how he gave 
no ear to slander,? and with what nicety he tested 
dispositions and acts; was no imputer of blame, and 
no craven, not a suspicious man, nor a _ sophist ; 
what little sufficed him whether for lodging or bed, 
dress, food or attendance ; how fond he was of work, 
and how long-suffering; how he would remain the 
whole day at the same occupation,* owing to his 
spare diet* not even requiring to relieve nature 
except at the customary time ; and how loyal he was 
to his friends and always the same ; and his forbear- 
ance towards those who openly opposed his views, 
and his pleasure when anyone pointed out something 
better®; and how god-fearing he was and yet not 
given to superstition. Take heed to all this, that 
thy last hour come upon thee as much at peace with 
thy conscience as he was. 

31. Be sober once more and call back thy senses, 
and being roused again from sleep and, realizing that 
they were but dreams that beset thee, now awake 


1 ep. i. 16 throughout. a 1..B; 
3 Or, in the same place. 4 cp. i. 3. 5 vi. 21; viii. 16. 


147 
EZ 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


hvaxyrouv, mdduw éeypnyopas Prérre TadTa, as 
exeiva &BerTres. 

AB’. ?Ex cw@partiou eipl cal Wwuyijs. TO pev 
ovv cwpatio mavtTa abidgopa: ove yap Swvarat 
Siabéper Bar. TH dé Siavoig advadopa, 6 doa py 
éoru aoris évepynpara: Soa 8é {YE aurijs éory 
evepynpara, TavTa mavra em auTh éoTw. Kal 
TOUT@Y jéVvTOL Trepl fovoY TO Tapoy TpaypLaT- 
eveTae" Ta yap pédovTa Kal TwapeynKoTa 
évepy para auris Kai aura 750 abuddopa. 

ry’. Ovx gow 0 TOvos TH xeupt ovde 7 
Tool. Tapa pvow, péxXpls Av Ton Oo TOUS TA TOD 
Todos Kal 4) yelp TA THS Yerpds. OUTS obv OvdE 
avOpore, a: avOpoTr@, Trapa diow éotly 6 
Tévos, wexpls av Toh Ta TOD avOpwTrov. ei Sé 
mapa piow avT@ ovK Eat, ovdé Kakdv éoTW 

> n 
auto. 

rs. SHrLcas nOovas Ha Oncav AnoTal, Kivatdot, 
matpanoiat, TUPAVVOL. 

re’. Ody opas, TOS of Bavavon Texvitat 
dppolovrat pev méxpe TLvds mpos Tovs idioTas, 
ovdev Ho cov pEVTOL ayréxovT at Too Aoyou THS 
TEXYNS, kal tovTou amooThvar ovx, dTouEvoveW; 
ov Sewor, et 0 GpXLTEKT OV kal 6 lar pos paddov 
aidécovTat Tov THS idias TEXYNS oyov Ho 
avOpwros Tov éavTod, ds avT@ Kowds ote TPds 
Tovs Geos; 

As’. “H ’Acia, 4) Eipern yoviar tod Koopov: 
may TéNayos otayav ToD Kécpov: “Abws Bword- 
prov 70d Koopou Tay To éveoT@s TOD xpdévou 
oTLypn TOD ai@vos. mMdavTa pLKpd, evTpETTA, 
évadariCopeva. 

148 





BOOK VI 


again, look at these realities as thou didst at those 
thy dreams. 

32. I consist of body and soul.! To the body indeed 
all things are indifferent, for it cannot concern itself 
with them. But to the mind? only those things are 
indifferent which are not its own activities; and all 
those things that are its own activities are in its 
own power. Howbeit, of these it is only concerned 
with the present ; for as to its activities in the past 
and the future, these two rank at once among things 
indifferent. 

33. For hand or foot to feel pain is no violation of 
nature, so long as the foot does its own appointed 
work, and the hand its own. Similarly pain for a 
man, as man, is no unnatural thing so long as he does 
a man’s appointed work. But, if not unnatural, then 
is it not an evil either. 

34. The pleasures of the brigand, the pathic, 
the parricide, the tyrant*—just think what they 
are ! 

35. Dost thou not see how the mechanic craftsman, 
though to some extent willing to humour the non- 
expert, yet holds fast none the less to the principles 
of his handicraft, and cannot endure to depart from 
them. Is it not strange that the architect and the 
physician should hold the rationale of their respective 
arts in higher reverence than a man his own reason, 
which he has in common with the Gods? 

36. Asia, Europe, corners of the Universe: the 
whole Ocean a drop in the Universe: Athos but a 
little clod therein: all. the present a point in 
Eternity :—everything on a tiny scale, so easily 
changed, so quickly vanished. 


1 vy. 13. 2 Here dudvoiw = puxh. P vi dO: 
149 


2 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Ilavra exeiber €,  EPXETAL, an éxetvou TOU KOLVOD 
HyeHorucod opyncavTa oy) Kat émaxonovOnaww. 
Kat TO xaopa ouv Tob éovTos Kal TO On dyTnpLov 
Kab Tao, KaKoupyia, OS axavOa, OS BopBopos, 
éxelvov eTLUyeVYNUATAa TOY GELVaV Kal KaXdOV. 
yn ovvy auTa. GNXOT pla ToUTOU, ov aéBes, 
pavratou: ara THD mavTov m™yny emthoyivov. 

ALuis O Ta vov id@v madvra E@paxev, boa TE 
e& audiov éyéveo Kal 6 boa eis TO ATeLpov Etat 
TATA yap omoyevh Kal opoerd7. 

ry’. TloAddxus évOupod THD emu bydeow Tav- 
TeV TOV év T® Koo pep Kab oxéow mpos adAnra. 
TpoTrov yap Tuva mavTa ardnrows émemeTheK Tat, 
Kal TavTa KaTa TOUTO dira aAANAOLS eoTiv? Kal 
yap adX@ adro! EFS ote tadTa® Siva THY 
Tovixny Kivnow* Kal ovutrvoav Kal thy Evoow 
THs ovotas. 

OW. Ois TUYKEKANPOTAL Tpaypact, TOUTOLS 
ouvappote geavTov' Kal ols cuveiAnyas avOpor- 
ols, TOVTOUS pirer, arn ahnO ives. 

: Me. “Opyavov, epryareiov, oKedos may el, mpos 
0 KaTETKEVAaTTAL, Tole, EV EXEL KaiTOL EKEL O 
KaTacKevdoas éxTrobwv. émi dé TaY UO dicews 
ovvexonévov évdov éotl Kal tapapéver 4» KaTa- 
oxevacaca Svvapis: Ka0o Kal wadrov aideicbar 
avTny Sei Kal vopiterv, éav kata TO BovAnpa 
1 &AAw &AAo Cor.: &AAw P BAdo A. 
2 rovro PA: taira Schenkl. 


3 romixhy xévnow P by an obvious misprint as Xyl. trans- 
lates constantem motum. 





1 ii. 3; v. 8, § 5; xii. 26. 21/2. 
3 ii, 14; iv. 32; vii. 1, 49; xi. 1; xii. 24. 


a at a 


' 


BOOK VI 


All things come from that one source, from that 
ruling Reason of the Universe,! either under a primary 
impulse. from it or by way of consequence. And 
therefore the gape of the lion’s jaws? and poison and 
all noxious things, such as thorns and mire, are but 
after-results of the grand and the beautiful. Look 
not then on these as alien to that which thou dost 


-reverence, but turn thy thoughts to the one source of 


all things. 

37. He, who sees what now is, hath seen all that 
ever hath been from times everlasting, and that shall 
be to eternity *; for all things are of one lineage and 
one likeness. 

38. Meditate often on the intimate union and 
mutual interdependence of all things in the Universe. 
For in a manner all things are mutually intertwined, 
and thus all things have a liking for one another. 
For these things are consequent one on another by 
reason of their contracting and expanding * motion, 
the sympathy ° that breathes through them, and the 
unity of all substance. : 

39. Fit thyself to the environment that is thy 
portion,® and love the men among whom thy lot is 
thrown, but whole-heartedly.’ 

40. Every implement, tool, or vessel is well if it 
do the work for which it is made, and yet in their 
case the maker is not at hand. But in the things 
which owe their organic unity to Nature, the Power 
that made is within them and abides there. Where- 
fore also must thou reverence it the more, and 


4 rovixhv ; see Index ITI. 
> cp. Diog. Laert. Zeno 70: rhv tav obpaviwy mpds Ta émlyera 
cupnvolay Kal cuvroviav. 6 vii. 57. 


7 vi. 48; viii. 22. cp. 1 St. Peter, i. 22. 
151 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


TaUTNS cavutov' exns Kal” * due ayy, exew oot 
TavTa KaTa voov. exer dé oUTwS Kal TH TravTl 
KATH vooV TA EAUTOD. 
/ d x lal > / e , 
pa’. “Ore dv TOV ampoapétov brooTHENS 
a , 
cavT@ ayabov 7) KaKoV, avayKn KaTa THY TeEpi- 
TTWOW TOU TOLOVTOV KAKOU 7 THY aToOTEvEW TOD 
nr / va] 
tovovTov ayabod, péurracOai ce Oeois, Kal 
avOpeorous S€ piohoat Tovs aitiovs dvtas 7% 
itomrevopevous EcecOar THs atotevEews 7) THS 
TEPLTTM@TEWS’ Kal adiKodmev 87 ToAAa Sia THY 
\ lal 7 7\ \ / \ > PB a 
Tpos TavTa Svahopav. éav dé pova Ta éf’ Hpiv 
ayaba Kai Kaka Kpivmpev, ovdepia aitia Kata- 
7 LA lol > / BA \ ” 
NeireTas oUTE Oe@ eyxarécar ote pods avOpwrov 
a / 
oThvat oTaow TodEpiov. 
/ A > A > / e 
pRB’. Uldvtes eis év atrotékeopa cvvepyoiper, 
oi pev elO0Tws Kal TapaKoNovOnTLKOs, of dé 
aveTtoTaTws’ waTep. Kal “Tods KabevdovTas,” 
> cre , se 2 , > »” / \ 
oipat, 0 ‘Hpdkretos “ épydtas eivar” réyer, Kai 
guvepyovs TOV év TO KOTH yLVoMevwV. adXOS 
5é Kat ado cuvepyel: ek Tepiovoias dé Kai 
/ € 
0 peppouevos Kail oO avTiBaivery TeLpmpevos 
° , n 
Kat avaupeiv Ta ywWomeva. Kal yap ToD ToLOvTOV 
/ 
Expy Sev 0 KOT [0s. NoLTrOV ovV GUVES, Eis Tivas 
O€auTOV Katara ets: éxelvos pev yap TdavTwS 
TOL KANO@S XpHoeTat OTA Ora Stol“KOY, Kal Tapa- 
dé£eTai oe eis pépos TL TOV cuVepyav Kal cuD- 
lal \ lo) 
EPYNTLKOV. AANA ov 1) TOLODTO Epos YyévN, Olos 
1 avrov A: omit P: cavrdy Cor.: avrds Schenkl. 
2 €xns cat P: omit A, 
152 





. BOOK VI 


realize that if thou keep and conduct thyself ever 
according to its will, all is to thy mind. So also to 
its mind are the things of the Universe. 

41, If thou regardest anything not in thine own 
choice as good or evil for thyself, it is inevitable that, 
on the incidence of such an evil or the miscarriage 
of such a good, thou shouldst upbraid*the Gods,! 
aye, and hate men as the actual or supposed cause of 
the one or the other ; and in fact many are the wrong- 
doings we commit by setting a value on such things.? 
But if we discriminate as good and evil only the 
things in our power, there is no occasion left for 
accusing the Gods ® or taking the stand of an enemy 
towards men. 

42, We are all fellow-workers towards the ful- 
filment of one object, some of us knowingly and 
intelligently, others blindly ; just as Heraclitus, I 
think, says that even when they sleep men are 
workers and fellow-agents in all that goes on in the 
world. One is a co-agent in this, another in that, 
and in abundant measure also he that murmurs and 


seeks to hinder or disannul what occurs. For the 
Universe had need of such men also. It remains 


then for thee to decide with whom thou art ranging 
thyself. For He that controls the Universe will in 
any case put thee to a good use and admit thee to a 
place among his fellow-workers and _ coadjutors. 
But see that thou fill no such place as the paltry 


1 vi. 16§ 3; ix. lad med. cp. Epict. i. 27 § 18. 

2 ae. treating as important things which are adidqpopa, or 
of no consequence either way. 3 vi. 1683. 
_ * ep. iv. 46. But Plutarch in his treatise On Superstition 
cites a saying of Heraclitus to the effect that sleepers live 
in a world of their own, 


153 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


€ > A \ al , 3 A / 
0 evTEANS Kal yedoios atixos év TH Spdpate, 
ov Xpvoirmos péuvynrar. 
/ / e ¢ \ a ¢ n 3 a a 
py. Myre o HrAu0s Ta TOD VeTod aktot Tovey; 
/ e ? \ \ a / / \ 
pn te 6 “AokArnTLos ta THs Kaprogopou; ti dé 
TOV aoTpwv ExacToV; ovxXi Siddhopa pév, TVVEpYa 
dé pos TavTov; 
/ > \ 9S > 7 \ > nr \ 
po. Ei pév ody éBovrevcavto wep éuod Kal 
TOV e“ol svpShvar opetrovTwv ot OBeoi, Kaas 
> / »” \ \ xO 39 n 
é€Bovrevoayto: aBovAov yap Oeov ovdé érivonoat 
padiov KaxoTojoar dé pe Sia Tiva aitiay 
EweAXov Opuav; Ti yap avTois 7) TO KoLW@, Ov 
adoTa TpovoodyvTat, €K ToUTOU TepLeyéveTo; 
el 5€ wn éBovrevcavto Kat idiay tepl mod, 
mept ye. TOV KoLWaY TravTws éBovrevcaYTO, ols 
Kat émakorovOnow Kat TadtTa cupPBaivorta 
> / \ / bd] / ry 5 oe. \ 
aomavecOat Kai otépye odeiiw. ei 8 dpa Tepl 
pndevos Bovrevovtat (mucTevery pév ovy Sotov), 
Hh pndée Ovopev pndé evyapucOa pndé opviwperv 
unde Ta GAXa Tpdoowper, dep Exacta ws TpOS 
, Ta) 
mapovtas Kal oupBidvtas tors Jeots mpdcc- 
ouev. e& 5€ dpa rept pndevos TOV Kal” was 
Bovrevovrar, euol pev e&eats Tept éyauTod 
BovreverOar- ewot 5é éaott oKéwis mepi Tob 
/ / \ ec /, \ \ \ 
auppépovtos. cupéper O€ ExdoT@, TO KATA THY 
€avTov KatacKkevny kal dvow:  Sé éun vous 
oyix? Kal TONTLKH TOALS Kal TraTpls @S meV 





1 Plutarch (adv. Stoic. §§ 13, 14) vigorously denounces this 
sophism, as he counts it, of Chrysippus that what is evil in 
itself has a value as a foil to the good. He quotes Chrysippus 
(Frag. Phys. 1181 Arnim) : 

dorep yap at kwpwdla: emvypappata yedoia pépovew & Kad 
éadra pev ott padra, TP 5e BAw worhuate Xap iva mpoorrlOnow, 


154 


BOOK VI 


and ridiculous line -in the play which Chrysippus 
mentions.! 

43. Does the sun take upon himself to discharge 
the functions of the rain? or Asclepius of the 
Fruit-bearer?? And what of each particular star? 
Do they not differ in glory yet co-operate to one 
end? 

44, If the Gods have taken counsel about me and 
the things to befall me, doubtless they have taken 
good counsel. For it is not easy even to imagine a 
God without wisdom. And what motive could they 
have impelling them to do me evil? For what advan- 
tage could thereby accrue to them or to the Universe 
which is their special care? But if the Gods have 
taken no counsel for me individually, yet they have 
in any case done so for the interests of the 
Universe, and I am bound to welcome and make 

the best of? those things also that befall as a 
necessary corollary to those interests. But if so be 
they take counsel about nothing at all—an impious 
belief—in good sooth let us have no more of 
sacrifices and prayers and oaths, nor do any other of 
these things every one of which is a recognition 
of the Gods as if they were at our side and dwell- 
ing amongst us—but if so be, I say, they do not 
take counsel about any’of our concerns, it is still 
in my power to take counsel about myself, and 
it is for me to consider my own interest. And 
that is to every man’s interest which is agree- 
able to his own constitution and nature. But my 
nature is rational and civic; my city and country, 
ottTws Weteias bv avThy ep Eautijs Thy Kkaxtay> rots de HAAS ovK 
uxpnords éorw. 


2 That is, the Earth, or possibly Demeter. 
3 v. 883; x. 6, 11. 


155 





MARCUS AURELIUS 


"Avrovive poe n ‘Popm, os be avO pam 0 


Koo MOS. Ta Tals ToT OV Ta’TALs OPEAMA 


poova éoti poe ayabd. 

pe. "Oca éxadoT@ oupPBaiver, Tada TH Ode 
ouppéper: 7PKEL TOUTO. arr ért éxeivo as émimay 
dyer tapagurdtas, doa avOporw, Kal érépous 
avO pwrrots. xowoTepov S€ viv To aupdépov éml 
TOV péowv AapBavésBa, 

ps’. “Oorep mpociorarat go Ta év TO aphe- 
Oedtpp kal Trois TOLOUTOLS xapios, @s del Ta 
avra opa@peva, Kal TO omoerdes T™poaKoph THY 
déav mowet: TObTO kal eml ddov Tob Biov mdaoxew 
mara yap dv KAT TA AUTA Kal Ex TOV AUTOP. 
péxpe Tivos OvV; 

pe. "Evvoee ovvex@s TavTotovs avOpwrovs 
Kal TaVTOL@Y wev emeTnOeupaTon, TavTodan Ov dé 


; : 
eOvav, teOvedtas' WoTEe KAaTLEVAL TOUTO PEXpL 


Didtotiwvos Kal PoiBov Kab Opuyaviwvos. 
péTiOe viv ert Ta adrAa dora. exe by perta- 
Bareiv pas Sez, Omrov TogovToL pev Sewvot 
pytopes, TocovToaL bé cemvot prrocopor, “Hpa- 
KAELTOS, Tv@ayepas, Lwxparns’ TOCOUTOL 6é 
Hpwes 7 poTepon, TogovTOL dé totepov oTparnyol, 
TUpavvot éml tovtos dé Kvdo€os, * ‘Immapxos, 
‘Apxeunons, Gddrrat pvaoeus o€etar, peyarod poves, 
piroTovat, Tavovpyot, avO addeas, avTHS THS €TwLKNp- 





1 v. 8; x. 6 etc. 

2 7.e. indifferent, neither good nor bad. 

3 A personal touch. See Fronto, ad Caes. iv. 12: theatro 
libros lectitabas; ii. 6, idem theatrum, idem odiwm (v.1. 
otium) ; cp. ii. 10; Naber, p. 34; cp. Capit. xv. § 1. 

* A Cynic philosopher of Gadara. His Syrian compatriot, 
Lucian, the prince of mockers, was yet alive and mocking. 


156 


~ 





BOOK VI . 


as Antoninus, is Rome; as a man, the world. The 
_ things then that are of advantage to these com- 
| munities, these, and no other, are good for me. 

45. All that befalls the Individual is to the 
interest of the Whole also.1 So far, so good, 
But further careful observation will shew thee 
that, as a general rule, what is to the interest 
of one man is also to the interest of other men. 
But in this case the word interest must be taken in 
a more general sense as it applies to intermediate ? 
things. 

46. As the shows in the amphitheatre and such 
places grate upon thee® as being an everlasting 
repetition of the same sight, and the similarity makes 
the spectacle pall, such must be the effect of the 
whole of life. For everything above and below is 
ever the same and the result of the same things. 
How long then ? 

47. Never lose sight of the fact that men of all 
kinds, of all sorts of vocations and of every race 
under heaven, are dead; and so carry thy thought 
down even to Philistion and Phoebus and Origanion. 
Now turn to the other tribes of men. We must 
pass at last to the same bourne whither so many 
wonderful orators have gone, so many grave philo- 
sophers, Heraclitus, Pythagoras, Socrates : so many 
heroes of old time, and so many warriors, so many 
tyrants of later days: and besides them, Eudoxus, 
Hipparchus, Archimedes, and other acute natures, 
men of large minds, lovers of toil, men of versatile 
powers, men of strong will, mockers, like Menippus + 


cp. Lue. Pisc. 26, where the Scholiast (Arethas) refers to 
this passage. Diog. Laert. mentions a Meleager, the con- 
temporary of Menippus, as a writer of similar character. 


157 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ov Kal ébnuépou TOV avOpwrrav Cons xreVacTAal, 
olov Mévimmos kai dcot ToLtodToL. Tepl TayT@Y 
TOUTwWY évvoel, OTL WAAL KElVTaL. TL OvY TOUTO 
devvov avtois; ti Sal tots pnd dvopalopuévors 
dros; “Ev @d¢ woddod aEov, TO pet adnOeias 
Kal SiKatocvyns evpevh Tots WevaTats Kal adixots 
dtaB.oovv. 

pn’. “Orav edtppavar ceavtov Oérys, évOuvpod 
Ta TpoTepnuata TOV cUpBLOvYTwY: oboY TOU meV 
To Spactipiov, Tov Sé TO aidijov, tod Sé TO 
evpeTaootov, addrdou S€ adrAO TL. oOvdeY Yap 
oUTws evdpaiver, @ TA OmolomaTa TOV apeTav 
éudhawopeva Tols Ocot Tov cvlovtwv Kal abpoa 
@s olov Te ovpTimrovTa. 510 Kal Tpdxyeipa avTa 
Ex TEéOD. 

pO’. Myre Svoyepaivers, Ste Toowvdé Tier 
AiTpav ¢& Kal ov Tpiaxociwv; ottw Sé Kal 
OTe péxpe Too@vde éra@v Biwtéov cor Kal ov 
péxypt mAelovos: womtep yap Tis ovclas door 


247 / , ¢ ey TB a 
ap@pioTtat ool oTEpyels, OVUTWS KAL ETL TOU 


x povov. 

v. Llepa pév meiOew adtovs, mpatte Sé Kal 
aKovTov,' dtav Tis Sixaroovyyns O ROyos obTwS 
dyn. éav pévtor Bla Tus mpocxp@pevos évicrn- 
Tal, weTaBawe éml TO evdpectov Kal ddvTor, 
kal ovyxp® eis GdAnY apeTHY TH KwdUGEL' 
kal péuvnoo, ote wel? trreEarpécews Hpyas, Ste 
Kal Ttav advydtwv ovK wpéyov. Tivos odv; 

1 ray axdvtwy P: abtady ax. Menag. 


158 





BOOK VI 


and many another such, of man’s perishable and 
transitory life itself. About all these reflect that 


_ they have long since been in their graves. What 


terrible thing then is this for them? What pray 
for those whose very names are unknown? One 
thing on earth is worth much—to live out our 
lives in truth and justice, and in charity with liars 
and unjust men. 

48. When thou wouldst cheer thine ‘heart, think 


upon the good qualities of thy associates'; as for 


instance, this one’s energy, that one’s modesty, the 
generosity of a third, and some other trait of a fourth. 
For nothing is so cheering as the images of the 


_ virtues mirrored in the characters of those who 
_ live with us, and presenting themselves in as great a 


throng as possible. Have these images then ever 
before thine eyes. 
49. Thou art not aggrieved, art thou, at being so 


many pounds in weight and not three hundred ? 


Then why be aggrieved if thou hast only so many 
years to live and no more? For as thou art con- 
tented with the amount of matter allotted thee, 
so be content also with the time. 

50. Try persuasion first, but even though men 


_would say thee nay, act when the principles of 
| justice so direct. Should any one however with- 


stand thee by force, take refuge in being well-content 
and unhurt, and utilize the obstacle for the display 
of some other virtue. Recollect that the impulse thou 
hadst was conditioned ? by circumstances,* and thine 
aim was not to do impossibilities. What then was it? 


1 But cp. v. 10. aiv. 1 ¥.20. 
3 Lit. was with a reservation, 7.e. ‘* should circumstances 
allow.” cp. iv. 1; viii. 41. 


159 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Ths Toraodé Twos opuns. Tovrov Sé TUyxavels: 
ép’ ois mponyOnpev, Tadta yiverat. 
va. ‘O pév dirodoEos adXotpiav évépyerav 
. Lg / 
idvov ayalov UTovAapBaver, 0 dé iryndovos idiav 
meio: 0 dé voov éywp idiay mpatw. ; 
vp’. “E&eots mepl tovrov pndév v7rodap- 
/ \ ee) a a a > \ \ 
Bavew Kai py dyreiocbat TH ~uyn avTa yap Ta 
mpdypata ovK exer paw TOLNTLKHY TOV 7ETEp@V 
Kploewn. 
7 Sy \ \ A € 4? cee 
vy. "E@tcov ceavtov mpos TH vd’ €ETEpou 
/, 
Aeyouévw yiverOar atrapevOvprjtws Kal ws oldv 
Te é€v TH Wx TOD NéyorTos yivou. 
vd. Td TO cpjver py cupdhépov ovd€ TH 
/ / 
pEerloon cvpdeper. 
, > nr € i x > 4 
ve. Ev xuBepyevta oi vadtar 7) tatpevovta 
¢ / fal bh \ x 
oi KdpvovTes Kak@s Edeyov, AAXAM TW av 
mpoceiyov 7) mas avTos évepyoin TO Tols EuTDré- 
ovot ocwTipiov % TO Tois Oepatrevopévols 
rytecvov; 
vs’. loco, we? wv eiciOov eis Tov Kocpor, 
non aTeXnrvOacrr. 
- ’ n \ / \ / \ 
ve’. “Intepi@or To pédXe Tixpov daiverary Kai 
, \ , \ , \ 
AveoodrKtos TO Vdwp PoBepov' Kal mardiows TO 





odaipiov Kadov. ti odv dpyifopar; 7) Soe? cou 
> 4 \ / x \ / a | 
éXaccov ioxvew TO Sreyrevopévov 7) TO yOdOoV TO 


’ al as 2X an / 
iKTEPL@VTL KAL O LOS TO AVTTOOHKTO; 
/ \ \ s n n 4 nr 
vy. Kata tov Xoyov tis ahs hicews Brody ce 


1 If mpoceixoy is lst pers. sing. we must with Richards : 
read évepyoinv and understand éué with kuBepyv@vta: mas 


av tis Schenkl. 
160 ' 


teen 


BOOK VI 


To feel some such impulse as thou didst. In that 
thou art successful. That which alone was in the 
sphere of our choice ! is realized. 

51. The lover of glory conceives his own good to 
consist in another’s action, the lover of pleasure in 
his own feelings, but the possessor of understanding 
in his own actions. 

52. We need not form any opinion about the thing 
in question or be harassed in soul, for Nature 
gives the thing itself no power to compel our 


_ judgments. 


53. Train thyself to pay careful attention to what 
is being said? by another and as far as possible enter 
into his soul. 

54, That which is not in the interests of the hive 
cannot be in the interests of the bee.? — 

55. If the sailors spoke ill of a steersman or the 
sick of a physician, what else would they have in 
mind but how the man should best effect the safety 
of the crew or the health of his patients ? 

56. How many have already left the world who 
came into it with me! 

57. To the jaundiced honey tastes bitter ; and the 
victim of hydrophobia has a horror of water; and to 
little children their ball is a treasure. Why then 
angry? Or dost thou think that error is a less 
potent factor than bile in the jaundiced and virus in 
the victim of rabies? 

58. From living according to the reason of thy 
nature no one can prevent thee: contrary to the 


1 Casaubon translates ‘‘that for which we were brought 
into the world,” but can rpodyw mean this? 

2 Obviously no contradiction of iv. 18 ete. See also vii. 
4, 30. 3 vy. 22. 


161 


MARCUS AURELIUS 

ovdels K@AVGELY Tapa Tov OYoOV THs KoLViS 
hvcews ovdév cor cupSyjoeTar. 

v0’. Olot eiow, ols OéXovew apéokev, kal SV 
ola mepiywopeva, Kal 5 olwy evepyerav. ws 

/ e >\ / 4 \o > 4 

TAXEWS 0 Al@Yv TaYTa KaduUWeEL KaLOoa ExdduW ev 
A 
76. 


162 





BOOK VI 


reason of the Universal Nature nothing shall befall 
thee. 

59. The persons men wish to please,! the objects 
they wish to gain, the means they employ—think of 
-the character of all these! How soon will Time 
hide all things! How many a thing has it already 
hidden ! 

vii. 62. 


BIBAION Z 


a’. Ti éotl xaxia; Todr éotwy, 6 ToANAKLIS Eldes. 

a / 
kal éml twavtds 5€ tod cupBaivoytos Tmpoyepov 
exe, OTL TOUTS €oTiv, 6 TOAAAKIS EldEs. OOS AVM 
KAT@ TA AUTA EUPHTELS, OV pecTal ai ioTopiat ai 
Taralai, ai péoat, ai UToyuoL: @V VOY pecTal ai 

/ \ ¢. 1 SEY 4 de / € Pah 
mores Kal <ai>‘ oixiar. ovdév Kawov' TavTa 
Kal cvvnOn Kal oduyoxpoua. ; 

B *H 3 \ Py a bys 8 4 

‘ Ta OoypaTa TwWS AANwS OVVATAL 

”~ 2\ \ e - > tal 

vexpwOjvar, av pn) at KaTdddnAoL avTtois pav- 
taciat oBecOaow ; as Sinvex@s avalwrupeiv éml 
coi éott. Stvapa Tepi TovTOUV, 6 Sel, bTToAapBav- 
ew ef © apa® Stivayar, Ti Tapdooopa; Ta 
yA n i.” / OX nA \ \ eRe. 
é£o tis éuns Siavoias ovdév 6N@S pds THY eunv 
Sudvoiav. TovTo wae Kai dpOds et. 

’"AvaBiavas co ekeotw: ide madw Ta Tpday- 
pata, ws éw®pas: év TOUT@ Yap TO avaBiavat. 

y. Tloprijs xevoorovdia, éri oxnvis Spduata, 
moiuvia, ayérat, Stadopaticpoi,* kvvidiots da Tap- 
tov éppimévor, rwpiov eis Tas Tov iyOvav SeEa- 
pevds, wupunkav tararta@piar kal ayPodopias, 

1 <ai> Cor. 
24 A: 4 Schenkl: omit. P: ras yap A omit. P: més ye 
Schenk. 3 yap A: 8 &pa Schenkl. 


4 After d:adopariouol Lofft ingeniously inserts ri eiot por; 
rt éuol ; Schenkl. 


164 





BOOK VII 


1. Wuart is vice? A familiar sight enough. So 
in everything that befalls have the thought ready: 
This is a familiar sight. Look up, look down, every- 
where thou wilt find the same things, whereof 
_ histories ancient, medieval, and modern are full; and 
full of them at this day are cities and houses. There 
is no new thing under the sun! Everything is stereo- 
typed, everything fleeting. 

2. How else can thy axioms be made dead than 
by the extinction of the ideas that answer to them? 
And these it lies with thee ever to kindle anew into 
flame. I am competent to form the true conception 
of a thing. If so, why am I harassed? What is out- 
side the scope of my mind has absolutely no concern 
with my mind. Learn this lesson and thou standest 
erect. 

Thou canst begin a new life! See but things 
afresh as thou usedst to see them; for in this consists 
the new life. 

3. Empty love of pageantry, stage-plays, flocks 
and herds, sham-fights, a bone thrown to lap-dogs, 
crumbs cast in a fish-pond, painful travail of ants and 
their bearing of burdens, skurryings of scared little 


1 Eecles. i. 9. cp, also Justin’s Apol. i. 57, addressed to 
Pius and Marcus. 


165 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


puLdiov emronpeévav dabpopai, ouyAdapra veupo- 
oTacToUpena. xpn ovv év TOUTOLS eVLEVaOS pev Kal 
7) KaTAppvatTopevov éotdvat' mapakodovleiv 
pévto, StL TocovTov aos Exaotos eat, dcov 
a&ia éote TavTaA, Tepl & éoTrovdaKeD. 

o. Aci KaTa neEw mapaxohovdeiv TOUS Aeyo- 
pévors, Kal Ka? éxdoTny oppayy Tots yevopévors. 
kat enh pev Too érépov evOvs Opa, émt tiva 
oKOTTOV 1 avapopa: emt dé tod érépov mapa- 
purdocew, TL TO ON [LALLY MEVOV. 

é. Torepov eEapKet 1) u) Sidvoud Hou T pos TOUTO 
y) ov; el bev eEapnel, xpapar avrTh 7 pos TO épyor, 
os opydve Tapa THs TOV ONWV piceos d00évtt. 
el O€ p7) éFapnel, 7 HTOb Tapaxopeo ToD épyou 7@ 
Suvapéve KpeiTTOV emuTeher at, é€av AAAwWS TOUTO 
Th) Kcabijnn, ) wpdooo, os Svvapar, T™poomapa- 
AaBev TOV Suvdpevov Kata _ TporXpnow TOU emo 
myepoveKcod TOUHO at TO eis THY Kowaviay vov 
Kaipiov Kal XPNT [OV 6 Te yap av ov épavtod 
uP avy ddd TO, ade povov Xp!) TUVTELVELY, ELS 
TO Kou? XpIo tov Kal evdppocrov. 

s. “Ooor pev rodvipyntoe yevopevot Hon 
AHOn mapadédovtar: door S€ TovTOVS UuyHcaYTES 
Tanrat exTroowv. 

ie My aicxuvou BonPovpevos: T pOoKeLTae yap 
ool évepyeiv TO émuBarrov os oTpaTLorn év 
TELXOMAX EG. Ti ovr, éav ov pep Xoraivor emt 
THD emai avaBivar peovos pun) SUvn, cdV A\rM 
dé duvatov 9 TovTO; 





1 ii. 2 ete. 2 cp. ix. 41 (Epicurus). 
3 v.16. cp. Dem. Olynth. iii. 32: arta yap by ra emityd~ 


166 





BOOK VII- 


mice, puppets moved by strings.'. Amid such en- 
vironment therefore thou must take thy place 
graciously and not ‘snorting defiance,’? nay thou 
must keep abreast of the fact that everyone is worth 
just so much as those things are worth in which he 
is interested.® 

4. In conversation keep abreast of what is being 
said, and, in every effort, of what is being done. 
In the latter see from the first to what end it has 
reference, and in the former be careful to catch the 
meaning. 

5. Is my mind competent for this or not? If com- 
petent, I apply it to the task as an instrument given 
me by the Universal Nature. If not competent, 
I either withdraw from the work in favour of some- 
one who can accomplish it better, unless for other 
reasons duty forbids; or I do the best I can, taking 
to assist me any one that can utilize my ruling Reason 
to effect what is at the moment seasonable and useful 

_ for the common welfare. For in whatsoever I do 
_ either by myself or with another I must direct my 
| energies to this alone, that it shall conduce to the 
_ common interest > and be in harmony with it. 

| 6. How many. much-lauded heroes have already 
been given as a prey unto forgetfulness,® and how 
many that lauded them have long ago disappeared ! 

7. Blush not to be helped 7; 7; for thou art bound to 
carry out the task that is laid upon thee as a soldier 

| to storm the breach. What then, if for very lame- 

| ness thou canst not mount the ramparts unaided, but 

| canst do this with another’s help? 

! edpata Tov avOpdnwy h, ToLodTov avayKh Kal Td ppdvnua exer. 
ep. Clem. Alex. Strom. iv. 23. 4 vi. 53. 5 iv. 12 


° iii. 10; iv. 33; viii. 21. 7x. 12, See saying of 
Marcus, Capit. xxii. 4, quoted below, p. 360. 


167 





MARCUS AURELIUS 


1. Ta pédXovTa pa Tapacoéro" ipFees yap én 
aura, éav denon, pépov TOV avTOV Noyor, @ vov 
Tpos TA mapovra XPS. 

@. Idvra adrAnros erimréxetat Kal } cvvdects 
iepd, kat oxedov Te ovdev GAOT pLov ado arr. 
TUYKATATETAKTAL yap Kal ouyKoo pel TOV avrov 
KOo pov. Koa Mos TE yap els €& a am avTov, Kat Oeds 
els Sua Tavtwv, Kal ovcia pia, Kal vopos els, 
Oyos Kowds TdavTwvy ToVY voepdv Cowv, Kal 
arnbeva par eltye Kal TEAELOTNS pia TOV opMo- 
yevov Kal Tob avTov Aoyou ETEXOVTOV Seer. 

uv. Ilav 70 épuhov évadhaviteras TaXLoTE Th 
TOV O\wv ovcig: kal wav aitioy eis TOV TOV Gdewv 
oyov TaXLoT a, avarapPaveras kal TavTos 
penn TAaXLoTA eyeaTaxevvuTas TO iar. 

ta’. Te AoYiKD Sse ) avTn mpakts Kara 
piow éotl Kat wares Noyov. 

iB. ’OpOos 7) * opBovpevos. 

vy. Oiov éorw év BVO PEVOLS Ta per Tob 
THLATOS, TobTov ever Tov oyou | év SueaT@ot TA 
oyuxd TMpos play Twa cuvepyiav KaTeo Kevac- 
péva. paddov 5é roe 2) TOUTOU vonors T poo Trea et- 
Tal, éav mpos €QUTOV Todas réyns, Ort ‘wéXos ” 
etl TOU ex TOV Roryor av TUTTIMATOS. éav dé [dua 


Tou pe grouxetou] * pépos’ eivat éauTov éyns, 


ovTw ao xapdias prreis Tous avO parrous, obra 
TE KATAANKTUKDS * Evppaiver TO evepyeTety’ ETL? ws 
1 uh Cas. 


2 xatadnmrin@s (‘‘assured delight”) PA: em. Gat. 
3 rit ei ws A. 





1 vi. 38. 2 iv. 45. i ee 
4 ii, 12, 5 Sen. de Vit. Beat.{8 


168 


= se ee eee. eo 





BOOK VII 


8. Be not disquieted about the future. If thou 
must come thither, thou wilt come armed with the 
same reason which thou appliest now to the present. 

9. All things are mutually intertwined,! and the 
tie is sacred, and scarcely anything is alien the one 
to the other. For all things have been ranged 
side by side,” and together help to order one ordered 
Universe. For there is both one Universe, made up 
of all things, and one God immanent in all things, 
and one Substance, and one Law, one Reason 
common to all intelligent creatures,? and one Truth, 
if indeed there is also one perfecting of living 
creatures that have the same origin and share the 
same reason. 

10. A little while and all that is material is lost to 
sight in the Substance of the Universe,‘ a little 
while and all Cause is taken back into the Reason of 
the Universe, a little while and the remembrance of 
everything is encairned in Eternity. 

11. To the rational creature the same act is at 
once according to nature and according to reason.® 

12. Upright, or made upright.® 

I3. The principle which obtains where limbs and 
body unite to form one organism, holds good also 
for rational things with their separate individualities, 
constituted as they are to work in conjunction. 
But the perception of this shall come more home to 
thee, if thou sayest to thyself, I am a limb of the 
organized body of rational things. But if [using the 
letter R] thou sayest thou art but a part,’ not yet 
dost thou love mankind from the heart, nor yet 
does well-doing delight thee for its own sake.* Thou 


8 ep. vii. 7; but see iii. 5. 
7 The pun may be kept by limb—rim. 8 cp. iv. 20. 


169 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


, gry \ a ” e \ 5 
TpETOV AUTO Widov TroLEels* OUT WS TaUTOV Ev 
TOLD. 

ls n 

wo. O @Oére, e&w0ev mpoonmimtéta ois 
lal an 4 

maveiy éx THS TMpooTMTMcEws TAVTHS SuVapévots. 

a / , \ 
éxetva yap, éav Oedjon, péuretar Ta TrafdvTa: 
b \ / 2\ \ ¢ / 4 \ \ 
eyo Oé, €av pn UToAaBo, 6TL KaKOV TO ouLBe- 

/ A / ” / \ 
Bnxos, otto BéBrappar. é€eote Sé pou py) 
vrrovaPeiv. 

7 4 a 
te. "“O Te av Tis Trouh 7 r€yy, ue Set ayabov 
x \ I's 
eilvar' @s av et 0 Ypucds t) 0 cpapaydSos 7) 1) Top- 
a 7 A a 
hvpa TovTO ael édeyev, “"O te av TIs TrOLH 7} Ey, 
a S. a a 
ewe Sel opdpayoov eivar Kal TO euavTod ypapwa 
eye.” 

/ \ e \ Bt e na > > a 

i’. Td jryepouxdy abto éavt@ ovK évoynrel, 
e 4 > a 1 § \ > > / ? / 
olov Néyw, ov hopet +} éauTo eis errvOvpiav. et bé 

a x a 4 
Tus aAXos avTo hoBhcar 7} AuTHoaL SvvaTat, 
\ a 
TolelLTM. AUTO yap EAUTO UTOANTTLKAS OU TpérveL 
eis TOLAVTAS TpoTds. 
/ \ 

To cwpdtiov pn aly TL, aVTO pEepiymvaTo, 

4 / / \ 
ei Stvatar, Kal reyéTo, ef Te Tacye TO Se 

7 \ 
wuxdplov, TO hoBovpevov, TO AvTOvpeEvoV, TO TrEpl 
\ 
TOUTWY OAS VTOAaUBavor ovdév un WAON* Ov yap 
A I 
&is adT@® eis Kpiow To.avTny. 

7A. 5 / > iia a4? Ld n Nr es 

mpoadeés eotiv, Goov ef EaUTH, TO Hryepov- 

lal a \ 
Kv, eav pn éEavT@ evderav TroLh? KaTa TavTa bé 
kal atapayov Kal aveumodioTov, éav pun éavTd 
tapacon Kal éurrodity. 
> / > \ / > \ x 

C. Evdaimovia éott Saipwv ayabds 7 
<F \ 3 > 06 / 5 AY) a 

nyenmovixov>* ayabov. ti ovv wbde Totes, 


s 
a 


1 poBet PA: coBe? Schenkl: I suggest pope? or rpémet. 
2 éters avd PA: ekts avrg Schenkl: éagers Schultz, 
3 <fyeuovinrdy> Gat, 


170 





BOOK VII 


dost practise it still as a bare duty, not yet as a boon 
to thyself. 

14. Let any external thing, that will, be incident 
to whatever is able to feel this incidence. For that 
which feels can, if it please, complain.' But I, 
if I do not consider what has befallen me to be 
an evil,? am still unhurt. AndI can refuse so to 
consider it. 

15. Let any say or do what he will, I must for my 
part be good. So might the emerald—or gold or 
purple—never tire of repeating, Whatever any one 
shall do or say, I must be an emerald and keep my 
colour. 

16. The ruling Reason is never the disturber ‘of 
its own peace, never, for instance, hurries itself into 
lust. But if another can cause it fear or pain, let 
it do so. For it will not let its own assumptions 
lead it into such aberrations. 

Let the body take thought for itself, if it may, 
that it suffer no hurt and, if it do so suffer, let it 
proclaim the fact.? But the soul that has the faculty 
of fear, the faculty of pain, and alone can assume 
that these exist, can never suffer; for it is not given 
to making any such admission.* 

In itself the ruling Reason wants for nothing 
unless it create its own needs, and in like manner 
nothing can disturb it, nothing impede it, unless the 
disturbance or impediment come from itself. 

17. Well-being® is a good Being, or a ruling 
Reason that is good. What then doest thou here, 


1 vii. 33; viii. 28 2 iv.'7,:39. 3 vii. 14, 33. 

4 vi. 52; vii. 14, 33; viii. 40 ete. 

> Defined by Chrysippus as ‘‘ harmony of our dafuwy with 
God’s will,” 


171 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


* , ee, \ , oe 

® pavtacia ; atrépxou, Tods Beovs cot, ws hrOEs* 
ov yap xpnoo cov. €djrvOas 6€ Kata TO 
apxaiov €0os. ovK« opyifopai cot , Hovov aml. 

mm. DoBeirai tis petaBornv ; Th ya Sdvaras 
xopls peTaBonis yevérOar; ti Oe pidrepov iy 
OLKELOTEPOY TH TOV ohov puoer ; ov 6€ avTos 
Aodcacbat Sivacat, edv ph) TA Evra petaBary ; ; 
tpadiva. Se Stvacar, édv pi Ta edddipa 
petaBdrn; ado 6é TL TOV Xpnoipav | Svvarat 
cuvtereo var Xepis petaBorNs ; 00x, opas ovv, 
6Tt Kal avTo TO oé petaBareiv Buoy éote Kal 
OMolws avayKxatiov TH TOV Owv hice ; 

/ \ n lal cA > , e \ / 

0’. Awa tis TOV 6rwv odcias ws Sia YeLmap- 
pov, Suexropeverat mara 7a oopara, TO drX@ 
ouppun Kab cuvepyd, os Ta Huérepa pépn ap rors. 

Ilocous 76n 0 aiwv Xpvoimrovs, mocous 
Lwxpates, wocous *Emixtntovs Kxatatéroxer. 
To 8 avo kal éml TAVTOS ovTwoa ody cou 
avO pwrou Te Kal Tpaypartos TpoomunTéeTo. 

K. "Eye Ev povoy mepiomd, pon Te avTos 
Tolnow, 0 7) KaTacKEv? TOD avOpwrrov ov OéneL, 7) 
e > ls A A n > f- 

@s ov OéreL, 7) 0 viv ov Oéreu. 
U > \ \ e \ \ , , 

Ka. “Kyyds péev 7 of Tept mavtav AjOn: 
éyyvs 5€ 4) wavT@v Tept cod AON. 

wv 3 , Lal A ‘\ / 

KB. “Idvov avOpwrov gireiv Kai tods mrat- 

ovtas. TovTO Oé yivEeTal, €av CULTpOOTinTyH ToL, 





1 vii. 29; cp. Ecclesiasticus, Xxxvii. 3. 

2 iv. 43; v. 23; vi. 15. 

3 Referred by some (see Zeller, Btoten, p. 158, Engl. trans.) 
to the theory that at each cyclical regeneration of the world 
the same persons and events repeat themselves. But see 
x. 31. 

* Aul. Gellius ii. 18 speaks of Epict. as recently dead ; 


172 


BOOK VII 


O Imagination?! Avaunt, in God’s name, as thou 
camest, for I desire thee not! But thou art come 
according to thine ancient wont. [ bear thee no 
malice ; only depart from me! 

18. Does a man shrink from change? Why, what 
can come into being save by change? What be 
nearer or dearer to the Nature of the Universe? 
Canst thou take a hot bath unless the wood for the 
furnace suffer a change? Couldst thou be fed, if 
thy food suffered no change, and can any of the 
needs of life be provided for apart from change ? 
Seest thou not that a personal change is similar, and 
similarly necessary to the Nature of the Universe ? 

19. Through the universal Substance as through 
a rushing torrent? all bodies pass on their way, 
united with the Whole in nature and activity, as 
our members are with one another. 

How many a Chrysippus,? how many a Socrates, 
how many an Epictetus* hath Time already de- 
voured! Whatsoever man thou hast to do with and 
whatsoever thing, let the same thought strike thee. 

20. I am concerned about one thing only, that 
I of myself do not what man’s constitution does 
not will, or wills not now, or in a way that it wills 
not. 

21. A little while and thou wilt have forgotten 
everything, a little while and everything will have 
forgotten thee. 

22. It is a man’s especial privilege® to love even 
those who stumble. And this love follows as soon as 


Them. Or. v. p. 63 D. implies that he was alive under the 
Antonines. Lucian, adv. Ind. 13 speaks of his earthenware 
lamp having been bought by an admirer for 3,000 drachmas. 

5 Fronto, ad Ver. ii. 2: Hominis maxime proprium 
ignoscere. cp. St. Matt. v. 44; Dio 71. 26, § 2. 


873 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


étt kal ovyyeveis kal Ov dyvotay Kal dKovTes 
dpaptdvovet, Kal @s pet Odiyov aporepor 
4 \ \ / ¢ > ” / 
TeOvnEecOe, Kal TPO TavT@DV, OTL OVK EBNaWE oe: 
ov yap TO Hye“ovKoy gov yYelpov érroinaer, 1) 
mpoa bev iv. 
Ul c fa) c. 4 > fol c- > , 
ky. H tap dr\@v dvats Ex Tis OANS Ovoias, 
Qn nr ‘ e 
@s KNpod, vov pév imTdpLlov Erdace, cuyxéaca 5é 
TovTo eis Sevdpvdiov! cuveypynoato TH Un avTod, 
eita eis dvOpwrdpiov, eita eis GAXO TL ExacToV 
5€ ToUT@Y Tpos OriytoTov UTréoTH.  Sewvov Sé 
OX \ n n , iA 29\ \ 
ovdéev TO StarvOjvat TO KiBwtio, Hotep ovde TO 
oupTaynvat.” 
/ \ > / rn , / \ 
KO. To érixotov tod mpocwmov iav mapa 
7 A 4 4 ; oer > 4 \ 
gua, <d> 6tav ToddaKis + evn, atroOvncKes bn 
TpooxXnua,® 7) TO TEedAEUTALoY aTEecBéOn, BoTE 
dros eFapOjvat pr SivacOa. aite ye TovTw 
mapakorovbeiy treip@, OTL Tapa Tov Aoyov. et 
yap kal ) cvvaicOnots Tod duaptavey oixnoeTat, 
tis tu TOD Shy aitia; 
/ / x4 con oe Bld val 
ke. Ilavta, 00a opds, dcov ovTw petaBanrel 
¢ \. PS) a 4 \ » > n oe 4 
] TA OXA OLOLKOVETA vous, Kal ANAA EK THS OVTLAS 
QUTOY Troince, Kal TaddW adrAa ex THs éxeivav 
- e 
ovcias, iva del veapos 7 0 KOcpMOos. 
/ ¢ ¢ 4 > / > \ > an 
Ks’. “Orav tis apdprn Tt eis oé, evOds éEvOupod, 
~~ 3 eee oe \ oe a \ 
ti ayabov } Kaxov UTOAABa@Y Huaptev. TOUTO yap 
idav erences avTov, kal ovTe Oavpdcoets, ovTE 


1 Sévdpov piow PA: Sevdptqrov Nauck. 

2 <ayabby> after cupmrayiva inary & 

3 Stray moAAdKis evarobvioKey F mpdoxnua PA: dbev moAAdKts 
évarrobviaKke: > tpdaxnua Fournier: I have patched up this 
incurable passage, as above. Possibly #5 would be better 
than 5%. { 


174 








BOOK VII 


thou reflectest that they are of kin to thee and 
that they do wrong involuntarily and through 
ignorance,! and that within a little while both 
they and thou will be dead?; and this, above all, 
that the man has done thee no hurt®; for he has 
not made thy ruling Reason worse than it was 
before. 

23. The Nature of the Whole out of the Substance 

of the Whole,‘ as out of wax, moulds at one time 
a horse, and breaking up the mould kneads the 
material up again into a tree, then into a man, 
and then into something else; and every one of 
these subsists but for a moment. It is no more a 
hardship for the coffer to be broken up than it 
was for it to be fitted together. 
» 24. An angry scowl on the face is beyond measure 
unnatural, and when it is often seen there, all 
comeliness begins at once to die away, or in the end 
is so utterly extinguished that it can never be re- 
kindled at all. From this very fact try to reach the 
conclusion that it is contrary to reason. The con- 
sciousness of wrong-doing once lost, what motive is 
left for living any more? 

25. Everything that thou seest will the Nature 
that controls the Universe change, no one knows 
how soon, and out of its substance make other 
compounds,® and again others out of theirs, that the 
world may ever renew its youth. 

26. Does a man do thee wrong? Go to and mark 
what notion of good and evil was his that did the 
wrong. Once perceive that and thou wilt feel 


1 ep, St. Luke xxiii. 34. 
2 iv. 6. $ii, }s- ix. 38: 
4 vii. 25. cp. St. Paul, Rom. ix. 20, 5. vii. 23. 


175 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


opyea Ono 7. HTot yap Kab abros TO avTo éxeivo 
dryabov ere dTodap Pavers ) GANO opoerdés. bei 
ovv avyywocKke. ef dé pnxéte UTOAApBaves TA 
ToadtTa ayaba Kal KaKd, padov evpevyns eon TO 
T Apop@vrTt. 

Ko’. Mn ta atrovta évvoeiv, as 5n' dvta* adda 
Ttav twapovtay ta dekiwtata éxroyierOar Kat 
TOUTOY Xap dropipryjoKed Oat, TOS ay émetnt- 
€iT0, €6 pn Taphvy. aua péevtor hudAdooov, pH 
dia TOD ovTwS acpevife adtois ePions exTimar 
avuTd, MoT, édy ToTE 12) TApH, TapaxOrjoec bau. 

KN. Ris cauTov ouverod. giow exer 7d 
Noyexov Tyyepovixov, éavT@ apneic bar diKato- 
mpayoovTe Kal Tap aro TOUTO syadquny éyovt. 

KO’. éEddevpor THV pavraciav. orioov THe 
vevpoo Tac tiay. meptyparpov TO ever TOs Too 
Xpovov. yepurov 76 oupBaivov i) col ) adr. 
diere Kal pépicov TO DrroKel wevov els TO airiades 
Kal UNLKOP. évvonoov THY éayaTny pay. 70 
éxeive dpapTnOév éxet KaTddeTre, STrou 7 dpaptia 
vréotn. 

r’. Supmaperteivew tiv vonow Tots reyouev- 
ous. eiadvecOar Tov. voby eis TA yivomeva Kal 
TOLouvTa. 

ra’. Daidpuvoy ceavtov amdotynTe Kal aidot 
Kal Th Tpds TO ava pécov apeTiis Kal Kaxias 
adiapopia. dirnoov To avOperivov yévos. aKoX- 

“ 


1 7d3éa (75tw Rend.) Schultz. 





1 ep. ii. 13; x. 30; Herodian i. 4, $2; Dio 71. 10, § 4. 
2 xi.18,§4. * Epict. Prag. 129. * cp. Hor. Ep. i. 10, 31. 
5 iv. 3 ad init. ; viii. 48. 6 vii. 17; viii. 29; ix. 7. 


176 





BOOK Vil 


compassion! not surprise or anger. For thou hast 
still thyself either the same notion of good and evil as 
he or another not unlike. Thou needs must forgive 
him then.? But if thy notions of good and evil are 
no longer such, all the more easily shalt thou be 
gracious to him that sees awry. 

27. Dream not of that which thou hast not as 
though already thine, but of what thou hast pick 
out the choicest blessings, and do not forget in 
respect of them how eagerly thou wouldst have 
coveted them, had they not been thine.? Albeit 
beware that thou do not inure thyself, by reason 
of this thy delight in them, to prize them so highly as 
to be distressed if at any time they are lost to thee.* 

28. Gather thyself into thyself.® It is character- 
istic of the rational Ruling Faculty to be satisfied 
with its own righteous dealing and the peace which 
that brings. 

29. Efface imagination!® Cease to be pulled as 
a puppet by thy passions.’ Isolate the present. 
Recognize what befalls either, thee or another. 
Dissect and analyze all that comes under thy ken 
into the Causal and the Material. Meditate on thy 
last hour. Let the wrong thy neighbour does thee 
rest with him that did the wrong.® 

30. Do thy utmost to keep up with what is said.1° 
Let thy mind enter into the things that are done 
and the things that are doing them. 

31. Make thy face to shine with simplicity and 
modesty and disregard of all that lies between virtue 
and vice. Love human-kind. Follow God. Says 


7 ji. 2 ete. 8 ii. 5. ® ix. 20, 38. 10 vii. 4. 
1-1 St. Peter, ii. 17. ep. Sen. de Vit. Beat. 15 : Deum sequere. 
Dio Chrys. ii. 98 R. 


ri 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


4 lad 
ov@naov Oe. exeivos pév yo, Ott “ TavTa 
/ > an 1 ée / 2 eed lal ” > al \ 
voutoti, téten ! Se povat® Ta otorxeia.” apKel Sé 
pepvijoOat, 6T1 TA TavTa vopiaTl exer. HON dav 
ortya.t 
AP’. Tlept Oavdrov- 4 cxedacpos, ei aToport: 
i) <el> &vaots,® Hror oBéors 7) peTadoTacts. 
/ 
dy’. Ilepi movou: “7d pev adopnrov éEdyer- Td 
y* / Ld n 
dé ypovifov, dopntov:” Kal 1 Svdvora Thy éavTis 
yarijvny Kata arorn uv Svatnpel, Kal ov yeipov 
TO ayepovixoy yéyovev. Ta S€ Kakotvpeva pépyn 
bo Tod movov, ei te Stvatat, Tepl avTod 
atrropnvacbw. 
AS. Llepi ddEns: iSe ras Stavoias adrar, oiat, 
\ \ y \ , \ 
kal ola pev hevyovoat, ola 5é du@Kovoat. Kai 
e a 
btt, @S ai Oives Gdrat em Arras errihopovpevar 
% n \ 
KpUTTovet Tas Tpotépas, oUTws év TO Biw TA 
mMpoTepa wvmTd TeV émeveyPévTwy TayLoTa 
éxanrvpen. 
re. [TXatwvxov.]* “He ob brapyet Siavoia 
peyarorpémera Kal Oewpia TavtTds pev xYpovov, 
maons S¢ ovcias, dpa oles ToUT@ péya TL SoKeiv 
2. \ 2 ‘A / > 7 a > v 
elvat tov avOporivov Biov; addtvatov, h 8 4s. 
ovKovv Kal Oavatov ov Sevov te HynoeTat Oo 
TOLOUTOS; HKLoTa ye.” 
1 éref Usener: ér) ei P: @r1 4 A. 
2 Saluova PA: 5€ wdva Cor.: Samdvia Xyl. 
3 ei évwots Cas., Schenk]: 4 PA: Kévwors P. 


4 <MAarwrndy> P: so <*Avrisberixdy> § 36, and <TAa- 
tovina> § 44, 


178 





— 








BOOK VII 


the Sage: All things by Lam, but in very truth 
only elements. And it suthces to remember that 
all things are by law: there thou hast it briefly 
enough.! 

32. Or Deatu: Either dispersion if atoms; or, if 
a single Whole, either extinction or a change of 
state.? 

33. Or Pain: When unbearable it destroys us, when 
lasting, it is bearable,? and the mind safeguards its 
own calm by withdrawing itself, and the ruling 
Reason takes no hurt. As to the parts that are 
impaired by the pain, let them say their say about it 
as they can.* 

34. Or Giory: Look at the minds of its votaries, 
their characteristics, ambitions, antipathies.° Re- 
member too that, as the sands of the sea drifting 
one upon the other bury the earlier deposits, so in 
life the earlier things are very soon hidden under 
what comes after. 

35. [From Plato.]® Dost thou think that the life of 
man can seem any great matter to him who has true 
grandeur of soul and a comprehensive outlook on all 
Time and all Substance? “It cannot seem so,” said he. 
Will such a man then deem death a terrible thing ? 
** Not in the least.” 


1 The reading and meaning are uncertain. The Sage 
is Democritus, and we should expect atoms rather than 
elements to be mentioned. Leopold aptly quotes Sext. Emp. 
vii. 35: vdup yAvKd kal vu mpdv, vou@ Oeppov vonw Wuxpdrv 
. + . @ref 5& &roua nat xévov. Fournier cleverly makes a 
hexameter of the words mdvra voutor’, ere 5 udva oroxela 
<névoy Te>. 

2 Sen. Zp. 65 ad fin. : Mors aut finis aut transitus. 

3 vii. 16, 64. cp. Aesch. Frag. 310: @dpoe aévou yap 
&xpov ovr Exer xpdvov ; Diog. Laert. Hpicurus xxxi. 4. 

4 vii. 14; viii. 40. 5 vi. 59. 5 Rep. 486 A. 


179 
nN 2 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Ax’. PAvticOevixov.| ‘ Baowdrsxov pev eb 
TPaTTEW, KAKOS be aKovew. e 
AE’. Aloypov éote TO pev 1 pOo wTrov bmjKoov 
eiva kal PIRATES Kat cataKkoo peta bar, o os 
KENEVEL duavoua, avtny 8 td éavtis py 
Pianos bas Kal KataKkoopeto Oar. 
Ay’. “Tots mpdypacw yap odvyi Oupodcbat 
Xpeay: 
pédeL yap avtois ovdév.” 
iO’. “"APavarous Te Oeois Kal juiv yappara 
Soins.” 
pb. ie Biov Depifew, & @OTE Ka pm lLov oTayur, 
Kal Tov pev elvat, TOV dé poy.” 
pa’. “Ei & npernOnv ex Oedv cal raid éuo, 
éyet NOyor Kal TodTO.” 
cer . > $3 a \ v1 Oo »” 
uB’. “TO yap ed pet éuod cal 7d Sixarov. 
‘. “My? cuverOpnveiv, wh opvferv.” 
Py / «cc? \ \ 4 éL 
wo. [Trateaucd.| Eya 6€ tovT@ dixatov 
A / by / iA > n La 9 
ay Xoyov avTeiTout: OTL ov Kad@s RéEyELS, W 
” > ” a / e / a 
avOparTe, ei oiee Seiv Kivduvov trodoyivecOat Tod 
a Xx 0 / ” 5 i \ \ v 
Shp 7) TeOvavar avdpa, dtov Te Kal cpixpov dp_dos- 
adn’ ovK éKkelvo povov oKxoreiv, oTav _™patTn, 
moTepov dixata 1) aduka mpdtTe. Kal avdpos 
ayadod <epya>!  KaKod.” 
pee srts $8 Odre ap é éxet, @ _awvopes "AOnvaior, Th 
adneia: ob adv tis avTov TaEn Hynodpevos 


, 1 <%pya> from Plato, Gat.: so de? below. 





1 cp. Epict. iv. 6, § 20; 1 St. Peter, ii. 20. See Diog. 
Laert. Antisthenes § 4. Plutarch attributes the saying to 
Alexander. 2? vii. 60. 

3 Eur. Bellerophon, Frag. 289; xi. 6. Twice quoted by 
Plutarch. 4 Unknown. 


180 


a_i oe 








BOOK VII 


36. [From Antisthenes.] ’ Tis royal to do well and 
be ill spoken of.} 

37. It is a shame that while the countenance ? is 
subject to the mind, taking its cast and livery from 
it, the mind cannot take its cast and its livery from 
itself. 

38. It nought availeth to be wroth with things, — 

For they reck not of i.8 

39. Unto the deathless Gods and to us give cause for 
rejoicing. 

40. Our lives are reaped like the ripe ears of corn, 

And as one falls, another still is born.? 
41. Though me and both my sons the Gods have 
spurned, 
For this too there is reason.® 
42. For justice and good luck shall bide with me." 
_ 43. No chorus of loud dirges, no hysteria.’ 

44. [Citations from Plato] : 

I might fairly answer such a questioner: Thou art 
mistaken if thou thinkest that a man, who is worth 
anything at all, ought to let considerations of life and 
death weigh with him rather than in all that he does 
consider but this, whether it is just or unjust and the 
work of a good man or a bad.® 

45. This, O men of Athens, is the true state of the 
case: Wherever a man has stationed himself, deeming 


5 Kur. Hypsipyle, Frag. 757; xi.6. Cie. Tusc. iii. 25, § 59.- 
Vita omnibus metenda, ut fruges. Epict. ii. 6.14. ep. Job v. 26. 

6 Kur. Antiope, Frag. 207 ; xi. 6. 

7 sc. cbupaxov tora Kur. Hrag. 910. Twice quoted by Cicero 
(ad Att. vi. 1, §8; viii. 8,§2). cp. Arist Ach. 661. 

8 Unknown. 

» Plato, Apol. 28 B. Socrates is answering a question 
whether he is not ashamed of risking his life in a vocation 
such as his. 

181 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Berrie Tov elvau HoT apxovros TaxO7, évTravda 
<Oei>, ws éwot Soxei, pévovta xwvOuvevery, pndev 
UmohoyiCouevov bare Odvatov pnte adXo pndev 
™po TOD aicxpod. 

ps. ie "AAN, @ paxdpre, dpa, pf) GAXO TL TO 
yevvaiov Kal TO aryaBov uB TO ootew Te Kal 
catecOar- pun yap TodTo pév, TO Chv omocovdy 
Xpovor, TOV YE @S arnOas avdpa, €aTéov éort, Kat 
ov prroyuxntéor, arn’ émiTpeyavta mept TovT@D 
T@ Ged Kat muarevoavTa Tats yuvarkiv, 6 or “rnp 
eiapuévnvy ovd av els eepoyot,’ TO emt TOUT@ 
oKEeTTEOD, tiva ay T pOTrov Toorop, ov pédree 
Xpovov Bidvat, @s apiota Biwn.” 

pe’. Tleptcxorrety dorpov dpopous doTep 
ouprrepOéovTa Kat Tas TOV “oTOUXel@v els 
adAnra petaBohas TUVEXOS évvoety" arroxabaip- 
ovat yap ai TovtTwv pavtaciat Tov puTov ToD 
Xapal Biouv. 

pn’. Kanov TO TOU Tdrevos. kal 1) mepl 
avO porrav Tous oyous TOLOUPLEVOV énsanenehy 
det xal Ta érriyesa, Womrep mroOev avabev, Kata} 
ayéXas, oTpaTevpata, yewpyla, yduous, dva- 
Avoers, yevéress, Pavarous, Sixaornplov OopuBor, 
éprjwous X@pas, BapBapov evn ToKtha, éoptas, 
Ipjvous, ayopas, TO Tappiyes Kal TO eK TOV 
evavTioy cvyKoomovpevov. 

pO’. Ta mpoyeyovita dvabewpeiv, tas Too- 


1 Kdtw Cas. 





1 Plato, Apol. 28 EK. 2 Plato, Gorgias, 512 DE. 

3 What follows is obviously not a saying of Plato. We 
must therefore refer back to what precedes, or suppose that 
Plato’s words have dropped out. 


182 








BOOK VII 


it the best for him, or has been stationed by his 
commander, there methinks he ought to stay and run 
every risk, taking into account neither death nor any 
thing else save dishonour.} 

46. But, my good sir, see whether nobility and 
goodness do not mean something other than to save and 
be saved ; for surely a man worthy of the name must 
waive aside the question of the duration of life how- 
ever extended, and must not cling basely to life, but 
leaving these things in the hands of God pin his JSaith 
to the women’s adage, ‘his destiny no man can flee, 
and thereafter consider in what way he may best live 
Jor such time as he has to live.? 

47. Watch the stars in their courses as one that 
runneth about with them therein; and think 
constantly upon the reciprocal changes of the 
elements, for thoughts on these things cleanse away 
the mire of our earthly life. 

48. Noble is this saying of Plato’s.2 Moreover he 
who discourses of men should, as if from some 
vantage-point * above, take a bird’s-eye view of the 
things of earth, in its gatherings, armies, husbandry, 
its marriages and separations,® its births and deaths, 
the din of the law-court and the silence of the 
desert, barbarous races manifold, its feasts and 
mournings and markets, the medley of it all and its 
orderly conjunction of contraries. 

49, Pass in review the far-off things of the past 


# ix:'30. cp. Lucian, Char. §15; Icaro-Men. § 12. 

> If xara ayedas be read, it will mean literally, drove by 
drove, i.e. in ils aggregations; if kdrw, ayéAas, the latter 
word must refer to gatherings of men. 

§ This might mean treaties of peace, but there seems to be 
a system of contrasted pairs. 


183 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


4 a 4 n are | 54 \ 
avTas Tav Hyewoviav petaBords.t E€eotse Kal 
a 7 n 
Ta eo opeva mpoepopav. dpoerdij yap TUVT@S 
ora, Kal ovx olov Te éx Bava TOU pvO pod T@v 
viv yevopevor" d0ev Kal toov TO Tec oapdKovTa 
éreow lorophoas TOV av0 pwrivov Biov r@ él ery 
pupa. the yap WAéov der; 
v’. “« Kal ta pev é« yijs 
4 > > n \ > 3 > > / 
puvt eis yaiav, Ta 8 am’ aiPepiouv 
Bracrovta yovijs eis obpaviov 
moXov HAGE TAAL: ” 


) TovTO Siddvols TaV év Tais ATOpoLsS avTEp- 
fal lal \ lal al 

TAOK@Y Kal TOLODTOS TLS TKOPTLT MOS TOV aTAa0av 
, 

OTOLYELWV. 


va. Kar 


/ nm 
“ Yitowss Kal ToToios Kal payevpact 
TAPEKTPETOVTES OXETOV, WATE yn Oaveiv.” 


“ @cdGev dé mvéovt’ ovpov avayKn 
TAHVAL KApPaTOLS avodupToLs.” 


vp. 2“ KaBBarixe@tepos,” arr ody! Kowvov- 
LK@TEPOS ove aidnpovéc repos ove eVTAKTOTEPOS 
emt Tots oupPaivovew ovde evpevérTEpos TpOS TA 
TOV mAnatov Tapopapara. 

vy: “Orou epyov éritencioOar Svvatar KaTa 
TOV Kowvov Geois Kal avO porous Aoyor, éxed ovdev 
Sewov Grou yap wpereias tuyeiv Feats Sia THs 


leas... metaBodds seems out of place, and Jackson 
would put the words after roixfAa, in previous section. 

2 Here P has a note, ovx éorw apxh rovTo, GAN <ék> 
TOY AVwTepw TAY Tpd TaY TlAaToviKay auvadés. 


184 


i a 





‘BOOK VII 


and its succession of sovranties without number. 
Thou canst look forward and see the future also. 
For it will most surely be of the same character,! 
and it cannot but carry on the rhythm of existing 
things. Consequently it is all one, whether we 
witness human life for forty years or ten thousand. 
For what more shalt thou see ? 


50. All that is earth-born gravitates earthwards, 
Dust unto dust ; and all that from ether 
Grows, speeds swiftly back again heavenward ; * 


that is, either there is a breaking up of the closely- 
linked atoms or, what is much the same, a scattering 
of the impassive elements. 
51. Again: 
With meats and drinks and curious sorceries 
Side-track the stream, so be they may not die.* 


When a storm from the Gods beats down on our 
bark, 

At our oars then we needs must toil and complain 
not.* 


52. Better at the cross-buttock,® may be, but not at 
shewing public spirit or modesty, or being readier for 
every contingency or more gracious to our neighbour 
if he sees awry. 

53. A work that can be accomplished in obedience 
to that reason which we share with the Gods is 
attended with no fear. For no harm need be 
anticipated, where by an activity that follows the 

eM ST: 

* Eur. Chrys. Frag. 836. Constantly quoted. cp. Luer. 
ii. 991 ; Genesis iii, 19: yA «2 nod és yhv amededon ; Eccle- 
siasticus xl. 11_ 

3 Yur. Suppl. 1110. * Unknown. 

5 Plutarch, Apophth. 2. 206 K, 


185 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


evodovons Kal KaTa THY KaTacKEVHY TpoLovans 
évepryeias, exe? ovdepiav BrA4Bnv bhoparéov. 

vd. Iavtayod cat dunver@s eri cot éott Kal 
Th Tapovon cupBace: OeoceBOs evapecTtety, Kal 
Tots mapovow avOporoas Kata SdiKaroovvny 
mpoapéper Oar, Kal TH Tapovon pavtacia éupiro- 
Texvely, iva pn TL aKATAANT TOV TrapeLa pu. 

ve. M1 aepiBré7ov adXOTpLa Hryewovicd, 
Grn éxet Brére nat evOv, eri Ti ce 7 pvats 
odnyel, } TE TOD GAOV Sta TOV cUupPaLvdvTMY cot 
Kal ) on Sua TOY Tpaxtéwv bTO cod. TpaKTéov 
5é Exdot@ TO éENs TH KaTacKEVH KaTETKEvATTAL 
Sé Ta wey AowTA TOV AOyLKOV EveKxev, BoTrEep Kal 
éml mavtos aAdov Ta YXelpw TOY KpELTTOVaV 
&vexev, TA S5é NOytKA GAAHOV EvExer. 

To wey ody mponyovpevov év TH TOD avOpwtrov 
KaTaTKEVH TO KoLv@viKdy éote’ SevTepov Sé TO 
avévdoTov mpos Tas TwpaTiKas Teicels* OYLKTS 
yap kal voepas xwijcews idvov trepiopivew éavTnv 
Kat pnmote HTTac0aL pnTe aicOnTiKHs wnTEe OpuN- 
TiKhs Kivicews Co@bders yap éExatepa: 7) 5é voepa 
COérer mpwtictever Kal pi) KataKpateicOas vr’ 
éxeivov. Sikaiws ye mépuKe yap xpnoTLKn 
maow éxeivos. tpitov év TH AOYLKH KaTacKEVT 
TO am@pomTw@toy Kal aveEatraTynTov. TovTwY ovv 
exomevov TO Hyepovixoy evOetav! trepawéTw, Kai 
exer TA EavTod. 


vs’, “Os atroreOvnxdta Sei, kal péxpe viv 
| 


1 ¢d6elq Schenk]: ev@éa PA: edOetav Cor. (cp, x. 11). 
186 


od 








BOOK VII 


right road, and satisfies the demands of our con- 
stitution, we can ensure our own weal. 

54. At all times and in all places it rests with thee 
both to be content with thy present lot as a 
worshipper of the Gods, and to deal righteously with 
thy present neighbours, and to labour lovingly at thy 
present thoughts, that nothing unverified should 
steal into them. 

55. Look not about thee at the ruling Reason of 
others, but look with straight eyes at this, Zo what 
is Nature guiding thee?—both the Nature of the 
Universe, by means of what befalls thee and thy 
nature by means of the acts thou hast to do. But 
everyone must do what follows from his own con- 
stitution ; and all other things have been constituted 
for the sake of rational beings—just as in every other 
case the lower are for the sake of the higher +— but 
the rational for their own sake. 

Social obligation then is the leading feature in the 
constitution of man and, coming second to it, an 
uncompromising resistance to bodily inclinations. 
For it is the privilege of a rational and _ intelli- 
gent motion to isolate itself, and never to be 
overcome by the motions of sense or desire ; for 
either kind is animal-like. But the motion of the 
Intelligence claims ever to have the pre-eminence and 
never to be mastered by them. And rightly so, for it 
is its nature to put all those to itsown use. Thirdly, 
the rational constitution is free from precipitancy 
and cannot be misled. Let the ruling Reason then, 
clinging to these characteristics, accomplish a straight 
course and then it comes into its own. 

56. As one that is dead, and his life till now lived 


eV. 16, 30°: ‘x1. 10: 
187 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


BeBvwxora,! to ovTov ex TOD TepLtovTos Choas 
KATA THY puow. 

v6. Movoy prreiv ro éavT@® oupBaivov Kai 
cuyKhoOopevor. Tt yap dppodustepov;, 

vn. > éxadaTou cup Bduatos éxelvous po 
Opparoov EXEL, ols Ta avTa ouvéBarvev, erecta 
nx9ovro, e€evilovro, é new ovo vov ovv exeivor 
ov; ovdapod- ti ov; Kal ov Béreus 0 omotws; ouxt 
bé Tas pév adorpias TpoTras KaTanem ety Tots 
TpéTOVGL wal TPETFOMEVOLS ; avTos be mept TO TOS 
xphabas avtois ros vives Bau; Xen n yap Karas, 
Kal thy cou éorau: povov Tpoaexe Kat Gére 
TEAUT@ Kanros? elvar éml través, ov mpaccels: 
Kab peuvng ot <én'>* appotépwv, Ott Kat b1a- 


gopovt é¢’ ov mpatus. 

v0’. “Evdov cxére.t évdov 4 myyn Tod ayabod 
Kal ae avaBr0ew Svvapévn, éav ael oxaTTNs: 

E. Aci xal TO capa memnyévae Kal py 
dieppipO at pajre év Kivnoes pene ey oxécet. 
olov yap te emt Tov Tpoo@rTrov _mapexerar n 
Sudvoua, ouverov ® avo Kal evoynpov cuv- 
Tnpovea,® towovtTo Kal émt 6rov Tov FHpaTos 
ataitntéov. tmdvta dé tadta ody TO aveTiTNO- 
eUT@ purakréa. 

Ea’. H Beorixn TH Tara tinh omovorépa. 
HrEp TH OPXNTTLKH KaTa TO 7 pos 7a eumimrovta 
Kal od mpoeyvocpeva & Fronts Kal aTT@S ExTavat. 

1 <oi> Reiske. ? Kadas A. 

3 <ér> Gat.: xadidpopoy Kron.: Schultz and Schenkl 
mark a lacuna after 671. 

4 Brére P: oxoret D: oxawre Schultz. 

5 guveotds Cor. 

5 xa ovyrnpodoa A: del for cat Schenkl. 


188 








BOOK VII 


and gone, must thou count the rest of thy days as 
so much to the good,! and live according to Nature. 

57. Love only what befalls thee and is spun for 
thee by fate. For what can be more befitting for 
thee ? ; 

58. In every contingency keep before thine eyes 
those who, when these same things befell them, 
were straightway aggrieved, estranged,’ rebellious. 
Where are they now? Nowhere! What then? 
Wouldst thou be like them? Why not leave those 
alien deflections to what deflects and is deflected by 
them, and devote thyself wholly to the question how 
to turn these contingencies to the best advantage ? 
For then wilt thou make a noble use of them, and 
they shall be thy raw material. Only in thought 
and will take heed to be beautiful to thyself in all 
that thou doest. And remember, in rejecting the 
one and using the other, that the thing which matters 
is the aim of the action. 

59. Look within. Within is the fountain of Good, 
ready always to well forth if thou wilt alway delve. 

60. The body too should be firmly set and suffer 
no distortion in movement or bearing. For what 
the mind effects in the face,* by keeping it composed 
and well-favoured, should be looked for similarly 
in the whole body. But all this must be secured 
without conscious effort. 

61. The business of life is more akin to wrestling * 
than dancing, for it requires of us to stand ready 
and unshakable against every assault however 
unforeseen. 

1 cp. Sen. Ep. 12 ad fin. Quisquis dixit ‘‘ Vixi,” quotidie 
ad lucrum surgit. ? Or, taken by surprise. cp. viii. 15. 


3 St. John iv. 14. 4 vii. 37. cp. vii. 24. 
5 St. Paul, Eph. vi. 12. 


189 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


EB’. Luvexds eprotavar, tives eioiv obtot, bp 
@v paptupetc—a Oédreus, Kal Tiva ryEeporrKxa 
éyovow. ovTe yap péurrn Tois axovoiws TTai- 
ova, ovTE émipaptupHnoews Senon, EuPrETraV eis 
Tas THYas THs UTOAp pews Kal Oputs avTav. 

Ey. “Tldca uy,” dnoiv, “ dxovca orépeTau 
arneias’” obras ovv Kal dicavoavyns Kal 
ca@ppoovyns Kal evpevelas kal TavTos TOU 
TOLOUTOU. dvarykavorarov dé TO Sinvecas TOUTOU 
pepynclar gon yap mT pos TavTas TPQOTEpos. 

ES’. "Ent pev TavTos Tovouv ™ poxerpov éoTo, 
OTL OUK aisxpon, ovde THY dudvotay THv KuBepe- 
@oav xetpw trovet’ ouTe yap «abo Royer * éoTuv 
ovre Ka0d KowWe@viKi) SiapOeiper auTay" én 
MévToL TOV TAELaT@Y TOVeY Kal TO TOD *EmuKoU- 
pov coe Boneirw, btu ‘ ovTE abopnrov oure ai@v- 
Lov,” éav Tov opov punpoverys Kal ua) T poo 
Sofatns. Kakelvov S€ péuvnoo, 6TL TONG, Tove 
Ta avTa dvTa, Aav aver Suoxepasvopeva olov 70 
voor ate wal TO cavparites Bar kal TO ap- 
opextety” érav ov TWwt TovT@y dvoapecTis, 
Néye éavT®, éte Tove évdidas. 

Ee. “Opa, pnroré <i> TotovToy TaOns T™pos 
Tvs amav0 porous, olov of <am>dvOpwrou™ Tpds 
TOUS avO porous. 

E-. lodev iopev, et pr Tyraveyns Lwxpar- 
ous Thy bidbeow Kpeicowy Hv; ov yap apKel, 


1 ~a0d bAuKy P Mo 2: xaborAuKh A: nad AoyKnh Cas. 
2 <an>dvOpwro Cas. 





1 vi. 59; vii. 34. 
2 Quoted by Epictetus (i. 63, 28 § 4) as from Plato (see 
Plato, Soph. 238 C ; Rep. ili. 412) ; viii. 14; x. 30; xi. 18, $3. 


190 





BOOK VII 


62. Continually reflect, who they ; are whose favour- 
able testimony thou desirest,! and what their ruling 
Reason ; for thus wilt thou not find fault with those 
who unintentionally offend, nor wilt thou want their 
testimony, when thou lookest into the inner springs 
of their opinions and desires. 

63. Every soul, says Plato, is refi of truth against its 
mill.2 Therefore it is the same also with justice 
and temperance and lovingkindness and every like 
quality. It is essential to keep this ever in mind, 
for it will make thee gentler towards all.? 

64. Whenever thou art in pain, have this reflection 
ready, that this is nothing to be ashamed of, nor can 
it make worse the mind that holds the helm. For it 
cannot impair it in so far as it is rational or in so far 
as it is social. In most pains, however, call to thy 
rescue even Epicurus when he says that a pain is 
never unbearable* or interminable, so that thou re- 
member its limitations and add nothing to it in 
imagination.’ Recollect this too that many of our 
every-day discomforts are really pain in disguise, such 
as drowsiness,® a high temperature, want of appetite. 
When inclined to be vexed at any of these, say to 
thyself: I am giving in to pain.” | 

65. See that thou never have for the inhuman 
the feeling which the inhuman have for human 
kind. 

66. How do we know that Telauges ® may not have 
excelled Socrates in character? For it is not enough 

® The same word is used of Marcus by Galen (xii. 17 
Kiihn); Athenag. Apol. 1. 1; Lucian, Peregr. 17; and 
Aristides, ad Reg. §§ 105, 112. 

* vii, 33: ° viii. 49. 

Seas 2. 7 ep. vi. 29. 

8 Son of Pythagoras. See Diog. Laert. Pyth. 22. 26. 


191 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


et Loxparns évgokbtrepov anréBave, Kat évt pexeo- 
Tepov tols coduorais drenéyero, ral _Kaprepica- 
TEpov ev TO Taye SLrevuKTépever, Kal TOY Ladapiv- 
tov Kerevabels «dye yevvixwtepov edokev 
avTiBivas, kal “ év tais odots éBpevOvero” epi 
ov Kal padiot av Tis emiatycerev,' eltep arnbes 
hv? adr éxeivo Set cKoreiv, Toiay Tia THY 
Wuyi eixe Loxparns, Kal ei edvvato apKeicOat 
T@ Olkaios eivat TA POs avOpwToUs Kal Gatos 
Ta mpos Oeovs pte exe? mpos THY Kaxkiav 
ayavaktav pndé pny SovrAev@Y TLVds ayvoia pHTE 
TOV drovewopeveov éx ToD Shou @S Eévov Tl 
dex opevos  @s apopnrov Umopeveoy pate tots 
Tov capkidiov mdbecww sEpeireape ae oupTadh Tov 
voov. 

EC: ‘H prow ovxy ovTasS ouverépace 7 
ouyKpipate, @S pa epeirbar mepuoptfew éauTov 
Kal Ta éavtod bd éavTe TroreicOar: iav yap 
évoéxyetat Oeiov avdpa yevécBat Kai bao pndevos 
yvopicOivat. tovTov péuvnco dei, Kai ere 
exeivou, Ott év OdLyioToLs KEiTaL TO EvSaLLOVeS 
Bidcar cal py, ott aT ATUTAS SiahenTiKos Kab 
guotkos écecbat, dua robo aTroye@s | Kal édev- 
Oepos kai aidjpov cal Kxowerixds Kal evtrerOijs 
Oe@. 

en. "A Biaotes biaSijoas € év TAcioTN Oupndia, 
Kav mavtes KataBodow atwa PBovrovtar, Kav 


z amiorhe ere Gat. : dubitari potest Xyl. 
2 eixn P: éxelvev Schenkl. 





1 Plato, Apol. 20C; Epict. iv. 7 § 30. 
2 Or yevvaisrepov, more honourable. 


“192 


ere en eee 








BOOK VII 


that Socrates died a more glorious death, and disputed 
more deftly with the Sophists, and with more hardi- 
hood braved whole nights in the frost, and, when 
called upon to fetch the Salaminian,! deemed it 
more spirited? to disobey, and that he carried his 
head high as he walked®’—and about the truth of 
this one can easily judge—; but the point to 
elucidate is this : what sort of soul had Socrates,‘ and 
could he rest satisfied with being just in his dealings 
with men and religious in his attitude towards the 
Gods, neither resentful at the wickedness of others nor 
yet lackeying the ignorance of anyone, nor regarding 
as alien to himself anything allotted to him from the 
Whole, nor bearing it as a burden intolerable, nor 
letting his intelligence be swayed sympathetically by 
the affections of the flesh ? 

67. Nature did not make so intimate a blend in 
the compound as not to allow a man to isolate 
himself and keep his own things in his own power. 
For it is very possible to be a godlike man and yet 
not to be recognized by any.® Never forget this ; 
nor that the happy life depends on the fewest 
possible things®; nor because thou hast been baulked 
in the hope of becoming skilled in dialectics and 
physics,’ needest thou despair of being free and 
modest and unselfish and obedient to God. 

68. Thou mayest live out thy life with none to 
constrain thee in the utmost peace of mind even 
though the whole world cry out against thee what 

® Arist. Nub. 363 ; Plato, Symp. 221 B. The meaning of 
the parenthesis is not clear. 4 cp. Dio Orat. iii. ad wit. 

5 Sen. (Zp. 79) instances Democritus, Socrates, and Cato. 

§ Julian, Conviv. 427.21, where Marcus, asked in what con- 
sists the imitation of the Gods, says defo bar Trav €AaxloTwy. Cp. 


Lucian, Cynic. 12: of 8 tyyioro Oeots eAaxlotwy déovran. 
Diog. Laert. Socr. 11. 74, 17, § 8; cp. v. 53 viii. 1. 


193 


Oo 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Ta Onpia Svacma ta pedvopua Tou meptTeO pap- 
pévov TOUTOU updparos. Ti yap KONVEL év 
Taot TOVTOLS (Thy didvovav cate éavTny év 
yannvn, Kal Kptoer [7H] Tepl TOV TEplegTKOT@Y 
arn bei, Kab xpuree TOV brroBeSAnpévev éroipn; 
OOTE THY pev Kpiow every TO _Mpoomimrovrt 
“ Todro imap els. Kat ovciav, Kav Kara do€av 
adXotov paivn, THY dé  XPHTW every. T@ omonimr- 
ovtt: “Xe ée€ntouv.” del yap pot 70 mapov oAN 
apeTns RNoyiKhs wal TOMTUKHS Kal TO GUVOXOY 
TEXVNS avO peorrou ) Ocod. wav yap TO oUp- 
Baivov 0c 4 avOparre eEorxevodrar kat ovTe 
Kavov oure ducpetaxelpioTov, adda sats 
Kal evepyés. 

£0. Tobdro eXeu 7) TeheLo7ns TOU nOovs, TO 
Tacav pepav @s TehevTaiay dueEdyey Kal pre 
oputew LTE vapeav unre vmoxpiver Oar. 

o. Oi Geot, advaror ovTes, ov dua xepatv- 
ovo, ore év TOTOUT@ aidve denoer avTous 
TavT@S adel TOLOUT@Y dyTwY Kal ToTOUTwY datov 
avixer Oa mpooéte O€ Kal KndovTar avTav 
TavTolws. ov dé bcov ovdéra dajyewv pédXov 
anavods, Kal tabra, els @ ov TOV pavrov; 

Bike Dedotov éoTL THY poev idtay KaKiav pn) 
pevyew, 0 xal duvatov éote tHv bé TOY adXrAwY 
pevryerv, 6 Sep aduvatov. 

of . *O ay 4 oyun Kat ToNeTLKN Sivapus 
evupioKn pre voepov pajre KOLVOVLKOV, EUNOYWS 
KaTAdEesTEPOV EAUTHS Kpiver. 





1 xi. 3. Applies accurately to the Christians. cp. i. 6; 
iii, 16; viii. 48, 51, § 2. 2 iv. 1. 


194 





BOOK VII 


they will, even though beasts tear limb from limb this 
plastic clay that has encased thee with its growth.! 
For what in all this debars the mind from keeping 
itself in calmness, in a right judgment as to its en- 
vironment, and in readiness to use all that is put at 
its disposal? so that the judgment can say to that 
which meets it: Jn essential substance thou art this, 
whatever else the common fame would have thee be. And 
the use can say to the object presented to it: Thee 
was I seeking. For the thing in hand is for me ever 
material for the exercise of rational and civic virtue,” 
and in a word for the art of a man or of God. For 
everything that befalls is intimately connected with 
God or man, and is not new or difficult to deal with, 
but familiar and feasible. 

69. This is the mark of a perfect character, to pass 
through each day as if it were the last,’ without 
agftation, without torpor, without pretence. 

70. The Gods—and they are immortal—do not 
take it amiss that for a time so long they must 
inevitably and always put up with worthless men 
who are what they are and so many‘; nay they 
even befriend them in all manner of ways. But 
thou, though destined to die so soon, criest off, and 
that too though thou art one of the worthless ones 
thyself. 

71. It is absurd not to eschew our own wickedness, 
which is possible, but to eschew that of others, which 
is not possible.® 

72. Whatever thy rational and civic faculty dis- 
covers to be neither intelligent nor social, it judges 
with good reason to fall short of its own standard. 


an 3 Pa 3 4 St. Matt. v. 45. 
5 v.17; ix. 42, 


195 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


U 


oy. “Otay od ed TeToinnws ns Kal addos ev 
merrov0as, tL émitnteis tpitov mapa Tadra, 
@oTrep of pwpol, To Kal SdEar ed metounKévar 4) 
TO amouBns TvxEly; 

0d. Ovddels cdpver @perovpevos. awpérea Se 

cal \ A \ 2 /, > / 
mpakis Kata dvow: pu) ovv Kduve whedovpevos, 
> , Cal 
év @ wgpeneis. 

Ul € fol ir4 / ye, \ / 

o¢. H tod Orov vous éri THY KoopoTrOLLAY 
apunoe viv Se Aro wav TO ywopevoy Kat 
> uA / a > , \ 
émaxonovOnow yivetat, 7 aroyota Kal Ta 

n \ 

Kupl@otata éotw, ef a& Toreitas idiay opynv TO 

a / 
Tov KocmOU HYyEMovLKOV. eis TOAAG GE YyaAnHVO- 
TEPOV TOLHTEL TOUTO LYNWOVEVOMEVOV. 





BOOK VII 


73. When thou hast done well to another and 
another has fared well at thy hands, why go on like 
the foolish to look for a third thing besides, that is, 
the credit also of har done well or a return for 
the same ! ? 

74. No one wearies of benefits received ; and to 
act by the law of Nature is its own benefit. Weary 
not then of being benefited therein, wherein thou 
dost benefit others.? 

75. The Nature of the Whole felt impelled to the 
creation of a Universe ; but now either all that comes 
into being does so by a natural sequence,’ or even 
the most paramount things, towards which the ruling 
Reason of the Universe feels an impulse of its own, 
are devoid of intelligence. Recollect this* and thou 
wilt face many an ill with more serenity. 


1 v.6; ix. 42. cp. Fronto, de Nep. ad fin. 

2 cp. St. Paul, Gal. vi. 9; 2 Thess. iii. 13. For the Stoic 
view see Stob. Hel. ii. 188. 

3 iv. 45 ; ix. 28. 

4 Marcus means that we must consider the second 
alternative given above as incredible. 


197 


BIBAION H 


, \ a \ N¥.9 , , e > 
a. Kat todto mpos To axevodo£or pépet, OTL ovK 
” 7 \ / e- A , > X / 
ére SU¥vacat Tov Biov GXov } TOV ye GTO VEdTHTOS 
, ro 
pirocogov BeBvoxévar: GAXA TrOAXOIS Te AAXOLS 
\ | yee.” a a / , 

Kal avTos ceavt@ SHros yéyovas TOppw dido- 
, x , s 4 \ \ / 
codias wv. mépupcar odv- wate THY pev SoEav 

\ a , / > x 
THV, TOV dirtocdhov KtHcacbat ovK ETL oot 
e LO - > 7 be 4 e ic 50 bs 
padiov: avrayavitetar 5 Kal  bToOecrs. ei7rep 
ov arnbads éwpaxas, Tod Keita TO TPaypa, - 
\ / / / A > / / > bat 
To pév, Ti Sokers, adhes, apxéoOnte Sé, e¢ Kav 
\ \ a Qs of Si, ¢ big ee 
TO NoTOV Tov Biov bcov SHoTE, <@s>1 H oH 
‘ lA 4 / i. J ‘4 f 
gio Oérer, Bidon. Katavonoov ovv, Ti Oéret, 
Kat pndev GAXO oe TEpLoTTaTw* TeTElpaca yap, 
/ a nr 
Tepl Toca TAaVNOEIs, OVdapod edpes TO ED FHv 
> > a r) > ff > > Wa 
ovK év cuAAOYLT LOIS, OVK ev TAOUTO, OvK ev OOEN, 
ovK év aTroNavoel, ovdapod. Tod ody éoTLW; €V 
n tad a > ~ e a > A 74 n 
TO Toreiy & émitnte 7 To avOpwrrov piats’ TAS 
rn / / BA > > e 
otv TadTa tomo; éav Sdypata éxyn, ad ov 
€ BS 
ai oppal cal ai mpd&es. tiva Sdypata; Ta 
mept aya0av Kal Kaxdv, ws ovdevds pev ayabod 
dvT0s avOporr@, 5 ovyi Toved Sixatov, cwdpova, 
1 <@s> Gat. 


198 





BOOK VIII 


1. Tuts too serves as a corrective to vain-glorious- 
ness, that thou art no longer able to have lived thy 
life wholly, or even from thy youth up, as a philo- 
sopher. Thou canst clearly perceive, and many others 
can see it too, that thou art far from Philosophy. 
So then thy life is a chaos,! and no longer is it easy 
for thee to win the credit of being a philosopher ; 
and the facts of thy life too war against it. If then 
thine eyes have verily seen where the truth lies, 
care no more what men shall think of thee, but be 
content if the rest of thy life, whether long or short, 
be lived as thy nature wills. Make sure then what 
that will is, and let nothing else draw thee aside. For 
past experience tells thee in how much thou hast gone 
astray, nor anywhere lighted upon the true life; no, 
not in the subtleties of logic,? or in wealth or fame 
or enjoyment, or anywhere. Where then is it to be 
found? In doing that which is the quest of man’s 
nature. How then shall a man do this? By having 
axioms as the source of his impulses and actions. 
What axioms? On. the nature of Good and Evil, 
shewing that nothing is for a man’s good save what 
makes him just, temperate, manly, free; nor any 


1 Or, thou hast been besmirched, but cp. vi. 16, § 3. 
2 4. 17 ad fin. ; vii. 67. 


199 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


avdpeiov, édevOepov, ovdevds 5é KaKov, 6 ovyl 


a 7 al 
To.el TavavTia Tois eipnpévors. 
f bl e 4 lal > , / 
B’. Ka? éxdotny mpakiv épeta ceavutov: 
2 
“Tlas pou attn yer; pt) wetavonow em avTh;” 
puxpov Kat TéOvnka Kal TavT éx péocov. Ti mEOV 
émitnt@, ef TO Tapov épyov Edouv voepod Kal 
KOLV@VLKOD Kal icovdmou De@; 
\ “ “ 
y. “AnréEavdpos [be] cal Tdios cat Hopmnios, 
/ \ Ms : Fad , \ > / 
tt mpos Avoyévn kat Hpakdevtov cat Ywxpatnv; 
\ \ \ \ 
of pev yap eldov Ta TpdypaTa Kal Tas aitias Kal 
Tas Uras, Kal TA IyewovKa Hv avTav avTa: +} 
lal , / 
éxel 5é Oowy mpovora Kai SovrAcia TOCwD. 
7 »Q\ a \ > \ / x 
&. “Ore ovdéyv Hrtov Ta avTa Toincover, Kav 
\ a 
ov dvappayis. 
e’. To mp@tov uy Tapdooov' TavTa yap KaTa 
\ a Cf 4 \ 3 / f > 
TV TOD Grov hia" Kai Odiyou ypovou ovédels 
> nm Df A OA C / Q\ x 
ovdapmod éon datep ovde “Adpiavos, o0dé Ady- 
e. an 
ovaTos. émretta atevioas eis TO Tpaypa ide avTo 
/ 4 
Kal cuppvnpovevaas, OTe ayadov ce avOpwrov 
val a 7 a 
eivat Sei, Kal Ti ToD avOpwrov 7 dios arrastel, 
a nr \ 
mpatov TodToO apeéeTaotpeTTt Kal eimré, ws 
/ / lal 
dixarotatov gaivetat cot, povov evpevas Kal 
/ \ , 
aidnmoves Kal avuTroKpiTas. 
U ¢ a ¢ 7 a ” ” \ 
s. “H tav drov piais todto Epyov exer, TA 
og 7 bd tal f / cy 
@be dvta exe wetaTiévar, weTaBdrreWw, aipeww 
évOev kat éxel dépew. mdavta tpoTrat, ovy waTE 


l gira A: raita P: radra Cas.: abtdpxn Schenkl. 





1 Justin (Apol. i. 46) mentions Heraclitus and Socrates 
and others like them as ‘‘ living with the divine Logos,” And 


200 





BOOK VIII 


thing for his ill that makes him not the reverse of 
these. 

2. In every action ask thyself, How does it affect 
me? Shall I regret it? Buta little and I am dead 
and all that lies between is past. What more do I ask 
for, as long as my present work is that of a living 
creature, intelligent, social, and under one law with 
God ? 

3. What are Alexander and Gaius and Pompeius to 
Diogenes and Heraclitus! and Socrates? For these 
latter had their eyes opened to things and to 
the causes and the material substance of things, 
and their ruling Reason was their very own. But 
those—what a host of cares, what a world of 
slavery ! 

4. Thou mayst burst thyself with rage, but they 
will go on doing the same things none the less. 

5. Firstly, fret not thyself, for all things are as the 
Nature of the Universe would have them, and within 
a little thou shalt be non-existent, and nowhere, like 
Hadrianus and Augustus. Secondly, look stead- 
fastly at the thing, and see it as it is and, remem- 
bering withal that thou must be a good man, and 
what the Nature of man calls for, do this without 
swerving, and speak as seemeth to thee most just, 
only be it graciously, modestly, and without 
feigning.” 

6. The Nature of the Universe is charged with 
this task, to transfer yonder the things which are 
here, to interchange them, to take them hence and 
convey them thither. All things are but phases of 


in Apol. ii. 8 Heraclitus and Musonius are spoken of as hated 


and slain for their opinions. 


2 The word here used by Marcus occurs only in -Christian 
writings. 
201 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


poBnOjvat, wn Te Katvov' tavta auvynOn: adra 
Kal toas ai arrovepna ess. 

go. “Apxetrar Taoa puous éavTh evodovan 
pvats 5é oyun evodel év ev pavraciass pyre 
pevdei pare adnr@ ouykaraTiepEern, TAS oppas 
dé él Ta KoWoviKa & épya. pova anevOvvovca, Tas 
opé&ecs be Kal Tas exces Tov ep nhpiv Hover 
TeToUnMern, TO O€ Uo THS Kowis pucews aTro- 
ve“opevov wav aotalopévn. pépos yap auTAs 
éoTL, @S 4% TOD PUAAOV Hiats THS TOV puTod 
picews’ mAnv St exel pev 4) TOD PUAXOV vats 
pépos ott dicews cal avatcOyntrov Kal addyou 
Kak eurrodiver bar Suvaperns, 7 7 O€ TOD avO porrou 
puots Hépos éoTiv “dveyrroBior0v pucews Kal 
voepas Kal dixaias, eltye ious Kal Kar’ akiav TOUS 
peptic pous Xpover, ovotas, aitiou, évepyelas, oUp- 
Bacews, éxadoros Toreitat. oKOTEL éé, pa) el TO 
<€v> pos TO év icov etpyoers emi TavTos, adAa 
el cVAANBOnY Ta TavTA TODSE TrpOS GO poa Ta TOD 
ETEpov. ; 

7). “° Avayiookew ov eEeotw.” adr UBpww 
dweipyely éEeotiv? adda mOovav Kal Tov@v xae- 
umepTepeiy efor" aAvra Tov do€aptou bTrepavo 
eivar éfeotw: adda aaa Oijrous Kal axaplaTous 
) Oupotabar, TpooeTe xndea Oar avtov é&eotwv. 

0. Myxeére gov pmoels aKovon KaTapeppo- 
pévou Tov év avrAF Biov, unde od ceavTod. 

t. A peTavoid éoTw éridywis TUS éavTod, os 
Xprjotwov Tt TAPELKOTOS” TO bé aryaov Xprjotpov 
Te bef elvat, Kal éripedntéov avTov TO KANO Kal 





1 ii. 14; iv. 32; vii. 1 ete. 
202 


BOOK VIII 


change, but nothing new-fangled need be feared ; all 
things are of the wonted type,! nay, their distributions 
also are alike. 

7. Every nature is content with itself when it 
speeds well on its way; and a rational nature speeds 
well on its way, when in its impressions it gives 
assent to nothing that is false or obscure, and directs 
its impulses towards none but social acts, and limits its 
inclinations and its aversions only to things that are 
in its power, and welcomes all that the Universal 
Nature allots it. For it is a part of that, as the 
nature of the leaf is of the plant-nature ; with the 
difference however, that in the case of the plant 
_ the nature of the leaf is part of a nature void both. 
_ of sentience and reason, and liable to be thwarted, 
while a man’s nature is part of a nature unthwart- ° 
_ able and intelligent and just, if indeed it divides up 
equally and in due measure to every one his quotas 
of time, substance, cause, activity, circumstance. 
And consider, not whether thou shalt find one thing 
in every case equal to one thing, but whether, collect- 
_ ively, the whole of this equal to the aggregate of that. 

8. Thou canst not be a student. But thou canst 
refrain from insolence ; but thou canst rise superior 
to pleasures and pains; but thou canst tread under 
thy feet the love of glory ; but thou canst forbear to 
be angry with the unfeeling and the thankless,” aye 
_ and even care for them. 

9. Let no one hear thee any more grumbling at 
life in a Court,’ nay let not thine own ears hear thee. 
10. Repentance is a sort of self-reproach at some 

_ useful thing passed by ; but the good must needs be 
a useful thing, and ever to be cultivated by the true 


2 $t. Luke vi. 35. 3 v. 16. 








203 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ayab@ avopi: ovdels & dv Karos kai ayabos avnp 
peTavoraécev emt 7@ noovny Twa TaperKévat: 
ovTe dpa XPHoLwov ouTE aryabov 700v. 

ta. Tovto Tt ear avTo Kal? éavTo TH dia 
KaTacKevy; Ti ev TO ovarardes avrod Kal Duco; 
Tt dé TO aitiades; ti 5é Trovel €v TO KOTO; TOTO 
dé Xpovov Upioratar; 

wp’. “Orav €& omvou duoxep@s éyeipy, ava- 
pipvnoKon, ore KaTa THY KATATKEU IY cov éoTh 
Kab Kara THY avO peor ixny gvow TO mpage 
KOLW@VLKAS amobovat, TO 6€ cabevdew Kowvov Kal 
TOV adoryou foov" 6 dé kata hvow éxdaTe, 
TOUTO oiKeLorepov Kal Tpoadvéctepov Kat 82) Kal 
™ poonvéaTepov. 

uy. Ainvexds kai éri maons, e olov te, par- 
tacias duva.odoyeiv, taforoyeir, Ssaderexed- 
eoOat. 
6. *Ou adv évtuyxavns, evOds cavTe onthe 
ovTos Tiva Soypara éyer trepl aryabov Kab KAKOD ; 
el yap Tept Hoovijs Kal Tovey Kal TOV TOLNTLKOV 
éxaTépov ral Tept S0&ns, abo€kias, Oavdrou, Soofis 
Towdde TLWa Soypara éxer, ovdév Oavpacrov o) 
Eévov peo d0fe, dav Tad€ Twa moun. Kal pemyn- 
copuat, bte avayxatetat oUTws Totetv. 

te. Mépvnoo, ott, domep aioxpov éote Eevit- 
ecOat, et 1) cuKH cixa héper, OUTS, Eb 0 KOTMOS 
Td8e Tia péper, ov éore gopos- Kal iarp@ oé 
Kal cuBepvirn aioxpov EeviferOar, ei memupeyev 
ovTos 7) ef avTimvola yéyover. 





' Or, formative. wel iT 5 Or, axioms. 
4 v.17; vii. 713° xi. 18, § 3: 5 18t. Peter, iv. 12. 


204 


BOOK VIII 


good man ; but the true good man would never regret 
having passed a pleasure by. Pleasure therefore 
is neither a useful thing nor a good. 

11. What of itself is the thing in question as 
individually constituted? What is the substance and 
material of it? What the causal! part? What 
doeth it in the Universe? How long doth it 
subsist ? 

12. When thou art loth to get up,? call to mind 
that the due discharge of social duties is in accord- 
ance with thy constitution and in accordance with 
man’s nature, while even irrational animals share 
with us the faculty of sleep; but what is in accord- 


- ance with the nature of the individual is more con- 





genial, more closely akin to him, aye and more 
attractive. 

13. Persistently and, if possible, in every case 
test thy impressions by the rules of physics, ethics, 
logic. 

“4. Whatever man thou meetest, put to thyself 
at once this question: What are this man’s convictions * 
about good and evil? For if they are such and such 
about pleasure and pain and what is productive of 
them, about good report and ill report, about death 
and life, it will be in no way strange or surprising 
to me if he does such and such things. So I will 
remember that he is constrained to act as he 
does.* 

15. Remember that, as it is monstrous to be sur- 
prised at a fig-tree bearing figs, so also is it to be 
surprised at the Universe bearing its own particular 
crop. Likewise it is monstrous for a physician or a 
steersman to be surprised ° that a patient has ReNeT 
or that a contrary wind has sprung up. 


205 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


/ / 4 \ \ / \ 
ix’. Mépuvnoo, 6tt Kai TO petatibecOar Kal 
a a / 
érecbat TO SiopOoivte opoiws édrevOepov éotw. 
e 
on yap évépyera KaTa THY ov Opyhy Kal Kpiow 
Kal 6) Kal Kata vody TOV coy TEpaLvopéern. 
t > \ 27-4 / / > X\ a > A D, 3 
uC’, Ei peév él coi, ti avto rroveis; ef 5€ er 
BA , / g ° > f x tal 6 Bae 
adr, Tim péuhyn; tais atopows % Tois Oeois; 
\ \ 
appotepa pavimdn. ovdevl pewTréov. ei ev yap 
lal , 
divacat, SuopPwaov ei S€ TodTO pi SvvacaL, TO 
ye TMpaypa avto: ef 5é unde TovTO, mpos Ti ETL 
j \ 
cor pépet TO péurpacOar; eixn yap ovdév Troin- 
Téov. 
, »” n / \ > \ > 4 
in’. “K&w tod Koopou TO atoGavoy ov Time. 
> ay) A \ / AY) \ Py hv 
et MOE evel, Kal peTaBddArE WSe Kali StadveTaL 
eis TA idta, & oToLxyeia ott TOD KOTMOoU Kal od. 
\ > \ \ / \ > 4 
Kal avra dé wetaBarre Kai ov yoryyuter. 
»” 
0’. “Exaortov Tpds TL yéryovev, immos, dmrenos* 
, , Lig eee F i ov 
ti Oavydfers; Kai o “HXtos épet, “ mpos tt épyov 
e ‘ 
yéyova,” Kal ot ourrol Oeot. ov ovv mpos Ti; TO 
4 yy Py eae A ¢ 
ndecOar; ide, ef avéxerar ) evvoa. 
Kk’. “H tows éordyacta: éxdotov ovdév Tt 
a an a \ 
éXacoov THs amodntews 7) THs apyis Te Kal 
an al / 
dueEaywyis, @s 0 avaBdd\Xov THY chaipay: TI 
an \ 
otv ) ayabov TO ohaipio avapepopéva 7) KaKov 
‘ 
Katapepopevm 7 Kal weTT@KOTL; Ti dé aya0or 
Th Touporuvy. cuvestoan 7 Kaxov Siadvbeion; 
Ta byota Sé Kal él Avyvov. 





! cp. vi. 30; vii. 7. cp. Capit. xxii. 4: ‘‘ Aequius est 
ut ego tot talium amicorum consilum sequar, quam ut tot 
tales amici meam unius voluntatem sequantur”; Digest. 
37. 14. 17. 

? Annius Verus, grandfather of Marcus, was the best 
ball-player of his day, see Wilmanns Inscr. 574. Marcus 
himself was an adept at the ball-game, Capit. iv. 9. 


206 





BOOK VIII 


16. Remember that neither a change of mind 
nor a willingness to be set right by others! is 
inconsistent with true freedom of will. For thine 
alone is the active effort that effects its purpose in 
accordance with thy impulse and judgment, aye 
and thy intelligence also. 

17. If the choice rests with thee, why do the 
thing? if with another, whom dost thou blame? 
Atoms or Gods? To do either would be crazy folly. 
No one is to blame. For if thou canst, set the offender 
right. Failing that, at least set the thing itself 
right. If that too be impracticable, what purpose 
is served by imputing blame? For without a 
purpose nothing should be done. 

18. That which dies is not cast out of the Universe. 
As it remains here, it also suffers change here and is 
dissolved into its own constituents, which are the 
elements of the Universe and thy own. Yes, and 
they too suffer change and murmur not. 

19. Every thing, be it a horse, be it a vine, has 
come into being for some end. Why wonder? 
Helios himself will say: I exist to do some work; 
and so of all the other Gods. For what then 
dost thou exist? For pleasure? Surely it is un- 
thinkable. ; 

20. Nature has included in its aim in every case 
the ceasing to be no less than the beginning and 
the duration, just as the man who tosses up his 
ball.2 But what good does the ball gain while 
tossed upwards, or harm as it comes down, or finally 
when it reaches the ground? Or what good accrues 
to the bubble while it coheres, or harm in its 
bursting? And the same holds good with the lamp- 
flame. 


‘ 207 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ka’. “Exotpeov kat Oéacat, oldv éortt, 
ynpacav 8€ olov yivetat, voojaoav 6é, ‘arro- 
mvevoav Oé.F} 

BpaxvBrov cal 6 eraway Kal 6 eTratvoupevos, 
Kal o pvnpovetov Kal 0 HV LOVEVO[EVOS. Tpoaere 
dé Kal év yovia: ToUTOU TOD Kriparos, Kal ovee 
évrada mavres cuupovovat, wal ovbe AUTOS TLS 
éavT@ Kal brn 6é 7) uh vA orLy pi}. 

«B. IIpoce € TO UToKeuév@ i) TH évepyela 
) TO Soypate? i) TO " onpauvopeve. 

Avcaios tadta mdoyets: warrov be OéreLs 
ayabos avptov yevéo Oar 7) onpepov eivar. 

ky. Ilpdcoowm ti; Tpdoow én avOpoTev 
evrrotiay avadépav’ ovpBaiver ti por; Séyopar 
él tods Beods avahépav Kal THY TavT@Y THYHY, 
ad’ hs wavta Ta ywopeva cvppnpveTaL. 

/ ¢ ar / A 4 

Kd. “Orroidvy cot gaiverar To Rover@ar: 
éXaov, iSpas, porros, bdwp yrouddes, mdvra 
TUX aVT A ToLOvTOY Trav mépos TOD Biouv Kal may 
dmroxelpevov. 

xe. Aovx«irra Ovfpov, celta Aoveirr\a: dé- 
Kxouvoa | MaE:pov, eita Séxovvda: "Emurbyxavos 
Avoripov, eita "Emitiyyavos* Pavorivay *"Avtov- 
ivos, eita *Avtwvivos. Towatra. mavTa* Keénep 
“Adpiavov, eira Kédep.® of 5é Spipets exetvor 4 
TpoyvwortKol i) TeTupwpévot, ToD; olov Spipets 

\ / \ / ec / 4 \ 
pev Xdpaké cai Anpuytpios [o IIdatwrixos|* Kat 

1 ropvedoay P: mopvedoas 5¢ A: Siarvicavy Leopold: dso- 
mvedoay Gat. 

24 7G Sdypart } 77 évepyela P: 

’ Stich would transfer KéAep. . . KéAep to the beginning 
of the paragraph. 

4 § MlAarwvinds possibly a wrong gloss. 


208 





BOOK VIII 


21. Turn it! inside out and see what it is like, 
what it comes to be when old, when sickly, when 
carrion. 

They endure but for a season, both praiser and 
praised, rememberer and remembered.? All this too 
in a tiny corner of this continent, and not even there 
are all in accord, no nor a man with himself; and 
the whole earth is itself a point.® 

22. Fix thy attention on the subject-matter or the 
act or the principle or the thing signified. 

Rightly served! Thou wouldst rather become a 
good man to-morrow than be one to-day. 

23. Am I doing some thing? I do it with refer- 
ence to the well-being of mankind. Does something 
befall me? I accept it with a reference to the Gods 
and to the Source of all things from which issue, 
linked together, the things that come into being. 

24. What bathing is when thou thinkest of it—oil, 
sweat, filth, greasy water, everything revolting—such 
is every part of life and every object we meet with. 

25. Lucilla* buried Verus, then Lucilla was buried ; 
Secunda Maximus,? then Secunda; Epitynchanus 
Diotimus, then Epitynchanus; Antoninus Faustina, 
then Antoninus. The same tale always: Celer® 
buried Hadrianus and then Celer was buried. And 
those acute wits, men renowned for their prescience 
or their pride, where are they? Such acute wits, 
for instance, as Charax and Demetrius [the Platonist’ | 


1 j,e. the body. ? iii. 10; iv. 3,§3. * iv. 3, §3; vi. 36. 

* The mother of Marcus, not as Gataker, Long, etc. the 
daughter. OUTS: 8 See Index II. 

7 Arethas on Lucian, de Salt. § 63, alludes to this passage, 
but Lucian’s Demetrius is the Cynic whom in Demon. § 3 
he couples with Epictetus. (cp. also adv. Ind. § 19.) See 
Index II. 


209 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Evéaivorv Kal ei tis TowdTos. wavta épypepa, 
teOvnkota mddar evict pev ovde én’ odriyov 
pvnpovevOérvtes: of Oé eis pvOous petaBadovtes: 
oi 6€ dn Kal ex pbOwv éFitnroL. TovT@YV od 
peuvncOar, Ott Senoet rot oKxedacOnvar Td 
ouyKpiwaT Lov cou, 1) cBecOhvat.TO Tvevpatior, 7) 
peTacTivas Kal adrhaxod katataxOhvat.» 

ks. Evgpocivn avOpetov movely Ta tO.a 
avOpa@rrou. iScov dé avOperrov evvora Tpos TO 
opopvroy, Umrepopacis THY aidOnTiKay KWicEwr, 
Staxpuots Tov Tilavav pavTacvov, émewpnats 
THS TOV drwy dvocws kal Tov KaT avTIY 
ryevopmevav. 

Ke. T pets oxéoess: u} Hev Tpos TO _ayyeiov* 
70 TepLKelwevov™ 7 Oé mpos THY Geiav aitiav, ad’ 
ns cupBaiver Tact mavra: » 5é mpos Tovs cup- 
Buobvras. 

xy “O Tovos HT OL TO Toware KaKov" ovKody 
anopawtcba n 7H puxir ann’ éeortiv auTh, THY 
idiav aidpiav kal yadquny Siagvhacceny Kal HH) 
UrodapBavew, 6 ore KaKOV. Taca yap Kpiots Kal 
opun Kal dpekis Kal exxdors EvOov, kai ovdev® be 
avaBaivet. 

KO’. "EEddere Tas pavracias TwvEXas 
TEaUTD Aéeyou: “ Nov éx’ épol eoTW, iva év TAUTY 
Th Wuxh pndepia movnpla 2 pode érvbupia 

pnde dhoos TAapAaXy Tus" ara Brérov mavTa, 
orroid eoTL, XpOpat éxdor@ kat akiav.” péuvnoo 
ravrys Tis eEovolas Kata picw. 


1 paraxOjva A. 


2 atriov PA: ayyeiov (cp. iii. 3, xii. 2) Valckenaer : 
owpatiov Cor. 3 <xakby> P, but cp. viii. 49. 


210 





BOOK VIII 


and Eudaemon, and others like them. All creatures 
of a day, dead long ago!—some not remembered 
even for a while, others transformed into legends,' 
and .yet others from legends faded into nothing- 
ness! Bear then in mind that either this thy com- 
posite self must be scattered abroad, or thy vital 
breath be quenched, or be transferred? and set 
elsewhere. 

26. It brings gladness to a man to do a man’s true 
work. Anda man’s true work is to shew goodwill to 
his own kind, to disdain the motions of the senses, 
to diagnose specious impressions, to take a compre- 
hensive view of the Nature of the Universe and all 
that is done at her bidding. 

27. Thou hast three relationships—the first to the 
vessel thou art contained in; the second to the 
divine Cause wherefrom issue all things to all; and . 
the third to those that dwell with thee.* 

28. Pain is an evil either to the body—let the 
body then denounce it‘—or to the Soul; but the 
Soul can ensure her own fair weather and her 
own calm sea,® and refuse to account it an evil. 
For every conviction and impulse and desire and 
aversion is from within,® and nothing climbs in 
thither. 

29. Efface thy impressions,’ saying ever to thyself : 
Now lies it with me that this soul should harbour no 
wickedness nor lust nor any disturbing element at all ; 
but that, seeing the true nature of all things,8 I should 
deal nith each as is its due. Bethink thee of this 
power that Nature gives thee. 


1 xn) 27. 2 Or, leave thee; but cp. v. 33. 
3 i, 12; v. 10, 48; ix. 3 ad jin. # Vite aoe Olarwrs 22) 
8 vy. 19;St. Matt. xv. 18. 7 vii. 17, 29; ix. 7. © iii...) 
2I1I 
P 2 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


nN. Aaretv nal ev cuykrnt@ Kal mpos travl? 
ovTivody Kocpiws, pi) TepiTpdvas: “Trytet Oyo 
xphaar. 

ra’. Avrn Adyovorou, yun, Ouydrnp, € eyyovet, 
Tporyovot, adeApn, "Aypimnas, ouyyevets, oiketot, 
pirot, “A pevos, Mavxjvas,iatpot, OvTat: SANs adANS 
Oavatos. eita ériOt Tas ddXNas <KaTactpodas>! 
pn Kal” évds avOpwrrov Oavatov, oiov Iloumrntov. 
Kaxeivo Sé TO émrurypacp opevov Tots pynpacw, 
5 ‘Ho yatos TOU idiov ) yévous, ’ emhoyi fer Pau, Toca 
éomaa Onoav ot po aren, va duddoxov TLVa 
KaTadinwow: eita avaynn éoyatov Tia ryev- 
écOat' madw wb 6XoV yévous Oavarov. 

rp’. Luvrévae def Tov Biov Kara play 
mpagwy, Kab éxdorn TO éavTiis mapexet,” as 
olov Te, apxeicOar iva dé TO éauThs mTapexn,® 
ovee els ce Koddoas Sivata. “’AAN evotnoetat 
tu &&wbev.” ovdév eis ye TO Stxaiws * Kal cwPpovas 
Kal evroyiotas: “Addo Oé Te lows evepyntiKov 
kadvOnoerar;” adda 7H pos avTo TO KOU ja. 
evaper TITEL Kal TH éml TO Suddmevov evyv@pmove 
petaBdoe. evOvs addy mpakis ayrixabicra- 
Tat évappocovoa cis THY ovvOecwv, TeEpl Hs Oo 
Aoryos. 

Ay’. “Artigas pév AaBeiv, edrAVT@s Sé ad- 
elvat. 


1 <émypapas> Breithaupt: Schenkl supplies adAds with 
a lacuna after: perhaps rdv éAns ovAjs with Lofft’s unre? 
évds would give the meaning. 

2 adoxer A: mapéxe: P: améxe: Schenkl. 

3 améxn PA: mapéxn Morus. 

+ A verb is missing, ¢.g. <diaKxeicOar> Rend., <mparrew> 
Morus. 


212 


speemtnememm eet 





BOOK VIII 


30. Say thy say in the Senate or to any person 
whatsoever becomingly and naturally. Use sound 
speech. 

31. The court of Augustus—wife, daughter, de- 
scendants, ancestors, sister, Agrippa, kinsfolk, house- 
hold, friends, Areius,? Maecenas, physicians, haru- 
spices—dead, the whole court of them! Pass on 
then to other records and the death not of individuals 
but of a clan, as of the Pompeii. And that well-known 
epitaph, Last of his race—think over it and the anxiety 
shewn by the man’s ancestors that they might leave a 
successor. But after all some one must be the last of 
the line—here again the death of a whole race! 

32. Act by act thou must build up thy life, and be 
content, if each act as far as may be fulfils its end.® 
And there is never a man that can prevent it doing 
this. But there mill be some impediment from without. 
There can be none to thy behaving justly, soberly, 
wisely. But what if some other exercise of activity be 
hindered? Well, a cheerful acceptance of the hin- 
drance and a tactful transition to what is allowed 
will enable another action to be substituted that will 
be in keeping with the built-up life of which we are 
speaking. 

* 33. Aecept without arrogance, surrender without 
reluctance. 


1 Dr. Bigg does not scruple to say that Marcus spoke 
in such a pedantic jargon as to be unintelligible to his hearers! - 
This is pitiable nonsense. See Fronto, wd Ant. i. 1: quanto 
studio quantoque favore et voluptate diceniem te audit senatus 
populusque Romanus; cp. ad Caes. ii. 1. 

2 Domestic philosopher to Augustus, as Rusticus was to 
Mareus. See Them. Orat. v. 63d; xiii. 173¢; Sen. ad 
Marciam, § 4. 

3 Or, receives its due reward (améxet). 


213 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ro’. Ei mote eldes yelpa aTroKeKopmpevny q 
Tooa, 1 Kepanray aTroTeTpnpevny xwpis Tov 
TOTE amo TOU NouTod TOMATOS Keypevny" ToLoDTov 
€avTOV TroLel, Soop ep éauT@, o a Bedov TO 
cup Paivor cal atroaxt Cov éauTov 7) 0 aKOLWOUN- 
TOV TL mpagawv. anéppipat Tou more amo 
TIS KaTa puow EVOTEWS* érrepuxets yap pé pos: 
vov <6e> EAUTOV aTréKowas. add’ MOE Kopnyov 
exeivo, 6TL eeort col TadwW év@oat aEavToOr. 
TOUTO adhep péper ovdevi Beds émétpewer, Nwpro- 
Oeévtt Kal OvaKoTevte mad ovvenbeiv. andra 
oKneyar TV XpnorornTa, 7 TeTipmxe TOV av por - 
ov: Kal yap va THY apxny pn) arroppayh aro 
Tov Grou, em ad’T@ éroinoer” Kal arroppayevre 
mau érravenOeiv Kat ouppovat Kal THY TOD 
pépous TaEwy atroraBelv éroincer. 

re’. “OQomep tas ddXas Suvd pees éxdot@! TOV 
Royexdy + oxedov dcov t” %) TOV NOYLK@V ‘doors, 
ovTas Kal TavTnY map _avriis eihnpaper. ov 
TpOTrov yap éxelyn mTav TO eat apevoy Kal aVTt- 
Baivov eMLTEpLTpeTEL Kab KataTdacel eis Thy 
eiwapperny, Kal Epos eauriis TOLEL, OUTWS Kal TO 
NoyeKov Spov Ovvatar may Kohupa. DANY éavtob 
moveiv, Kat xpicOar avTo, ee olov av Kai 
Gpyncer. 

Ae". My ae ouyxetr@ y) Too éXov Biov pav- 
tacia. pun ovupmepivoe, érimova ola Kal boa 
miavov éruyeyevrnobar, adda Kal Exactov TeV 
Tapovtwy émep@ta ceavTov' Ti Tod Epyou TO 
apopntov Kat avitoictov; aicyvvOnon yap 

1 €xaoros P. 
2 axeddv bcov: éoxédacev Cor.: <%5wxey> Schultz. 


214 


a A hk es ot te, 


td 





BOOK VIII 


34. Thou hast seen a hand cut off or a foot, or a 
head severed from the trunk, and lying at some 
distance from the rest of the body. Just so does the 
man treat himself, as far as he may, who wills not 
what befalls and severs himself from mankind or acts 
unsocially. Say thou hast been torn away in some 
sort from the unity of Nature ; for by the law of thy 
birth thou wast a part; but now thou hast cut 
thyself off. Yet here comes in that exquisite pro- 
vision, that thou canst return again to thy unity.! To 
no other part has God granted this, to come together 
again, when once separated and cleft asunder. Aye, 
behold His goodness, wherewith He hath glorified 
man! For He hath let it rest with a man that he be 
never rent away from the Whole, and if he do rend 
himself away, to return again and grow on to the 
rest and take up his position again as part. 

35. Just as the Nature of rational things has 
given each rational being almost all his other 
powers, so also have we received this one from 
it; that, as this Nature moulds to its purpose what- 
ever interference or opposition it meets, and gives it 
a place in the destined order of things, and makes it 
a part of itself, so also can the rational creature 
convert every hindrance into material for itself? and 
utilize it for its own purposes. 

36. Let not the mental picture of life as a whole - 
confound thee. Fill not thy thoughts with what and 
how many ills may conceivably await thee, but in every 
present case ask thyself: What is there in this experi- 
ence so crushing, so insupportable? Thou wilt blush 


1 Sen. Hp. 98: licet in integrum restitui (a legal phrase 
for a restoration to all rights). 
2 iv. 1; v. 20; vi. 50. 


215 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


A / 2 
Opmoroynoalr. emerta avapiuvnoKe ceavTov, dTL 
x x \ s 
ovTe TO pédAXAOV OVTE TO TrapwyNKoS Papel ce 
arra del TO \mapov. ToOTO bé KaTao wuKpiverau, 
éav avo povov mepvopians Kal am eheyXys THY 
didvorav, ei mpos TovTO Widov avrs Net 7) 
dvvatar. 
XC’. More viv tapaxd@ntar tH Tod Kupiov! 
a / x / , \ ac a 
cop® IlavOeva 7) épyapos; ti dé; 7H “Adptavod 
Xafpias 7 Avdtios; yedotov. ti dé; et mapexdd- 
4 > / / / > > / 
nvtTo, &uedrov aicOdvecOa; ti dé, ei noOavovto, 
Eweov noOncerIar; Ti 6é, el Neovo, _epeXov 
obToL abavaror eiva; ov Kal TOUTOUS 7 p@TOv pep 
ypatas Kat yépovras yevéo Bau oUTWS elyapro, 
eita atoVaveiv; Ti ovv batepov Euerrov éxeivor 
Toveiv, ToUT@V aToVavovTMV; ypdaos wav TodTO 
\ “f 3 / 
Kal UO pov év OvrAdKo. 
An’. Ei dtvacar-6€d Brérew, Brérre,t “ Kpi 
” , “ec , ” 4 
vov, onal, “ copw@tata. + 
. Atkatoctyns Kate~avactatiKny apeThy 
ovY Opa év Th 700 Royexod Cdov KaTacKeuiy’ 
mdovns dé 0 ope THY éyxparevay. 
bw’. “Kav adpédys THY, ony omokmyrw Tepl TOU 
Autrey ae SoKxodvtos, avros év TO aaharerrareo 
éstnxas. “Tis avdtos;” o Néyos. "ANN ove 
ell NOyos.” ~oTw. ovKodY O pev OYOS avTOS 
ec \ \ / > / BA n 
éavTov pu) AVTeiTw. ef Sé TL GAO GOL KAKaS 
4 ¢ / > \ \ ¢€ na 
éyev, UToAaBETW.avTO TEpl aUTOD. 
1 rot Kuplov P: tod xvpod A: [rov] Oijpov Salm., but 
Marcus does not speak of Lucius as Verus. 


2 gopwrdtos P: copwrarns (with Sixaocivns, §39) A: 
copétata Xyl. 


1 See on vi. 29. 
2 Lucian (?) (Imag. §§ 10, 22), mentions Pantheia as the 
216 





eo ee 





BOOK VIII 


to confess. Remind thyself further that it is not the 
future nor the past but the present always that 
brings thee its burden. But this is reduced to in- 
significance if thou isolate it, and take thy mind to 
task ! if it cannot hold out against this mere trifle. 

37. Does Pantheia? now watch by the urn of her 
lord, or Pergamus ? What, does Chabrias or Diotimus 
by Hadrian’s? Absurd! And had they sat there 
till now, would the dead have been aware of it? 
and, if aware of it, would they have been pleased? 
and, if pleased, would that have made the mourners 
immortal? Was it not destined that these like 
others should become old women and old men 
and then die? What then, when they were dead, 
would be left for those whom they had mourned 
to do? It is all stench and foul corruption ‘in 
a sack of skin.’ ? 

38. Hast thou keenness of sight? Use it mith 
judgment ever so nisely, as the saying goes. 

39. In the constitution of rational creatures I see 
no virtue incompatible with justice, but incompatible 
with pleasure I see—continence. 

40. Take away thy opinion‘ as to any imagined 
pain, and thou thyself art set in surest safety. 
What is ‘thyself’? Reason. But I am not reason. 
Be it so. At all events let the Reason not cause 
itself pain, but if any part in thee is amiss, let it 
form its own opinion about itself.® 
matchless concubine of rG@ ueydA@ Baorre? xphot~ Kal jucpe 
dvtt (meaning apparently Lucius Verus). Lucian (Nigr. 
§ 31) speaks of of xeAevovres Kal mapapevery Tivds oikéras Tois 
Tapas. 

% Epict. Frag. 94. cp. Diog. Laert. Anawxarchus, § 2 ; 
Zeno Hleat. § 5. Howell, Familiar Letters, viii, 2, 50, speaks 
of ‘‘ this smal! skinful or bagful of bones,” 

4 vii. 16; viii. 47. 5 vii, 33, 

: 217 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Uy > A° > / \ fol 

pa’. “Eurodsopos aicOnoews Kkaxov Cotixis 
pvcews: Eu7rodic Los Opus opotws Kaxov CoTiKs 

/ yy f ” e / ? \ 
dvoews. ate 5é TL AdXO Opoiws eutrodioTiKOV 
Kat Kakov THS vTiKs KaTacKevsS.  ovT@S 

/ rn a 
Tolvuy euTrodicpos vod KaKoV voepas pPicews. 
TavTa 6) TavTa éml ceavTov peTadepe. TOVvOS 
<> Hdovn amtetai cov; dWerar 4 aicPnors. 
opuncavts évotnua éyéveto; et ev avuTreEatper- 
ws oppds, non @s oyLKOD KaKov. et bé TO 
Kowov apBaves, ovTw BéBrAaar ovdée ep- 

/ \ / a an > \ yv 

TETOOLTAL. TA LEVTOL TOV VOD ldta ovdEls ANOS 
yy > / 4 \ > nr > / 
el@bev éurroditew: tovTov yap ov mip, ov oidn- 
pos, ov TUpavvos, ov Bracdypia, ody oTLodY 
amtetar: “Otav yévntar oaipos, KuKAoTEp?S 
péver.t ”} 

wp’. Ov« eip aEvos €wavTov AvTretv* ovde yap 
a\XNov TeTOTE ExwoV ELUTNGA. 

jy’. Evgpaiver GdXov adro- ewe O€, Eav ines 
€X@ TO HyEmoriKOV, fy aTrooTpEepopmevoy pTE 
avOpwrov tia pnte <tt> TOV avOpwTo.s 
cupBawovtav: adr\a Tay evpeveow ofOarpois 
op@v Te Kal Sexopuevov Kal ypwpevov ExdoT@ KaT 
akéiav. 


pd’. Todrov? ised tov ypovoy ceavTd yapioat. 


of Thy vaoTepodynuiay paddXov SiwKovTes ov 
RNoyilovtar, tt GAOL TovodTor péANOVEOW ExeEivot 


5 fu e A a = BEAT. 
e€lval, otod E€LOLVY OUTOL, OUS Bapovvtrac: KQKELVOL © 


4 


1 yovly Rend. (ep. xii. 3): by changing o«aipos to opaipa 


(xi. 12) we get a senarius. 2 rovrovt 6n Leop. 
218 


Sail a ss 








BOOK VIII 


41. To the animal nature a thwarting of sense- 
perception is an evil, as is also to the same nature the 
thwarting of impulse. There is similarly some other 
thing that can thwart the constitution of plants and 
is an evil to them. Thus then the thwarting of 
intelligence is an evil to the intelligent nature. 
Transfer the application of all this to thyself. 
Does pain, does pleasure take hold of thee? The 
senses shall look to it. Wast thou impelled to a 
thing and wast thwarted? If thy impulse counts on 
an unconditional fulfilment, failure at once becomes 
an evil to thee as a rational creature. But accept 
the universal limitation, and thou hast so far received 
no hurt nor even been thwarted.! Indeed no one 
else is in a way to thwart the inner purposes of 
the mind. For it no fire can touch, nor steel, nor 
tyrant, nor obloquy,’ nor any thing soever : a sphere * 
once formed continues round and true. 

42. It were not right ‘that I should pain myself 
for not even another have I ever knowingly 
pained.* 

43, One thing delights one, another thing another. 
To me it is a delight if [ keep my ruling Reason 
sound, not looking askance at man or anything that 
befalls man, but regarding all things with kindly 
eyes, accepting and using everything for its intrinsic 
worth. 

44. See thou dower thyself with this present time. 
Those that yearn rather for after-fame do not realize 
that their successors are sure to be very much the 
same as the contemporaries whom they find such a 

1 vi. 50.  ? vil. 68; =ar 15 22..43.0) Aix. 125/xi1. 3. 

4 cp. Them. Orat. xv. p. 191 B, quoted App. ii.; cp. Diog. 
Laert. Zeno 64. 


219 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


\ / / \ oo \ / x > a a 
dé Ovntoi. Ti dé Grws Tpds cé, Av éxeivos Pwvais 
TolavTas aTnYaow 7) vrdrAn yw TovavTnY Trepl 
cov Exwow; 

pe’. “Apov pe kat Bare, drrov Oérers. exet! yap 
[<4 \ woN / Oo / > 7 
éEw tov éuov Saipova trewv, TouTéctiv apKov- 
pevor, et &xot Kal évepyoin Kata TO éEAs TH idia 
KATAC KEV). 
3 fal ” ivf > a 2% a ” 
Apa tobdto a€tov, tva bv abto KaKas po Ex 
uy Kal xeipwv éavthis 4 Tatrewoupévn, 
Gpeyouéevn, avvdvopévn,? t+ mrupouévn; Kal ti 
evpynaets TovTOU aéLov; 
/ >? 7, > \ a! 4 a 
us’. “AvOpdr@ ovdevi cupBaiverw te divatat, 6 
> »” > \ 4 2O\ 7, a > 
ovK éotiv avOpwrikov ctuTTwopa: ode Boi, 6 odK 
4 - f 2Q\ 3 le > ” > / 
éote Boixov' oddé autrérg, 6 ovK EoTLv apTrEedtKoV’ 
ovde ALOw, 6 ovK éott AOov itdiov. et odv 
eke t a Ap 9 6 \ , rx | 
éxdot@ cupBaiver, 0 Kal/eiwbe kai mwépuxe, Ti av 
/ 
Suexepaivors; ov yap S PROBA ao. ehepev 1 
Kown pvats. 
we’. Ei pev Sid te TeV éxTos dum, ovK 
éxeivd cor évoxrel, GAA TO GOV TeEpi avdTod 
val a \ » > ta) » ¥F.\ 4, 3 > 
Kpiwa. Todto dé Hdn éEaretas eri coi éotw. ef 
lad nr a / 
dé AvTel oé Te TOV ev TH of Siabéoe, Tis Oo 
4 lal \ / <4 \ \ > 
KworAvwV SiopPdcat TO Soya; Spuos Sé Kal e 
rn Lal / 
AuTH, Ste ovyl Tdde Te vepyets tyes cor 
al n x n 
haivopevov, Ti ovxt madrov évepyeis 7) AuTH; 
”» nr 
“Ana ioyupotepor Tt eviotatat. 2) odv NuTrOD" 
n \ n 
ov yap mapa oé 7 aitia Tov ph évepycicOar, 
“Adda ove aEvov Civ par) évepyoupévouv tovTov.” 
1 «axet Kron. 2 guvdeouevn Gat. 


220 , 





BOOK VIII 


burden, and no less mortal. “What is it anyway to 
thee if there be this or that far-off echo of their 
voices, or if they have this or that opinion about 
thee ? 

45. Take me up and cast me where thou wilt. For 
even there will I keep my ‘ genius’ tranquil, that 
is, content if in itself and in its activity it follow the 
laws of its own constitution. 

Is this worth while, that on its account my soul 
should be iil at ease and fall below itself, grovelling, 
grasping, floundering, affrighted? What cou/d make 
it worth while ? 

46. Nothing can befall a man that is not a 
contingency natural to man; nor befall an ox, that is 
not natural to oxen, nor a vine that is not natural to 
a vine, nor a stone that is not proper to it. If 
therefore only what is natural and customary befalls 
each, why be aggrieved? For the common Nature 
brings thee nothing that thou canst not bear.} 

47. When thou art vexed at some external cross, 
it is not the thing itself that troubles thee,? but thy 
judgment on it. And this thou canst annul in a 
moment. But if thou art vexed at something in thine 
own character, who can prevent thee from rectifying 
the principle that is to blame?? So also if thou 
art vexed * at not undertaking that which seems to 
thee a sound act, why not rather undertake it than be 
vexed? But there is a lion in the path! Be not vexed 
then, for the blame of inaction rests not with thee. 
But life is not worth living, this left undone. Depart 


1 ep. St. Paul, 1 Cor. x. 13. 
2 cp. Epict. Man. 5. 
3 viii. 40. 
4 v. 9, 36; viii. 10; xi. 19. 
221 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


amiO. ow €x Tov Civ evpev7js, 7H cal 0 évepyav 
atoOvncKe, dua ihews Tots évia TALEVOLS. 

py. Mépvnoo, ore akaTapaxntov yivetat TO 
HPYEMOVLKOY, étav eis éavro ovoTpapey ape On 
éavuT@ 2) TOLowvTt, r) pI) Benet, Kav aos 
mapardénrar. th obv, brav Kal pera déoyou 
<xal> Trepiecxeppévas Kpivyn Tepi Twos; d1a TOTO 
axpoToMs éotw  édevbépa mabdav Sidvova: 
ovdev yap oxUpwTEpoy ExeL avOporos, eg’ r) Kara 
puyov. GvadXwTos Nowrov av ein. 0 pev ouv pa 
EWPAKDS TOUTO apabns: 0 0€ éwpaxas Kal pH 
Katadevyov aTUxNS. 

pO. Mydev mréov cavt@ réye, @Y ai Tpo- 
nyovpevar havtacias avayyéAXovawy. HyyedTat, 
bre 0 Seivd ce KaKds réyeL. HryyeATaL TOUTO* TO 
dé, dte BéBNaWat, odK Hyyertar. Brérw OTL 
vooet TO Tatdiov. Brérrw: Ste dé Kivdvvever ov 
Bré7ro. obtws otv péve del éml Tov TpeTaV 
gavtaciay, cal pndéev adres Evdo0ev errireye, Kai 
ovdév cot yiverau: padXov dé errireye, os yvop- 
in he Exacta TOY ev TO Koo We oupBawovtov. 

“Zixvos TUKpOS.” aes. “Baro é év TH 000.” 

Zeehwvor. apxel. a) mpocerreiTrns* «Ti dé Kai 
éyivero TavTa ev TO Kor up; érrel catayedac Ojon 
omd avOpwrou puovohoyov, @s ay wal vm 
TEKTOVOS kal oKUTEDS yeracbeins KATAYLWVOTKOY, 
bt év T@ Epyaotnpio Eécpata Kal TepiTpHpata 





1 jii. 1; v. 29; Epict. i. 24, § 20. 2 vii. 28. 

3 xi. 3. In both places Marcus seems to have the Christ- 
jans in mind. 

4 ep. Fronto, ad Ver. ii. 1 (of Marcus): arcem munitam et 
invictam et inexpugnabilem quae in fratris tui pectore sita est. 


222 





BOOK VIII 


then from life,! dying with the same kindly feelings 
as he who effects his purpose, and accepting with a 
good grace the obstacles that thwart thee. 

48. Never forget that the ruling Reason shews itself 
unconquerable when, concentrated in itself,? it is 
content with itself so it do nothing that itdoth not will, 
even if it refuse from mere opposition? and not from 
reason—much more, then, if it judge of a thing on 
reasonable grounds and advisedly. Therefore the 
Mind, unmastered by passions, is a very citadel, for a 
man has no fortress more impregnable * wherein to 
find refuge and be untaken for ever. He indeed 
who hath not seen this is ignorant, but he that hath 
seen it and takes not refuge therein is luckless. 

49, Say no more to thyself than what the initial 
impressions report.? This has been told thee, that so 
and so speaks ill of thee. This has been told thee, 
but it has not been told thee that thou art harmed.® 
I see that my child is ailing. I see it, but I do not see 
that he is in danger. Keep then ever to first im- 
pressions and supplement them not on thy part from 
within, and nothing’ happens to thee. And yet do 
supplement them with this, that thou art familiar 
with every possible contingency in the world. 

50. The gherkin is bitter. Toss it away. There 
are briars in the path. Turn aside. » That suffices, 
and thou needest not to add: Why are. such things 
found in the world? For thou wouldst be a laugh- 
ing stock to any student of nature; just as thou 
wouldst be laughed at by a carpenter and a cobbler 
if thou tookest them to task because in their shops 
are seen sawdust and parings from what they are 


5 iv. 7 ete. § Yet Capit. (xx. §5) says that Marcus 
was suae curiosissimus famae, cp. ibid. xxii. §6; xxiii. §7,9; 
xxix. § 5. 7 ep. Viii. 28. 


223 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Tov KaTac ceva loevav opas. Kaitot éxelvoi ye 
Ex ovat, mod avrTa pipacw: » 6€ TOV bA@V prous 
éfo ovder € éyeu* axa TO Javpacrov TiS TEXYNS 
ravTns éotiv, OTL Teplopioaca éavTiyy mTav TO 
évov SiapGeiper Bar Kab ynpas Kew Kab axXpnotov 
elvat Soxodv, eis EauTny peTaBarnrer, Kal ére 
mad ara veapa €K TOUT@V avTav Tovet: iva 
bHTE ovatas éwbev ypntn pajTe, Smrov éxBary Ta 
cam porepa, TpoodenTar. dpxetra ow Kal copa 
Th éauT is Kab ody TH éauTis Kal téxvn TH idia. 
va’. Mire év tais mpdkeow émicdvpew pare 
év Tails opsriats Pupew pte év tails havtacias 
adacbar pnte TH Wuyn Kabarak— cvvédKecOat 
H exOdpvvcbar pnte ev TH Biw avyonreicbar. 
“Kreivouot, cpeavomovot, KaTadpats €Xavvovct.” 
Ti ovv TadTa pos TO THD Sudvovay péveev 
cabapar, ppeviipn, cdppova, dikatar; olov el TIS 
TapacTas ™mYy7 Svavyet Kal yuxeia Bracdnpoin 
aurny, % O€ ov TaveTaL TOT “MoV dvapr0tovea" 
Kav mndov éuBddry, Kav KoTpiav, TaxLoTa 
duacKeddce: avTa Kal éxkrQVoe Kal ovdapas 
Badynoetat. Tas ovv THynY aévaoy ees Kal pH 
ppéap'; av pvdrAdoons ceavTov mdons pas eis 
éhevd epiav feTa TOU evpEev@s Kal aTrAMS Kal 
aidnuovas. 
vB. ‘O pév pr cides, 6 te éotl Kdcpos, ovK 
oldev, Omrov éotiv. 6 dé pay cides 7 pos é TL 
mépuxer, ovK oidev dares éotiv, ovee Ti éore 
Koopmos. o S€ & Tt TOUTMY aroNTa@V OSE TPdS 
i kal wh ppéap omit AD; &y pvadoons AD; odov P. 





1 Or, for space, material, craftsmanship she is content with 
herself alone. 


224 











BOOK VIII 


making. And yet they have space for the disposal 
of their fragments ; while the Universal Nature has 
nothing outside herself; but the marvel of her crafts- 
manship is that, though she is limited to herself, 
she transmutes into her own substance all that 
within her seems to be perishing and decrepit and 
useless, and again from these very things produces 
other new ones ; whereby she shews that she neither 
wants any substance outside herself nor needs a 
corner where she may cast her decaying matter. Her 
own space, her own material, her own proper crafts- 
manship is all that she requires.! 

51. Be not dilatory in doing, nor confused in 
conversation, nor vague in thought; let not thy 
soul be wholly concentred in itself nor uncon- 
trollably agitated ; leave thyself leisure in thy life. 

They kill us, they cut us limb from limb, they hunt 
us mith execrations!2 How does that prevent thy 
mind being still pure, sane, sober, just? Imagine a 
man to stand by a crystal-clear spring of sweet 
water, and to rail at it; yet it fails not to bubble 
up with wholesome water. Throw in mud or even 
filth and it will quickly winnow them away and 
purge itself of them and take never a stain. How 
then possess thyself of a living fountain and no 
mere well?? By guiding thyself carefully every 
hour into freedom with kindliness, simplicity, and 
modesty. 

52. He that knoweth not what the Universe is know- 
eth not where he is. He that knoweth not the end of 
its being knoweth not who he is or what the Universe 
is. But he that is wanting in the knowledge of any 

2 Marcus must be thinking of the Christians. cp. vii. 68. 
See Appendix. 3 St. John, iv. 14-16. 

4 cp. Epict. ii, 24, § 19. , 

; 225 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


/ , 
6 Te avros répuxev citror. Tis ody PatweTai oot 
lal 4 / a , 
0 TOY TOY KpoTOvYTwY erratvov pevyav } SibKav,t} 
ot ov@ Srrov eicly ovTe oiTwWés Elo yw@oKOVOW; 
/ > a / € \ > , \ 
vy. “EmaweicOa Oérers tO avOpwrov pis 
a n , 
Ths @pas éavT@® Katapwpévov; apécxew Oédets 
avOpore@, ds otk apéoxet EavT@; apéoxer EavT@ 
- an . / 
6 petavowr ef’ arract oyedor, ols mpdacer; 
a / 

vd. Myxéti povov cuprveiv te TepiéxovTt 
aépt, GAN Hon Kal ouphpovety TH TreptéyovTt 
TAVTA VOEPO. OV Yap ITTOV 7 VoEpa Sivas TAYTH 
KéyutTat Kal SiaTrepoitnKke TH oTrdoar dvvapévo, 
HTEp ) aepwdns TO avatrvedoar Svvapévo. 

/ an \ ec , > \ 4 \ 
ve. Levinas pév 7 kaxia ovdéy Barter Tov 

/ c \ \ / 2O\ / \ 
KOopov, 7 O€ KaTa pépos ovdey PXrATrTEL TOP 
7 , \ 4 > A +1 > 
eTEPOV. pov dé BraBepd éott TOUT®, @ €Tt- 
Térpamras Kal amnrdayxOat adTis, oTOTAaY TpaTov 
obros OerHon. 

vs’. TO é€u@ mpoatpetin@ TO TOD mANHoior 

‘ / > / 

TpoatpeTiKov éTians adidpoporv éotiw, ws Kal Td 
TVEVMATLOV aUTOU Kal TO GapKidiov. Kal yap él 
¢ / > , 4 , 4 \ 
OTL REMIT, BNA? EVEKEV YEVOVAMEV, BEES Te 
Hryepovinds Huav Exactov Thy diay Kuplay exer 
mel TOL cued ev 2 TOU mrayoior Kakia epod KaKOV 
elvat Srrep ovK edoke TH Oe@, iva pr) em” Gr 7 
TO €ue atuxelv. 


- | 
i 


vf. ‘O Hr0s xataxeytcOar Soxel, Kal rdvtn 


/ > \ > / e 4 4 
Ye KEXUTAL, OV pny exKéxUTAL. 1 yap YvVoLs AUTH 


1 7) Siwy (5tw A) P: Sidnav Cas.: 4 ydyov pebywy h Eravov 
Sidnwy Gat. 


226 











BOOK VIII 


of these things could not tell what is the end of his 
own being. What then must we think of those that 
court or eschew the verdict of the clappers, who have 
no conception where or who they are ? 

53. Carest thou to be praised by a man who 
execrates himself thrice within the hour? to win the 
approval of a man who wins not his own? Can he 
be said to win his own approval who regrets almost 
every thing he does? 

54. Be no longer content merely to breathe in 
unison with the all-embracing air, but from this 
moment think also in unison with the all-embracing 
Intelligence. For that intelligent faculty is every- 
where diffused and offers itself on every side to him 
that can take it in no less than the aerial to him 
that can breathe. 

55. Taken collectively wickedness does no harm 
to the Universe,! and the particular wickedness does 
no harm to others. It is harmful to the one 
individual alone, and he has been given the option 
of being quit of it the first moment hé pleases. 

56. To my power of choice? the power of choice of 
my neighbour is as much a matter of indifference as 
is his vital breath and his flesh. For however much 
we may have been made for one another, yet our 
ruling Reason is in each case master in its own house. 
Else might my neighbour’s wickedness become my 
bane; and this was not God’s will, that another 
might not have my unhappiness in his keeping.® 

57. The sun’s light is diffused down, as it seems, 
yes, and in every direction, yet it does not diffuse 
itself away. For this diffusion is an extension. At any 


1 vy. 35.  ? Not distinguishable from the ‘ruling Reason.’ 
3 Sen. Hp. 70 ad med. : nemo nisi vitio suo miser est. 


227 
Q 2 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Taols éotiv. “axtives” yoov ai avyat avtod 
> im itt 3 , » t Citi's , 
amo Tov “ éxteiverOar” Réyovtat. o7roiov Oé 
Te éotly axis, iSoug av, et Sid Tivos aTevod eis 
éoKiacévov oiKov TO ag’ HALoU pas elo Sudpevov 
Gedoato: Telerau! ap Kar’ ev, wal dom ep 
Stepeiderar” mT pos TO oTEpEMLOV, 6 Tt av amavt- 
Hon, Sueipyyov TOV eméKxewwa dépa: evtav0a &é 
éorn Kal ov Katona ev ovde érrecep. TOLAUT HY 
oby THY YvowW ral Suayvow THS Stavoias eivat 
Xen» pndapas exXvow arra tdow Kal mT pos 
Ta amavravra KoOdAvpAaTAa pH Blatoy pnde pay- 
Satap Thy émréperow moveiaae" pndée pnv Kata- 
mimtew, adda ioracbat Kal emidaprrey TO 
Sex opevov. aro yap éavTo oTEepHoEL THS avyns 
TO pn Tapam éurov avTny. 

vn. ‘O tov Oavatov poBovpevos iro avata6- 
notav poBetras H alcOnow ETEpotay. GXn’ 
elite OUKETL aicOnow ovee Kako Tivos aig Anon: 
elite addXNoLOTEpav aicOnow KTHoN, addolov Coov 
éon Kal tov Env ov Tavon. 

v0’. Oi dvOpwrror yeyovacw addrjrov evexev. 
}) Sidacke ovdv 7) épe. 

E’. "AdAws Bédos, GAXws vods Pépetary 6 
pévToe vous, Kal drav evra Biras cal dtav trepi 
THY one or pépntas, hépetar kat evOd ovdév 

\ 
HTTOv Kab él TO TpoKel Wevov. 

Ea’. Eiovévar els TO mYEpoveKov éxdotou" 
Tapéxew dé Kab érép@ mavtl eiovévat eis TO 
EAUTOV 1YyEMOVIKOV. 


1 relverat Cor. for yiverat. ” SrepeiSeras Reiske : diatpetrar PA. 





1 A false etymology. The derivation may be from diccw 
or &yvup. 
228 











BOOK VIII 

rate the beams of the Sun are called Extension rays, 
because they have an extension in space.1_ And what a 
ray is you may easily see, if you observe the sun’s 
light entering through a narrow chink into a 
darkened room, for it extends straight on, and is 
as it were brought up against? any solid body it 
encounters that cuts off the air beyond. There 
the ray comes to a standstill, neither slipping off nor 
sinking down. Such then should be the diffusion 
and circumfusion of the mind, never a diffusing away 
but extension, and it should never make a violent 
or uncontrollable impact against any obstacle it 
meets with, no, nor collapse, but stand firm and illu- 
minate what receives it. For that which conducts 
it not on its way will deprive itself wilfully of its 
beams. 

58. Dread of death is a dread of non-sensation 
or -new sensation.? But either thou wilt feel no 
sensation, and so no sensation of any evil; or a 
different kind of sensation will be thine, and so the 
life of a different creature, but still a life. 

59. Mankind have been created for the sake of 
one another.? Either instruct therefore or endure.® 

60. One is the way of an arrow, another of the 
mind. Howbeit the mind, both when it cautiously 
examines its ground and when it is engaged in its 
enquiry, is none the less moving straight forward and 
towards its goal. 

61.*Enter into every man’s ruling Reason, and 
give every one else an opportunity to enter into 
thine.® 

2 Siaipetra: (mss.) would mean apparently cut or broken. 

3 cp. Justin, Apol. i. § 57, addressed to Pius and Marcus. 

4 ix. 1 ad init. Bye 28)s.ixcT 1, 

§ iv. 38. cp. vii. 55; Epict. iii. 9, § 12. 

. 229 


BIBAION ® 


a’. ‘O abdixadv aceBel. Tis yap TOV drov hicews 
4 \ \ a 4 > / 
KaTETKEVaAKULAS TA NOyiKA CHa Evexev ANANOY, 
cal / 
@aTe wpereiv pév G\AnAa Kat akiav, Branrev 
a c / 

dé pndauds, 0 TO BovAnua TavTns TapaBaivev 
aceBet Snrovots eis tiv tmpecBuTdtnvy Tov 
Gear. 

Kal 0 wevddpevos 5€ aceBet repli thy avtny 

\ a 
Geov. yap TOY brov dvous dvTwV éoTi vats. 
\ 
Ta Oé ye dvTa Tpos Ta UTdpyYoVTAa TavTa oiKElws 
4 4 \ \ > 7 A 3 a \ 
éyer. ete 5€ Kai adnOeva aitn ovopaterar Kai 
TOV GAnOOv aTayT@Y TpeTNH aitia éotiv. oO pev 
= e \ / > a , > fal 
obv Ex@v Wevddpevos aceBei, xabdcov éEaTatav 
a ¢ al nr fal 

adixet> 0 S€ adxkwv, Kxabocov Siapwvel TH TOV 


iA 4 \ , > a ‘ a 
orAwv ducet, Kal Kabocov aKkoo pet baxXouevos TH 


Tov Kocpov pice paxeTar yap Oo éml Tavaytia 
n > / / x ¢ , b] \ \ 
Tots adnOéor hepopevos Tap éavTov: adpopuas yap 
mpoerlnpe. Tapa THS Piaews, OV apedHoas ovyY 
olds té éote viv Siaxpive ta WevdH ard Tov 

anrnOav. 
Kai piv o tas HOovas ws ayaba Si@Ka@v Tods 
5€ movovs @s Kaka ghevywv aceBel. avayKn 


230 


a ha es 








BOOK IX 


1. Insustice is impiety. For in that the Nature 
of the Universe has fashioned rational creatures for 
the sake of one another! with a view to mutual 
benefit based upon worth, but by no means for harm, 
the transgressor of her will acts with obvious impiety 
against the most venerable of Deities. 

And the liar too acts impiously with respect to 
the same Goddess. For the Nature of the Universe 
is the Nature of the things that are. And the things 
that are have an intimate connexion with all the 
things that have ever been, Moreover this Nature 
is named Truth, and is the primary cause of all that 
is true. The willing liar then is impious in so far 
as his deceit is a wrong-doing; and the unwilling 
liar too, for he is out of tune with the Nature of the 
Whole, and an element of disorder by being in conflict 
with the Nature of an orderly Universe ; for he is in 
conflict who allows himself, as far as his conduct goes, 
to be carried into opposition to what is true. And 
whereas he had previously been endowed by nature 
with the means of distinguishing false from true, by 
neglecting to use them he has lost the power.’ 

Again he acts impiously who seeks after pleasure 
as a good thing and eschews pain as an evil. For 


1 vy, 30; viii. 59. 2 vii, 2. 


231 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


yap Tov TovodTov péuhecOar ToAraKIS TH KOWT 
pice, ws Tap akiay Tt ATovesovan Tois havroLs 
Kal tois omrovdaios, dia TO TOAAGKIS TOUS peV 
pavrous év Sovais eivar Kal TA TroLNTLKAa TOUTOY 
KkTacOat, tos 5 otovdaiovs Tovm Kal Tos 
Tomtikots TovTov TepiTinmtew. Ett dé 0 PoBov- 
pevos Tovs Trovous, poBynOycetai Tote Kal Tov 
écopévav Te ev TO KOTU@ TODTO bé On acePés. 
6 te Su@Kwv Tas Hdovas ovK adéEeTat TOD dduxeiv: 
ToUTO O€ éevapyas aceBés. 

Xp7 é, mpds & ) Kown puvats érrions exer (ov 
yap av apotepa érroies, ei pt) Tmpos auhotepa 
émions €lye), Tpos TAavTAa Kal TOs TH pice 
Bovnropévous errecOat omoyvepmovas bvtas érians 
Siaxeicbat Satis odv Tpds Trovoy Kal HSoviy 4) 
Oavatov kai Conv 4 Sofav Kal adokiav, ois 
érians 4» TaV Srdwv dias ypHTal, avTos ovK 
émions exe, Shrov ws aceBel. réyw S€ TO 
xphoOa TovTos éemions THY Kowny diow, avTl 
tod wavtTa'! cupBaive érions Kata 76 éEfS Tots 
yivopuévors Kal éruytvopévows op Tut apyaia Tis 
Tpovoias, Ka?’ iv amd Twos apyijs Opynoev eri 
THvoe THY SvaKdcpnoW cvAABodcEd TLVAS OYOUS 
Tov écouévav Kal Suvdpers yovipous abopicaca 
imoctadcemy te Kal petaBorav Kai dsadoydv 
TOLOUTMD. 

B. Xapiectépov pev jv avdpos ayevorov 
Wevdoroyias Kal traons bToKpicews Kal tpvdijs 


1 rod nara To P: em. Schenkl, 
232 


i ait em 











BOOK IX 


such a man must inevitably find frequent fault with 
the Universal Nature! as unfair in its apportion- 
ments to the worthless and the worthy, since the 
worthless are often lapped in pleasures and possess 
the things that make for pleasure, while the worthy 
meet with pain and the things that make for pain. 
Moreover he that dreads pain will some day be in 
dread of something that must be in the world. 
And there we have impiety at once. And he that 
hunts after pleasures will not hold his hand from 
injustice. And this is palpable impiety. 

But those, who are of one mind with Nature and 
would walk in her ways, must hold a neutral attitude ? 
towards those things towards which the Universal 
Nature is neutral—for she would not be the Maker of 
both were she not neutral towards both. So he clearly 
acts with impiety who is not himself neutral towards 
pain and pleasure, death and life, good report and 
ill report, things which the Nature of the Universe 
treats with neutrality. And by the Universal 
Nature treating these with neutrality I mean that all 
things happen neutrally in a chain of sequence ® to 
things that come into being and their after products + 
by some primeval impulse of Providence,’ in accord- 
ance with which She was impelled by some primal 
impulse to this making of an ordered Universe, when 
She had conceived certain principles for all that was 
to be, and allocated the powers generative of sub- 
stances and changes and successions such as we see. 

2. It were more graceful doubtless for a man to 
depart from mankind untainted with falsehood and 


1 vi. 16 ad fin. 41. cp. Epict. i. 6, § 39. 


2 Or, attitude of indifference. 3 viii. ‘75. 
4 Or, that are consequent upon some primeval impulse. 
Providence here = koh dors, 5 ix. 28. 


233 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Kal Tudou yevopevov €& avOpoirrav amedOeiv: TO 
8 otv xopecOévta ye tovTwv arorvedaat ‘ devT- 
Epos Trods. 0] Tponpnaat mpookabjabar TH 
KaKiG, Kal ovT@ ce ovdE _Teipa TreiOer pevyenv 
€x Tov NoLmov; ojos yap Svapbopa Siavotas 
TOAD ye paddov HTEp TOU TepLKexvpevov 
TOUTOU TVEU MATOS TaLabe TUS duexpacia Kal 
TpoT7n. airy bev yap Soav Aowmos, Kabo Coa 
éoTw exeivn 88 dvOpoTor, Kad div0 porrot 
elow. 

Y: My KaTappover Javarov, Gra evapéoret 
avT@® @s Kal TOUTOU évos OVTOS, ov a pvous 
eOérev. olov ydp éoTt 70 vedoas, Kal TO ynpacat, 
Kal To av&joat, Kal TO akpdoat, Kal oddovtas 
Kal yévetov Kal todas éveyxetv, Kal oreipat, 
Kal Kkvopopjoat, Kal atoKxvicat, Kal Ta dAdN|a 
Ta hvoiwa évepynpata, boa ai Tod cod Biov 
@pat épovet, Towdto Kat Td SdiadrvOjvar. 
TobTo fev ovv KaTa avO pomov eoTL Aehoytc MEvOv, 
pa OAT XEPHS pndé OOTUOS poe Umepnpives 
mpos Tov Qdvatov EXEW, ava TE pLpevely @sS 
pilav TOV puoikov EVEPYELOV. Kab os vov 
TEPLUEvELS, TOTE éuBpvov éx TIS yaar pos | THS 
yuvurKos cov €£€XOn, ov Tas exdéxerOar Tv @pav 
év 7 TO uydpidv cov tov éXUTpov TovTOU 
extreceitar. 

Ei 8€ xal ids@tixov Tapanny wa axpixapo.ov 
eOénevs, pda oe eUKohov T™ pos TOV Odvatov 
Toupee  émiotaciw % éml Ta Drroxeipyeva, ov 
pérres adbictacOa, cal pe? oiwv 7Odv ovdxKéte 





1 But cp. Capit. xxviii. §4 (of Marcus): mortem contem- 
nens. 2 x. 36, §:2. 


234 





BOOK IX 


all dissimulation and luxury and arrogance ; failing 
that, however, the ‘next best course’ is to breathe 
out his life when his gorge has risen at these things. 
Or is it thy choice to throw in thy lot with vice, - 
and does not even thy taste of it yet persuade thee 
to fly from the pestilence? For the corruption of the 
mind is a pest far worse than any such miasma and 
vitiation of the air which we breathe around us. 
The latter is a pestilence for living creatures and 
affects their life, the former for human beings and 
affects their humanity. 

3. Despise not death,! but welcome it, for Nature 
wills it like all else. For dissolution is but one of 
the processes of Nature,? associated with thy life’s 
various seasons, such as to be young, to be old, to 
wax to our prime and to reach it, to grow teeth and 
beard and gray hairs, to beget, conceive and bring 
forth. A man then that has reasoned the matter 
out should not take up towards death the attitude of 
indifference, reluctance, or scorn, but await it as one 
of the processes of Nature.’ Look for the hour 
when thy soul shall emerge from this its sheath, as 
now thou awaitest the moment when the’ child she 
carries shall come forth from thy wife’s womb.+* 

But if thou desirest a commonplace solace too that 
will appeal to the heart, nothing will enable thee to 
meet death with equanimity better than to observe 
the environment thou art leaving and the sort of 
characters with whom thy soul shall no longer be 

3 cp. Montaigne i. 19 (Florio’s version): ‘‘ The same way 
you came from death to life, returne without passion or 
amazement from life to death. Your death is but a piece of 
the world’s order, and but a parcel of the world’s life.” 


4 Hardly a personal touch, as Vibia Aurelia, Faustina’s 
last child, was born in 166, Besides, €u8pvor has no article. 


235 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


éortae 7) <on puxi> ouprrepuppern. Tpoo Kort - 
ecOar pev yap avrois Heora deZ, adda kal 
xnndeqOau Kal T Paws péperv, pepvnclar pévTou, 
STL OUK am” dv peorav opodoypaTowvTav oot a) 
amrradrayn éorau. TOUTO yap povor, elmep apa, 
aveinxev av kat Karel ev év TO Shy, et ovtqv 
épeiro tois Ta aura Soywara mepumerrounwevo4s.. 
vov dé opas, daos 0 KoTOS év TH Siapwvig 
THS gupPBLoOcews, @OTE eimeiv, a @arrov Abas, 
@® Odvate, pH tov Kal avtos émirdlopas 
éwavTov.” 

&. ‘O dpaptdvwv éavt@ auaptaver: 6 adixov 
éavTov abikel! Kako éavTOV TOLD. 

é€. "AdsKet mroAXaKLS 0 wu) TOLMY TL, OV MovoV 
0 TOLD TL. 

s. ~Apket ) rapodca brovAnwis KaTadnTTLKN, 
Kal ) Tapovoa Tpakis KoWWwWULKY, Kal 4) Tapodca 
didDects evapertiKn Tpds Tay TO Tapa THs ExTOS* 
aitias cvpBaivor. 

o. "EEaderpae pavraciay: oThoas oppny: 
oBéoat bpeEw" eg’ éavT@ EXEL ' TO HYEMOvLKOD. 

7’. Eis pev Ta aroya Sea pia yuxn Sunpytac 
els dé Ta oyna pla voEpa uxn HEpEpLoTat. 
@oTep Kal pia yh éotly dmavTwy TOV yewdor, 


1 @dixet Cor.: kaxot P: éavrdy xaxdv Leop. 
2 7d ék tris PAD: rijs exrds Reiske (cp. ix. 31). 


1 x, 36; Plato, Phaed. 66 B. 

2 As Marcus himself often was. cp. v. 10; vi. 12; viii. 8. 

3 ates 

4 ep. the despairing echo of these words by General Gordon, 
who was a reader of Marcus, from Khartum: ‘ There is 
nothing left for me to prevent me speaking evil of everyone 
and distrusting my dear Lord but death.” 


236 





YN i cE RS at + 





BOOK IX 


mixed up.! For while it is very far from right 
to be disgusted with them,’ but rather even to 
befriend and deal gently with them,® yet it is well 
to remember that not from men of like principles 
with thine will thy release be. For this alone, if 
anything, could draw us back and bind us to life, 
if it were but permitted us to live with those who 
have possessed themselves of the same principles as 
ours. But now thou seest how thou art driven by 
sheer weariness at the jarring discord of thy life with 
them to say: Zarry not, O Death, lest peradventure I 
too forget myself. 

4. He that does wrong, does wrong to himself. 
The unjust man is unjust to himself, for he makes 
himself bad.® 

5. There is often an injustice of omission as well as 
of commission. 

6. The present assumption rightly apprehended, 
the present act socially enacted, the present dis- 
position satisfied with all that befalls it from the 
Cause external to it—these will suffice. 

7. Efface imagination.’ Restrain impulse. Quench 
desire. Keep the ruling Reason in thine own 
power. 

8. Among irrational creatures one life is distributed, 
and among the rational one intellectual soul has 
been parcelled out. Just as also there is one 
earth for all the things that are of the earth; and 


5 iv. 26; ix. 38. Epict. ii. 10, § 26. 

6 Or, does himself harm. Plutarch (Stoic. Contrad. 12) 
shews that Chrysippus contradicts himself on this point. 
Justin (Apol. i. 3), speaking of persecution to Pius and 
|| Marcus, turns the tables on the latter, saying that in injuring 
||| innocent Christians they injured themselves. Epict. iv. 5. 10. 
7 vii. 29; viii. 29, 49; xii. 25. 


237 


2 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Kal évi dot opapev, kal &va aépa avarrvéoper, 
boa opatixa Kal Eurpvya travta. 

0. “Oca Kowod twos petréyer, mpos TO 
Opmoyeves o7revoer. TO yewdes Tay pémer éml 
yi, TO vypov Tay cUppovy, TO adep@des Opoiws: 
wate xpntew Tav duetpyovt@v Kal Bias. 7d Tip 
avodepes pev Oia TO oToryer@des Tp’ TavTl bé 
mTupl évtad0a mpos To ovveEdrtecOar érorpov 
oUTas, Bote Kal TAY TO DALKOV TO OALy@ Enpd- 
Tepov evéEatr Tov eivat, dua TO EXatrov éyKxexpaa Vat 
avT@® TO Kw@AvTLKOY pds eEaiy. Kal Toivur 
mav TO Kownhs [péev|' voepas dicews péToxov 
mMpos TO auyyeves Opolws omevder 7) Kal waddov. 
dam ydp éott KpeitTov Tapa TA Ada, TOTOUT@ 
Kal mpos TO cuyKipvacOat TO oixeim Kal ovy- 
vetcbar érorporepov. 

EvOds yodv éml wey TOV adoyor eipébn ounvy 
Kal ayéXat Kal veooootpodiar Kai olov épwrtes* 


~ 


Ms LUNI gy ny > a he \@ 
wuyal yap dn hoav évtadOa, Kal TO cvvayoryov 
n / A 
év T® KpeitTom émiTewopevoy evpioKeto, olov 


n BA / ' , 
ovte éml dhut@v iv ovte emi NOwv 7 Edr@v. 


n n a / 
él O€ TOV NoyiKo@v Cowv wodTEltat Kal piriat 
« \ UA ) / a 
Kal oixot Kal cUAXOYOL Kal év TrOrépoLs cUVORKAL 
/ n / ‘ 
Kat avoyail. émi Sé Tov ett KpetTTOvaY, Kal 
/ /, iA 
SuecTHnKOTwV TpoToy Twa &vwarts bTésTH, ola éml 
\ lal 
TOV doTpwv. ovTws 7 éml TO KpElTTOY éTaVd- 
Bao, cuprabevay Kai év Suectaow épydcacbat 
dvvarat. 


1 omit P. 


iat 


238 











BOOK IX 
one is the light whereby we see,! and one the air 
we all breathe that have sight and life. 

9. All that share in a common element have an 
affinity for their own kind. The trend of all that is 
earthy is to earth; fluids all run together; it is the same 
with the aerial; so that only interposing obstacles 
and force can keep them apart. Fire indeed has a 
tendency to rise by reason of the elemental fire, but 
is so quick to be kindled in sympathy with all fire 
here below that every sort of matter, a whit drier 
than usual, is easily kindled owing to its having fewer 
constituents calculated to offer resistance to its 
kindling. So then all that shares in the Universal 
Intelligent Nature has as strong an affinity towards 
what is akin, aye even a stronger. For the measure 
of its superiority to all other things is the measure of 
its readiness to blend and coalesce with that which is 
akin to it. : 

At any rate to begin with among _ irrational 
creatures we find swarms and herds and _ bird- 
colonies and, as it were, love-associations.? For 
already at that stage there are souls, and the bond 
of affinity shews itself in the higher form to a 
degree of intensity not found in plants or stones 
or timber. But among rational creatures are found 
political communities and friendships and house- 
holds and gatherings and in wars treaties and 
armistices. But in things still higher a sort of unity 
in separation even exists, as in the stars. Thus 
the ascent to the higher form is able to effect a 
sympathetic connexion? even among things which 
are separate. 


1 xii, 30. 2 ep. Aesch. Prom. Vin. 492: orépynOpa. 
3 cp. Epict. i. 14 ad init. 


239 


3 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


“Opa ovv TO vOV yevopevov" poova yap Ta voepa 
vov emidédnorat THS mpos addnha omovdijs Kal 
auvvetoews, Kal TO cbppouv wbE povovy ov Brér- 
eTal. AN Gums kaitor hevyovTes TeptKatadap- 
Bdvovtat: Kpatet yap 7) piats. dyer bé, 6 Néyo, 
Tapapurdcowrv. Oaccov yodv ebpor Tis av 
ryewdés TL pndevds yewdous TpocaTTopevoy Hep 
avOpomov avOporov dmer yuo pévor. 

u. Dépev Kap ov Kal avO peorros Kal Beds Kat 
O KOO 1os" év tats oixetars dpars Exacta péper. 
et 5€ » ouvynbera Kupiws Tétpipev emt aprérou 
Kal TOV opoi@, ovdev TobTO. 0 AOyos dé Kal 
Kowov Kal iStov Kaprov exe Kal vyiverau é& 
avtobd toad?” érepa, omroiov te avTos éoTW Oo 
Noros. 

wa’. Ki pev Sivacar, petadidacke ei 5é wn, 
péuvnoo, Ste mpos TodTO H evpéverad aor SédoTar. 
Kal of Oeot dé evpevets Tots ToLtovToLs eiciv: eis 
eva dé cal cuvepyovow, els bylevay, eis TAOUTOP, 
els S0Eay obras etal ypnotol. é&erts Sé Kal 
cot’ 7 el7ré, TIS O Kohvor; 

u8’. lover, wn @s GOrAvos pndée ws erecta ar 
) Oavpafecbar Oédwv: adrXrdgA povov ev Oére, 
kiweicOat Kail ioyecOar, ws 6 ToALTLKOS OYOS 
aké1ot. 

uy’. Xnpepov é&MAOov mdons TepraoTtdcews: 
parrov O¢ €&éBadov tacav Tepictacw: Ew yap 
ovK Hv, aX Evdov ev Tais bor Weot. 





1 $t. Paul, Gal. v. 22. 2 v. 28; viii. 59. Fixe Q¥s 
4 v. 2; viii. 40; xii. 22. cp. Montaigne, i. 40 (Florio’s 
version): ‘‘Men, saith an ancient Greek sentence, are 


tormented by the opinions they have of things and not the 
240 














BOOK IX 


See then what actually happens at the present 
time ; for at the present time it is only the intelli- 
gent creatures that have forgotten their mutual 
affinity and attraction, and here alone there is no 
sign of like flowing to like. Yet flee as they will, 
they are nevertheless caught in the toils, for Nature 
will have her way. Watch closely and thou wilt see 
‘tis so. Easier at any rate were it to find an earthy 
thing in touch with nothing earthy than a man 
wholly severed from mankind. 

10. They all bear fruit—Man and God and the 
Universe : each in its due season bears. It matters 
nought that in customary parlance such a term is 
strictly applicable only to the vine and such things. 
Reason too hath its fruit both for all and for itself, 
and there issue from it other things such as is 
Reason itself. 

11. If thou art able, convert the wrong-doer.? If 
not, bear in mind that kindliness was given thee to 
meet just such a case. The Gods too are kindly -to 
such persons and even co-operate with them for 
certain ends—for health, to wit, and wealth and 
fame, so benignant are they.? Thou too canst be the 
same ; or say who is there that prevents thee. 

12. Do thy work not as a drudge, nor as desirous 
of pity or praise. Desire one thing only, to act or 
not to act as civic reason directs. 

13. This day have I got me out of all trouble, or 
rather have cast out all trouble, for it was not from 
without, but within, in my own imagination.* 
things themselves. . . . If evil have no entrance into us but 
by our judgment, it seemeth that it lieth in our power either 
to contemne or turn them to our good... . If that which we 
call evil and torment be neither torment nor evil, but that 
our fancy only gives it that quality, it is in us to change it.” 

241 
R 


“MARCUS AURELIUS 


wo. Ildvra Tabra ouvnOn pep TH meta, 
eprpepa dé 76 Xpove, putapa S& TH Bry. 
mavra vov, ola é er E€KELV@V, OVS kateb drpaper. 

te. Ta mpaypara ém Oupav Eorney avra 
ép éavtav pndev pajre eld0Ta Trept abt ey pare 
atopatvopeva. Ti ovv amopaivetar wept avTav; 
TO 2YEMOVLKOV. 

is’. Ovdw év meicet, arn évepyelg TO TOD 
AoyiKod <kal> TohetiKoo Seou kaxov Kab aryabor, 
OoTEp ovee 7; 7 apeTn Kal Kakia avtod év Teicet, 
ana évepyetia. 

wf. Te avappidévte MOe@ ovdey KaKov TO 
karevexOivat ovde ayabov 70 dvevex Oivat. 

tn’. AierOe é éow els Ta Hye poviKa avTaD, Kab 
der, Tivas Kpitas hoBF, olovs Kal rept avTav 
y / 
évTas KpiTas. 

0. ldvra év petaBoniy Kal avTos od ev 
Sunvere’ adXrowmoe: Kal Katd Tr POopa Kal o 
Koo Mos 5é SXos. 

«x. To dd2Xov apaptnua éxel bet RATE MTR: 

Ka. "Evepyetas amoAnéts, opyhs, drodypews 
mata al olov Gdvaros, ovdey KaKOV. here 
vov emt pruciav, otov THY maudieny, Ty ToD 
petpaxiov, THY VEOTHTA, TO Yhpas: Kal yap Tov- 
Tov Taca petaBonry Oavaros. pyre dewvov ; 
were vov éti Biov Tov ome TO TaTT@, eita TOV 
bd TH pntpl, eita Tov bd TH Tatpi: Kal adras 


1 6pujs requires a substantive like aréAnis or jovxh to 
balance the sentence. 





1 iv. 44, 2 iv. 35. 
3 ii. 43 iv. 32. 4 viii. 20. 


242 


q 
} 
4 





fdetace 








BOOK IX 


14. All these are things of familiar experience! ; 
in their duration ephemeral,? in their material foul. 
Everything is now as it was in the days of those 
whom we have buried.? 

15. Objective things stand outside the door, keep- 
ing themselves to themselves, without knowledge of 
or message about themselves. What then has for us 
a message about them? The ruling Reason. 

16, Not in being acted upon but in activity lies 
the evil and the good of the rational and civic 
creature, just as his virtue too and his vice lie in 
activity and not in being acted upon. 

17. The stone that is thrown into the air is none 
the worse for falling down, or the better for being 
carried upwards.! 

18. Find the way within into their ruling Reason, 
and thou shalt see what these judges are whom thou 
fearest and what their judgment of themselves is 
worth. 

19. Change is the universal experience.6 Thou 
art thyself undergoing a perpetual transformation 
and, in some sort, decay": aye and the whole Uni- 
verse as well. 

20. Another’s wrong-doing should be left with 
him.® 

21. A cessation of activity, a quiescence from 
impulse and opinion and, as it were, their death, is no 
evil. Turn now to consider the stages of thy life— 
childhood, boyhood, manhood, old age—each step 
in the ladder of change a death. Is there anything 
terrible here? Pass on now to thy life under thy 
grandfather, then under thy mother, then under thy 

© iv. 3835 vii. 34. 6 vy. 23; vii. 18. 

7 iv. 3 ad fin. ; vii. 25. 8 vii. 29; ix. 38. 
243 

R 2 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


dé ToNas Siapopas * Kal peraBonras Kal amro- 
Antes evpioxwr, erepara ceavTov" “Myre 
ewov;” ovTws Tolvuy ovdé 4 TOD OXov Biov 
AEs Kal TadAa Kal peTaBorn. 

KB’. Tpéxe ert TO ceavTod ryemovtxdv Kal TO 
Tov édov, Kal TO TavToOV. TO pev ceavTod, Wa 
voby* duxaixov ano Toujons: 70 dé Tob ddov, 
iva cvppynpovevons, Tivos pépos elt TO dé TOUTOU, 
wa émiotHoys, TOTEpov ayvoia 7 yvoun, Kab 
dpa Noyion, OTL cuyyevés. 

Ky’. “OQomep avtos ob TodtTiKOD cvaTHmaTOS 
cupTANpwTLKOS €l, OUTws Kal Taca Tpakis cov 
cum ANpOT LK?) éore Sons TrONeT LIAS. res éay 
ovv mpakis gov pn exXn THV davaopav cite 
Tpoaexas elTe moppobev én 70 KOLV@VLKOY 
Téhos, airn Siaona TOV Biov Kal ov é€a éva 
eivac kal oracwdns éoTiy, adorep év Sipe 0 TO 
Kal avrov pépos Suctdpevos ad THS TovavTns 
ocvpdovias. 

KO. Iladiwv opyat cal maiyua, Kal “ mvevp- 
dtia vexpois Baotdafovta,’ wate évapyéoTtepov 
mpootece TO THs Nexvias. 

ke. “IOr éml THY TOLOTNTA TOV aiTiov, kal amo 
Tob ddiKod aro Tepuypanyas Oéacar: cita Kal 
TOV xpovoy TMEpLopLTov, dcop tTreiatov Udicracbat 
wépuKe TOTO TO idiws ToLov. 


1 S:apbopas AD. 
2 viv Rend.: yotr Cor. 





1 Pius. See oni. 17, § 3. 
2 ep. Lucian, de Luet. 15. 
3 iv. 41 mvevpdtiov = Wuxapiov. 


244 











BOOK IX 


father,! and finding there many other alterations, 
changes, and cessations, ask thyself: Js there any- 
thing terrible here? No, nor any in the ending and 
quiescence and change of the whole of life.” 

22. Speed to the ruling Reason of thyself, and of 
the Universe, and of thy neighbour: of thine own, 
that thou mayest make it just; of that of the Uni- 
verse, that thou mayest therewithal remember of 
what thou art a part; of thy neighbour, that thou 
mayest learn whether it was ignorance with him or 
understanding, and reflect at the same time that it is 
akin to thee. 

23. As thou thyself art a part perfective of a 
civic organism, let also thine every act be a part 
perfective of civic life. Every act of thine then 
that has no relation direct or indirect to this social 
end, tears thy life asunder and destroys its unity, and 
creates a schism, just as in a commonwealth does the 
man who, as far as in him lies, stands aloof from 
such a concord of his fellows. 

24. Children’s squabbles and make-believe, and 
little souls bearing up corpses*—the Invocation of the 
Dead‘ might strike one as a more vivid reality ! 

25. Go straight to that which makes a thing what 
it is, its formative cause,® and, isolating it from 
the material, regard it so. Then mark off the 
utmost time for which the individual object so 
qualified is calculated to subsist. 


4 Possibly refers to the Néxua of Homer (Od. xi.). Menippus 
(Diog. Laert. Men. 6) also wrote a Néxuia (cp. above, vi.47). But 
it was a term for the invocation of the dead, see Just. Ap. i. 18. 

5 To the Formative, or Efficient Cause, of things is due not 
only that they exist, but that they are what they are. To 
translate. the words here literally by the quality of the Cause 
conveys no meaning. cp. vi. 3. 


245 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ks’. “AvérAns pipra Sia TO pry apKeicOar TO 
TP NYELOVLK® TrovodvTL TAaVTA, eis A KaTETKED- 
aoTalt. adda ads. 

Ko. “Orav ad)os veyn oe, 7 poh, q ToadTd 
TWA exhovaaw, épxou én Ta Wuxdpea auton, 
SieAOe Eow Kal ide, wotot Twés eiow. dre, OTL 
ov Sef ce oT GoOa, iva TovTOLS Ti TOTE Tepl GoD 
Soxh. evvoeiv pévtor avtois Sei> pices yap diror. 
kat ot Geol S€ mavtoiws avtois BonOovdor, Sv 
oveipar, bia pavTe@v, Tpos TaDTAa pévTOL, TpOs a 
éxeivot Sua €povrar. 

xn. Tadra éore Ta Tob _KOo mou eyKuKMA, 
avo Kxdatw, é& ai@vos eis ai@va. Kal nto éd’ 
éxaoTov Oped H ToD ddov didvowa’ Omrep et éorw, 
amrobéxov TO éxetvns oppntov" n dmak @ aBpunse, Ta 
bé dovra Kar’ émaxonovOnow Kat +t év Tive't 
TpoTov yep. TWA aTopor, tH apeph. + 7d 8€ odor, 
etre eds, ed Eyer TavTa’ ElTE TO EK, py Kal od 
elk}. 

“Hédn tavtas nas yh Kadv er Emerta Kal 
auti) peTaBanrel Kaxeiva eis atrerpov wetaBaret: 
Kal Tddw éxeiva eis Ameipov. Tas yap émt- 
KupaT@ces TaV peTaBorXwv Kal adoLOcEwV 
évOupovpevos Tis Kal TO TaXOS TravTos OvnTod 
KaTappoviycet. 

KO. Xespappous n Tov drwv aitia:* mavra 
héper. ws evtedH S& Kal Ta TONTIKA TadTA Kal, 

lat ev (ev A) rive Ps rh évretvy (Why this striving 7) Cor. 
(cp. x. 31): 7 év rwl Stich. 2 ovoia Reiske. 

1 4. 17 ad fin. 3 axd AiO. 

3 The Heraclitan round of change between the elements ; 
see iy. 46. 4 ix. 1,§4 
246 











BOOK IX 


26. By not being content with thy ruling Reason 
doing the work for which it was constituted, thou 
hast borne unnumbered ills. Nay, ’tis enough ! 

27. When men blame or hate thee or give utter- 
ance to some such feelings against thee, turn to their 
souls, enter into them, and see what sort of men they 
are. Thou wilt perceive that thou needest not be 
concerned as to what they think of thee. Yet 
must thou feel kindly towards them, for Nature made 
them dear to thee. The Gods too lend them aid in 
divers ways by dreams! and oracles, to win those 
very things on which their hearts are set.? 

28. The same, upwards, downwards,’ from cycle to 
cycle are the revolutions ot the Universe. And 
either the Universal Mind feels an impulse to act in 
each separate case—and if this be so, accept its | 
impulsion—or it felt this impulse ‘ once for all, and all 
subsequent things follow by way of consequence ; 
and what matters which it be, for if you like to put 
it so the world is all atoms [or indivisible].> But as 
to the Whole, if God—all is well ; if haphazard—be 
not thou also haphazard.® 

Presently the earth will cover us all. It too will 
anon be changed, and the resulting product will go 
on from change to change, and so for ever and ever. 
When a man thinks of these successive waves of 
change and transformation, and their rapidity, he 
will hold every mortal thing in scorn.’ 

29. The Werld-Cause is as a torrent, it sweeps 
everything along. How negligible these manikins 

5 Possibly aueph is a gloss, or duoromeph should be read, 
(cp. Epict. frag. 175.) 

6 ii.5; iv.2,etc. 7d ddov may also be taken to mean in fine. 

7 ix. 19; xii. 21. cp. Capit. xxviii..4 of Marcus on his 
death-bed, ridens res humanas. 


247 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Os olerat, prrocopos TPAKTUKA évO parma: putev 
peord. avOpwre, ti OTE; mwoincov, 6 vv uy 
gpvots arractet. Spyncor, éav dddrau, Kal 1) 
mepiBrérou, el TLS eloeTau. PM, THY T\atewvos 
moduTelay Enmebe arra apxod, et TO Bpaxdraroy 
TpoeLot, Kal TOVTOV avTOD THD &Bacw, as? 
puKpov Ti éoTt, Siavood. Soyua yap avTav tis 
petaBarrer} Xwpls be Soypatav petaBorns Th 
ado 7) Sovdeta OTEVOVTMV Kal mei\ecbar 7 poo- 
TOLOUPEVOD ; braye vor, kal "AnréEavépor Kal 
Pidctrarov Kal An pay peov TOV Parnpéa juou eye. 
dypovrar, el eldov, Ti 9 Kowwn dias HOcrev, Kal 
€avToUs errabayaynoay ei é erparyponoay, 
ovdels pe KATAKEKPLKE ptpeto Oar. amhodv €oTL 
Kal aidfpov To pirocodias Epyov un pe amraye? 
ert ceuvotudiar. 

1S “Avober émewpety ayéas pupias Kal 
TeeTas pupias Kal m)oov mavrotov €v XELMOCL 
Kal yarnvats Kal Siapopas yevopeverr, ouyyivo- 
pévov, aroyiwouévev. eémivoes dé Kal Tov br 
G\Aov wdadat BeBropévov | Biov, kal Tov peTa oe 
BiwOnodpevor, Kab TOV vov €v Tots BapBapous 
eOveot Brovpevor Kal daou pev ode dvoma ou 
yv@ocKover, boot Oe TaxloTa. emiArjoovTat, 6 boot 
dé emaivobvTes lows vov oe TaXoTe, eEover 
cal @S OUTE 1) penn aktoroyov rye ovTE 7 SoEa 


ovtTe aXXo TL TO oUmmay. 
ha’. “Atapakia pév mepl tav amd Ths éxTOs 
1 &s ob P. 2 Perhaps amayéro. . 





ly, 6, §1. Sen. Hp. 79: Haec nos oportet agere licet 
nemo videat. 


248 





BOOK IX 


that busy themselves with civic matters and flatter 
themselves that they act therein as philosophers! 
Drivellers all! What then, O Man? Do what 
Nature asks of thee now. Make the effort if it be 
given thee to do so and look not about to see if any 
shall know it.! Dream not of Utopias but be content 
if the least thing go forward, and count the outcome 
of the matter in hand as a small thing.? For who 
can alter another’s conviction? Failing a change of 
conviction, we merely get men pretending to be 
persuaded and chafing like slaves under coercion. 
Go to now and tell me of Alexander and Philip 
and Demetrius of Phalerum. Whether they realized 
the will of Nature and schooled themselves thereto, 
is their concern. But if they played the tragedy- 
hero, no one has condemned me to copy them. 
Simple and modest is the work of Philosophy: lead 
me not astray into pomposity and pride. 

30. Take a bird’s-eye view of the world, its endless 
gatherings* and endless ceremonials,* voyagings 
manifold in storm and calm, and the vicissitudes of 

- things coming into being, participating in being, 
ceasing to be. Reflect too on the life lived long ago 
by other men, and the life that shall be lived after 
thee, and is now being lived in barbarous countries ; 
and how many have never even heard thy name, 
and how many will very soon forget it, and how 
many who now perhaps acclaim, will very soon blame 
thee, and that neither memory nor fame nor anything 
thing else whatever is worth reckoning. 

31. Freedom from perturbance in all that befalls 


2 Or, reading od wixpdvy: deem the success of the matter in 
hand no small thing. 3 vii. 3, 48. 
+ nearly = our colloquial ‘“* functions,” 


249 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


aitias cupBawovterv, Sicavotns 5é ev ois 
Tapa THY éK ood aitiav évepryoupevors” TOUT- 
éorw open Kat mpakes Katadiyyoura én aro 
TO KOWOVIKOS ampatat @s TOUTd Got KaTa 
pioww dv. 

rB’. TlovAra Tepioad. mepiehety TOV évoxovv- 
Tov cot dwvacat, bra él TH UToAmper cov 
Kelwevas Kal Todd) evpuxeplav TeplTronaets 
70N GTEauvTo, <T@>?* TOV dhov KOO MOV Tepl- 
edn evar TH youn, Kab TOV aidiov aidva 
mepwvoeir, Kal THY TOV KATA HE pos éxdotou 
Tpdyparos Taxetap petaBory emwoeiv, 
Bpaxd yey TO amo yeverews HEX pt drarvoews, 
axaves dé TO T™ po THS yevécews, @S Kal TO peTA 
THY OladVOLY O opotos amretpor. 

My. Ilavra, dca ops, TaXLoTa pbapyoerat 
Kab ot pbeipopeva adta émdovres TaXLoTA Kal 
avtot pOapnoovrar Kal o eoxaToynpws amro- 
Pave eis ioov KATATTHOETAL TO Tpowpy. 

ro. Tiva ta HYepoviKa TOUT@Y, Kal Teplt ola 
eomovddKact, Kal Ov ola prrodor Kat TUMOTL. 
yupva voile BrErrew Ta puxdpra avTov. OTE 
doxovat Sdamrew wéyovtes  awereiv é€- 
UpVoUVTES, O07 oinats. 

re. “H amoBonn ovden GX €oTW 1 peTa- 
Bory. Ttovr@ &é Xaiper ) TOV bow puots, Kad 
hv wavta, Kalas? ryiverat, && aidvos OMOELOWS 


> 7 \ > » s 
EYLVETO, KAL ELS ATTELPOV ToLtave étepa éoTat. Tb 


oov éyels, OTe eyiveTo Te RavTA <KaKas>* Kal 


1 <rg@> Gat. 
2 kad@s PA: xadws Schenkl. 
3 So Reiske: 3 nal rdvra P: omit A, 


250 


A A tt Na 














BOOK IX 


from the external Cause, and justice in all that thine 
own inner Cause prompts thee todo; thatis, impulse 
and action finding fulfilment in the actual performance 
of social duty as being in accordance with thy nature. 

32. It is in thy power to rid thyself of many 
unnecessary troubles, for they exist wholly in thy 
imagination. Thou wilt at once set thy feet in a 
large room by embracing the whole Universe in thy 
mind and including in thy purview time ever- 
lasting, and by observing the rapid change in every 
part of everything, and the shortness of the span 
between birth and dissolution, and that the yawn- 
ing immensity before birth is only matched by the 
infinity after our dissolution. 

33. All that thine eyes behold will soon perish 
and they, who live to see it perish, will in their turn 
perish no less quickly ; and he who outlives all his 
contemporaries and he who dies before his time will 
be as one in the grave. 

34. What is the ruling Reason! of these men, and 
about what sort of objects have they been in earnest, 
and from what motives do they lavish their love and 
their honour! View with the mind’s eye their poor 
little souls in their nakedness. What immense con- 
ceit this of theirs, when they fancy that there is bane 
in their blame and profit in their praises ! 

35. Loss and change,’ they are but one. Therein 
doth the Universal Nature take pleasure,® through 
whom are all things done now as they have been in 
like fashion from time everlasting ; and to eternity 
shall other like things be. Why then dost thou say 
that all things have been evil and will remain evil 

1 vii. 34, 62; ix. 18. 

2 The play on the words cannot be kept. 3 vii. 18. 


251 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


TavTa ae KaK@s eEotal, Kal ovdeyia apa 
dvvapuis év toaovTos Oeois éEevpéOn more 7 
S10 pPacovea TavTa, adra KATAKEKPLTAL 0 KOG 0S 
év adianreiTTOLs Kaxois owvexer Bas; 

Me. To cam pov THS éxdor@ ) brroxerpévns odys: 
Bap, KOves, doTapla, ypdoos: 7 Tahu mapor vis 

¢ 
Ta pappapa, Kal brooraO yar O xpuaos, o 
dpyupos, Kal tTpixia  écOns: Kal alua 1 
Toppupa, Kal Ta GAXa TavTa ToLavTa. Kal TO 
mvevpatiov! dé dAXO ToLodTOV Kal ex TovTwY «Eis 
TavTa petaBarnrov. 
no’. “AdXus tod aOXiov Biov, Kal yoyyuvapuod, 
lol / 

kat mLOnKiopov. Ti Tapdoon; Ti TOUTwWY KaLVOV; 

/ +e/ N ” ” > / > > id 
ti oe é&iotnot; TO aitiov; ide avTo. GAN 7H 
ef y > / Ba \ 7 > / > 
trAn; ie avtynv. Ew Sé TovTwy ovdév éortiV 
> \ \ \ \ 0 \ yO \ id ff 
ahha Kal Mpos TOUS VEeous ON ToTE aT OVE TEPOS 
Kal XpnoToTEpos yevod. 

\ nr 

"Icov TO éxaTov éTeot Kal TO Tpiol TadTa 
iorophoar. 

/ f > 

- Ei pév juaprtev, éxet TO Kaxov. Taya d 
ovx Hjpaprev. 

OW. "“Hrow amo pads mn YAS voepas mavra oS 
evi oopate emioupBaiver, Kal ov Set TO pépos Tois 
bmrép Tod dXou ‘yevopevous péuperOar 7) aTopor 
Kal ovdev aXXo 7, KUKE@V Kab oxedag pos. Tt 
ovv Tapdoon; TO Hyepover@ éyer” “ TéOvnkas, 
epPapoar, TeOnpiwcat, troxpivn, acuvayeratn, 


Booxn.” 
pw. “Hros oddév Sivavtat ot Deol 4 StvavTat. 


1 avevpatinoy Cas.: mvevudriov PA. 
2 Aéyers PA: Aéye Cor. Perhaps Aéye ov. 





BOOK IX 


to the end, and that no help has after all been found 
in Gods, so many as they be, to right these things, 
but that the fiat hath gone forth that the Universe 
should be bound in an unbroken chain of ill? 

36. Seeds of decay in the underlying material of 
everything—water, dust, bones, reek ! Again, marble 
but nodules of earth, and gold and silver but dross, 
garments merely hair-tufts, and purple only blood. 
And so with everything else. The soul too 
another like thing and liable to change from this 
to that. 

37. Have done with this miserable way of life, 
this grumbling, this apism! Why fret? What is 
the novelty here? What amazesthee? The Cause? 
Look fairly at it. What then, the Material? Look 
fairly at that. Apart from these two, there is nothing. 
But in regard to the Gods also now even at the 
eleventh hour show thyself more simple,) more 
worthy. 

Whether thy experience of these things lasts three 
hundred years or three, it is all one. 

38. If he did wrong, with him lies the evil. But 
maybe he did no wrong.’ 

39. Either there is one intelligent source, from 
which as in one body all after things proceed—and 
the part ought not to grumble at what is done in 
the interests of the whole—or there are atoms, and 
nothing but a medley and a dispersion.2 Why then 
be harassed? Say to thy ruling Reason: Thou art 
dead! Thou art corrupt! Thou hast become a mild 
beast! Thou art a hypocrite! Thou art one of the 
herd! Thou battenest nith them ! 

40. Either the Gods have no power or they have 


1 iv. 26. 2 vii. 29. 8 iv. 27; vi. 10; vii. 82; xii, 14. 


253 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


€L bev oop By) Sdvavrat, Ti evyn; ei 8é duvarras, 
dia Th ouxl Hardov evyn didovae avtTovs TO pyre 
poPeicbat TL TOUTMY payre érOupeiy Tivos 
TOUT@V bare AvTreioOan eri Toe TOUTOY padrov 
iNTEp TO pa mapeivai TL TOUT@Y 7) TO Tapeiva; 
mavTos yap, ei Stvavtat ouvepyeiv avOparross, 
Kal els TaUvTa Svvavrae _ouvepyeiv. ara lows 
épels, ore “Kr éuot avta ot Geol emoinoap.” 
eita ov Kpeia cov xphabar Tois emt gol HET. 
édevdepias H SwapéperOat pos Ta p41) emt col 
pera Sovhelas Kal TAT ELvOTNTOS; ris 5€ cou elzrey, 
dtu ovxXl Kal cis Ta ef jpiv ot Geol ouhhay- 
Bavovow; apEau youv Tept ToUTMY edyer Oar Kal 
drper. ovTos evyetar “I1as Konda pet éxetvys.” 
ou: “Ila@s un éridupjnocw Tod Kou hvar per’ 
éxeiyns.” Gdrdosr “Ils orepnOd éxetvov.” ov 
“Ids Bn xputeo TOU orepnOhvar.” adQos" “TId@s 
pay aroBadrw To Texviov. at: “Ilas pay poPnOd 
amoBaneiv.” ddws ade sale tsepod Tas evyds, Kal 
Gewper, Th yiveran. 

Ha. ‘O "Exrixoupos evel, bre “Ev 7H voow 
OvK HOA [ot at Opidtar Tmeph TOV TOU copatiou 
mabav ovdée mpos Tovs elovovTas Touabrd TWA, 
prov, * ‘ €\ddovr: ara Ta Tponyoupeva puoto- 
Noy dv dueTéXovy, Kal ™ pos avT@ TOUT@ OY, TOS 
» Otdvora Tupper adapPdvove a TOV év T@ capK- 
Lim Tovovtwy! Kwhnoewy atapaKtel, TO tdcov 
dyabov tnpotca. ove Tots iarpois éumrapetyor,” 
dno, “xatappvatrecOar, ws TL TOLOvGLY, GAN O 


1 ro.oitwov P: woobtvtwv A: wo@v tTivwv Schenk). 





1 vi. 44. 4 : 
2 ix. 27. St. Paul, Rom. viii. 26: 7d mvedua cuvaytirau- 


254 











BOOK IX 


power. If they have no power, why pray to them!? 
But if they have power, why not rather pray that 
they should give thee freedom from fear of any of 
these things and from lust for any of these things and 
from grief at any of these things [rather] than that 
they should grant this or refuse that. For obviously 
if they can assist men at all, they can assist them in 
this. But perhaps thou wilt say: The Gods have put 
this in my power. Then is it not better to use what is 
in thy power like a free man than to concern thyself 
with what is not in thy power like a slave and an 
abject? And who told thee that the Gods do not 
co-operate with us? even in the things that are in 
our power? Begin at any rate with prayers for such 
things and thou wilt see. One prays: How may I lie 
mith that woman!*® Thou: How may I not lust to lie 
with her! Another: How may I be quit of that man ! 
Thou: How may I not mish to be quit of him! 
Another: How may I not lose my little child! Thou: 
How may I not dread to lose him.4 In a word, give 
thy prayers this turn, and see what comes of it. 

41. Listen to Epicurus’ where he says: In my 
illness my talk was not of any bodily feelings, nor did I 
chatter about such things to those who came to see me, but 
I went on with my cardinal disquisitions on natural 
philosophy, dwelling especially on this point, how the 
mind, having perforce its share in such affections of 
the flesh, yet remains unperturbed, safeguarding its 
_onn proper good. Nor did I—he goes on—let the - 
physicians ride the high horse as if they were doing 
Bdverat. Gataker very aptly quotes Augustine, de Grat. 
Christi i. 15: Cur petitur quod ad nostram pertinet potes- 
tatem, si Deus non adjuvat voluntatem ? 


3 Sen. Ep. 10 ad fin.; Shak. Luer. 50. 
4 Capit. xxi. § 3. 5 See Diog. Laert. Bpicur. § 10. 


255 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Bios Hryeto eb Kal Kars.” TadbTa odv éxeiv@ év 
vOoe, éay voons, Kal év addy Tul mTepiotacet* TO 
yap ph adlaracbat dirocodias év ols Snore Tots 
T poo mimToucl pide [76] iovarn Kal apuonoye" 
cupprAvapeiy macys aipécews Kowov .... TpOS 
pov Sé€ TO vov ™ pac comer elvat Kal TO Opyave, 
db: 08 T pages.” 

pB. “Orav Tivos avaroxuvTia T POTKOTT NS, 
evO0s muvOdvou ceauToo" « Avvavtat ovv év 7@ 
Koop avai xuvroe pn eivas ;” ov Svvayrat. BN 
ouv arraires TO advvarov. els 4p kal odds 
éorw éxelvov Tov dvaroxXuvTov, ods avayKn év TO 
KOT We eivat. To 8 auto Kal én tod mravotpyou 
Kal éml tod amictov Kal TavTos Tob oTLoby 
dpaptavorros éoT@ col _Tpoxerpov. dpa yap 
TO bromo Ojvas, éTe TO yévos TOV ToLOUT@V 
ddivardv éoTe [1 _mdpxew, eUPLEverTEpOS éon 
™ pos Tovs kal” &va. edxpnoTov dé KaKeivo 
evOvs évvoeiv, * Tia éd@Kev Uy) pvous TS 
av0 pot @ dperny pos. ToUTO TO dpaprnpa. 
exe yap, | ws dvtipdppaxoy Tpos Hey TOV 
ayvapLova THY TpadTHTAa, mpos 5é adrov aAAHV 
Tia SUVA. 

“Oras. 6é efeort rot petadidacKew TOV Teé- 
TavnwEvov" mwas yap 6 cpapTaver - apapapT aver 
TOU TpoKetpévov Kab TeTaNTau. tt oe Kal 
BEBraypar; evpynoels yap pndéva TOUT@D, 7 pos 
ods tapokivn, meTomnKxoTa TL ToLodTOY, é& ov 7 
didvord cov yeipwv euerre yevnoecOar- TO € 

1 apuoordy@ Gat.: puciordyp (natural philosopher) PA. 


2 mpdooet PA. This verb has no subject and Wilam. and 
Schenk] mark a lacuna before rpds udvm: mpdooes Reiske. 


256 





BOOK IX 


grand things, but .my life went on well and happily. 
Imitate him then in sickness, if thou art sick, and in 
any other emergency ; for it is a commonplace of 
every sect not to renounce Philosophy whatever 
difficulties we encounter, nor to consent to babble 
as he does that is unenlightened in philosophy and 
nature; ... devote thyself to thy present work 
alone and thy instrument for performing it. 

42. When thou art offended by shamelessness in 
any one, put this question at once to thyself: Can i 
be that shameless men should not exist in the world? It 
can not be. Then ask not for what can not be.! 
For this man in question also is one of the shameless 
ones that must needs exist in the world. Have the 
same reflection ready for the rogue, the deceiver, or 
any other wrongdoer whatever. For the remem- 
brance that this class of men cannot but exist will 
bring with it kindlier feelings towards individuals of 
the class. Right useful too is it to bethink thee at 
-once of this: What virtue has Nature given man as 
a foil to the wrong-doing in question? For as an 
antidote against the unfeeling man she has given 
gentleness,” and against another man some other 
resource, 

In any case it is in thy power to teach the man 
that has gone astray the error of his ways. For 
every one that doth amiss misses his’ true mark and 
hath gone astray. But what harm hast thou suffered ? 
Thou wilt find that not one of the persons against 
whom thou art exasperated has done anything 
capable of making thy mind worse; but it is in 


ly. 17. cp. Dio 71. 34, § 4. 
2 Epict. Man. 10; St. Paul, Tit. iii. 2: mpadrnra mpds 
Taras. 


sir 257 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


KaKOv oou Kal TO BraBepov évtad0a Tacav tiv 
vmoctaciw Exel. 

Ti dai xaxov 7) Eévov syeyover, el 0 amaidevos 
Ta ToD amaide’TOV Tpdoce; Spa, pi) TEeavTo 
padrov éyxanreiv opeidys, tt ov mpoceddKnoas 
TOUTOV TOUTO dpapTncecOa. od yap Kal adoppas 
éx Tod Noyou eiyves Tpds TO EvOvpNOfvat, STL eiKds 
€oTL TOUTOY TovUTO auapTncecOal, Kal dyuws 
émrtAab ouevos Gavpaters, | él eapTHKE. 

Manora 8é, Stay Os amlaTe i) axaploT@ 
péphn, els oeavTov emia Tpepou. “Tpodi dws yap 
oop 70 apapTnua, €iTe mepl Tob TovavTay dia- 
Ocow éxovtos ériatevoas, bt. THY TicTW purdéet, 
elite THY xdpw didodvs pH KaTAaAHKTLKaS EdwxKas, 
pnde wote €& adits ths offs mpakews evOds 
aTeundévat TavTa TOV KapT Ov. 

Ti yap Théov Géreus ev Toujoas avO parov; 
ovK apKet TodTO, ore Kata pvow TV ory Tl 
émpakas, adda ToOvTOU po Oov fntels; as el 6 
opOarpos apoiBhy amnre, Ott BrEret, ob 
moves, Ste Badifovcw. @omTep yap TadTa Tpods 
TO0E TL YéyovEV, ATEp KATA THY iOiav KaTATKEUHY 
évepyoovtTa améyxet TO idtov, oTwS Kal 6 avOpwT- 
OS EVEPyETLKOS TrEPUKwS, OTOTAD TL EVEPYETLKOY 4) 
GdXas eis TA péoa-ouvepyntiKov Tpaen, TeTOLNKe, 
mpos 6 KatecxevacTat, Kal éyet TO éavTod. 





—— 


1 Lit. there, i.e. in thy mind. 

2 cp. the striking parallel in Dio 71. 24, § 2, 7d under 
motoy év dvOpémots elvat: ibid. 71. 26, § 2, riorw naraddoarts 
miorbdv diaryeverOat, where Marcus is speaking to his soldiers 
on the revolt of Cassius; and 27, § 1, where, writing to the 
Senate, he calls Cassius axdpitos. I cannot help thinking 


258 -_— 





BOOK IX 


thy mind? that the evil for thee and the harmful 
have their whole existence. 

Where is the harm or the strangeness in the boor 
acting—like a boor? See whether thou art not 
thyself the more to blame in not expecting that he 
would act thus wrongly. For thy reason too could 
have given thee means for concluding that this would 
most likely be the case. Nevertheless all this is 
forgotten, and thou art surprised at his wrongdoing. 

But above all, when thou findest fault with a 
man for faithlessness and ingratitude,? turn thy 
thoughts to thyself. For evidently the fault is thine 
own, whether thou hadst faith that a man with such 
a character would keep faith with thee, or if in 
bestowing a kindness thou didst not bestow it 
absolutely and as from the very doing of it having 
at once received the full complete fruit.’ 

For when thou hast done a kindness, what more 
wouldst thou have? Is not this enough that thou 
hast done something in accordance with thy nature ? 
Seekest thou a recompense for it? As though the 
_eye should claim a guerdon for seeing, or the feet 
for walking! For just as these latter were made for 
_ their special work, and by carrying this out according 
to their individual constitution they come fully into 
their own, so also man, formed as he is by nature 
for benefiting others, when he has acted as bene- 
factor or as co-factor in any other way for the general 
weal, has done what he was constituted for, and has 
what is his.* . 
that this section of the Thoughts was written at the time of 
the rebellion in 175, and that Marcus is here taking himself 
to task. 3 v. 63 vii., 73. 

4 iv. 49; xi. l. cp. St. Matt. vi. 2. Marcus was noted for 
evepycaia, Dio 71. 34, §3; C.I.Gr. 2495, 4697°. 


; 259 
s 2 


“a> 


BIBAION I 


a. "Eon ToTe apa, 3) Wx, aryaby Kat ami 
Kal pia Kal yuprn, pavepwréepa TOU TEpLKELLevoU 
ool THMATOS; yevon Tore apa TAS prrnrucis Kab 
oTEpKTLUCTS Siabécews: éon ToTé apa 7 apns 
Kal avevdens Kal ovdey érvmoboboa ovde érre- 
Oupotoa ovdevos ote éeprpvyou oure apd ov 
T pos mover aTroravaes; ovdé Xpovou, ev @ emt 
pax porepov amronavcers; ovde TOTOU cy xX@pas bf) 
adépwv evxatpias ovdé av0 poo evappootias; 
GNA apresOnon Th Tapovoy KaTacT ace Kal 
HoOnon Tots srapobot mao, Kal oupmeioets oe- 
auTHy, 6Tt TavTa, <d>1 cot Tdpectl, Tapa TOV 
Ochv mwdpectt kal TavTa cou ed eye Kal ev 
eet, boca pidov avtots Kal boa pédRovor ddcew 
én owrnpla TOU Tehelov Saou, TOU ayabod Kal 
Sixatov Kal Kkanov wal yervavros TavTa Kal 
TUVEXOVTOS Kal TEPLEXOVTOS Kal TmepthapPdvov- ; 
TOS Svarvopeva eis yeverw érépav Opole ; éon- 
more dpa to.avtn, ola Geois Te Kab dv pdvross 
ote cupmomTever Oat, @S pajre pénperdat Th 
avrois pate KataywooKkecOat tT avTav; 


1 <&> Lemercier and Schenk]: wapa trav beady mapeoti Kab 
transposed by Schenk] from before xa) ed ete: P. 


260 


ee tie etait 2h rte 








BOOK X 


1. Witr thou then, O my Soul, ever at last be 
good and simple and single and naked, shewing 
thyself more visible than the body that overlies 
thee? Wilt thou ever taste the sweets of a loving 
and a tender heart? Ever be full-filled and self- 
sufficing, longing for nothing, lusting after nothing 
animate or inanimate, for the enjoyment of pleasures 
—not time wherein the longer to enjoy them, nor 
place or country or congenial climes or men nearer 
to thy liking—but contented with thy present state ! 
and delighted with thy present everything, convinc- 
ing thyself withal that all that is present for thee 
is present from the Gods,? and that everything is 
and shall be well with thee that is pleasing to them 
and that they shall hereafter grant for the con- 
servation of that Perfect Being® that is good and 
just and beautiful, the Begetter and Upholder of 
all things, that embraces and gathers them in, when 
they are dissolved, to generate therefrom other like 
things? * Wilt thou ever at last fit thyself so to bea 
fellow-citizen with the Gods and with men as never 
to find fault with them or incur their condemnation ? ? 

1 ix. 6. 3 iii. J1,'8 3. 

3 i.e. Zeus = the Universe = the First Cause = Nature. 

4 vii. 23. 

261 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


B. Uaparnpe, ti cov 4 pias émefnte?, ws 
bro hioews povov Siorkovpévou: Elta Toler avTo 
\ / > \ 6 / U 7, 
Kal mpocieco, ef py yetpov pérrer SiaTiPecOat 
an A / 
cov 7 as Sou dias. é&Hs 5é wapatynpyntéov, Ti 
na / \ lal lo) 
émitntes cov 7 ws Cwov pivots: Kal wav TovTO 
/ > \ lal / / e 
TapadnTréov, et pn) Yetpov uérres SratiPecOar 1) 
e 4 rn UA »” \ \ X 
os Gwouv AoyiKoD vais: EoTL dé TO Noyexov 
/ 
evOds Kal TodTLKOV. TovTOLS 52 KaVOTL KP@pEvOS 
pndév repiepyafov. 
’ al \ ad ” es / 
y. dv ro cvpBaivoy Aro ovtas cvpPaiver, 
¢ , > \ , A ¢ > f 572k 
@s TéepuKas avTO PEepetvy 7) WS ov TEpUKAaS AUTO 
, / 
péperv. ef pev ovv cvpBaiver cor, ws mépuKas 
y / 
éperv, 7) Suvtxépawe AN ws TépuKas, Pépe. 
? bé e \ / / \ 8 / . 
et 0€, ws pn TréepuKas epee, p17) Ove VYEpaLvE 
lal / 
POapicetat yap ce aTavar@cav. péuvnoo pév- 
tot, Ott mépuKas pépew wav, Tepl ov emt TH 
ig / > \ fel nr \ \ > \ > x 
borne: eat TH of PopyTov Kal avexTOov avTO 
a a / 
Toujoat, KaTa pavtaciav Tov cuppépev i) Kad- 
KEL TEAUT@ TOUTO TrOLEly. 
/ > \ LA / 9 n 
5. Et péev oddrrerar, didaoxew evpevas 
Kal TO Tapopwpevov Secxvivar: © ei dé advvateis, 
ceavtov aitiacbat, 7 nde ceavTov. 


, 


df ” / rn , 
€. “O te ay cor cupBaivn, todTo aa é& 


IA > \ al 
ai@vos mpokatecKevateTo: Kal 1 €TuTAOKN TOV | 


5 / / \ e / > 
aitiwv cuvéxrobe tHv te ony wmrootacw é& 
/ \ 4 
adiov Kal THY ToUTOU cUuBac. 
/ Ty. LA ” 4 lal / 
x. Kite dropoe elite dios, mp@tov Keicba, 
e , a & n e/- ig \ 4 
67t pépos eiul tov Srov, bd hicews SvotKov- 
pévov: Ererta, btt exw Tas oixelws pos TA 


262 


: 
] 





BOOK X 


2. Observe what thy nature asks of thee, as one 
controlled by Nature alone, then do this and with a 
good grace, if thy nature as a living creature is not 
to be made worse thereby. Next must thou observe 
what thy nature as a living creature asks of thee. 
And this must thou wholly accept, if thy nature as a 
rational living creature be not made worse thereby. 
Now the rational is indisputably also the civic. 
Comply with these rules then and be not needlessly 
busy about anything. 

3. All that befalls either so befalls as thou art 
fitted by nature to bear it or as thou art not fitted.1 
If the former, take it not amiss, but bear it as thou 
art fitted todo. If the latter, take not that amiss 
either, for when it has destroyed thee, it will itself 
perish. Howbeit be assured that thou art fitted by 
nature to bear everything which it rests with thine 
own opinion about it to render bearable and tolerable, 
according as thou thinkest it thy interest or thy duty 
to do so. 

4. If a man makes a slip, enlighten him with 
loving-kindness, and shew him wherein he hath 
seen amiss.? Failing that, blame thyself or not even 
thyself. 

5. Whatever befalls thee was set in train for thee 
from everlasting, and the interplication of causes was 
from eternity weaving into one fabric thy existence 
and the coincidence of this event. 

6. Whether there be atoms or a Nature, let it be 
postulated first, that I am a part of the whole Uni- 
verse controlled by Nature; secondly, that I stand 
in some intimate connexion with other kindred parts. 


1 vili, 46. 2 viii. 59; xi. 9, 13, 18, § 9. 
3 iii, 11; iv. 26. 


263 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


oporyevi én: TOUT@D yap HE LYNLEVOS, Kadore pev 
Hépos ell, ovdevl Sucapertiow T@V €K TOU bdOU 


atrovenouévav? ovdev yap BraBepov TO péper, 


8 7 dX@ Tuppeper. ov yap éyet TL TO SAov, 6 
a oupdéper éavt@ tacdv pev picewr KOLVOV 
exourdy TodTo, THS 5é Tod KOT MOU TpocerAnpuvias 
TO pnode v7r0 Twos efwbev aitias avaynaveo Oat 
BraBepov TT éaury ‘yevvar. 

Kara pev 87) TO Hepvijc Oar, 6 ore HE pos ell ddXou 
TOU TOLOUTOU, evaper tire mavri To dmoBaivovtt. 
xalocov dé éyw Tas oixei@s Mpos TA Opmoryeviy 
pépn, ovdev mpage aKoweavntor, _baddov dé 
oToXdoopat TOV opmoryevOv Kal ™ pos TO _Kouwy 
ouppépov tacav opunv éwavtod ad&w Kal aro 
Tovvavtiou amd&w. Tovtwv € oUTw TEpawo- 
pévov avayKn Tov Biov evpoeiv, ws av Kat ToXiT- 
ov Biov eUpovy emrivonoelas ™ poLovTos bia 
mpagewy Tots ToMT als AvotTEN@V Kal, Srrep av 
) TOMS drrovewy, TOUTO aomatopévov. 

C. . Tois pépeoe Tod ddou, boa pice TEpLexe- 
Tat UTO TOU Koc pov, avaryen pbecipecbau: Aeyér Io 
dé TodTO onuavTiK@s Tod adroLtodcAar ei Sé 
gioe Kaxov Te Kal avayKaiov éott TODTO avTois, 
ovx ay TO ddAov KarOs SieEdyoLTO, TOV pepav «is 
adXoTpiwow iovtwr, Kal mpos TO POciperOar dia- 
popes KaTecKkevacuév@v. ToTEpov yap éTrExELp- 
noev » pvois avTH Ta EauvTAS pépn KaKodV Kal 
TEPLTT@TUKA TO KAK@ Kal €& avayKns EuTToTA 





1 vi. ‘543 x. 33, § 4. 
ix. 22 
3 These words can also be translated: parts of herself that 


264 


6 Re 





BOOK X 


For bearing this in mind, as I am a part, I shall not 
be displeased with anything allotted me from the 
Whole. For what is advantageous to the whole can 
in no wise be injurious to the part.1_ For the Whole 
contains nothing that is not advantageous to itself; 
and all natures have this in common, but the Uni- 
versal Nature is endowed with the additional attrib- 
ute of never being forced by any external cause to 
engender anything hurtful to itself. 

As long then as I remember that I am a part of 
such a whole, I shall be well pleased with all that 
happens; and in so far as I am in intimate connexion 
with the parts that are akin to myself, I shall be 
guilty of no unsocial act, but I shall devote my atten- 
tion rather to the parts that are akin to myself,? and 
direct every impulse of mine to the common interest 
and withhold it from the reverse of this. That 
being done, life must needs flow smoothly, as thou 
mayst see the life flow smoothly of a citizen who 
goes steadily on in a course of action beneficial to 
his fellow-citizens and cheerfully accepts whatever is 
assigned him by the State. 

7. The parts of the Whole—all that Nature has 
comprised in the Universe—must inevitably perish, 
taking “perish” to mean “be changed.” But if 
this process is by nature for them both evil and in- 
evitable, the Whole could never do its work satisfact- 
orily, its parts ever going as they do from change 
to change and being constituted to perish in diverse 
ways. Did Nature herself set her hand to bringing 
evil upon parts of herself and rendering them not only 
liable to fall into evil but of necessity fallen into it, 


were both liable to fall into such evil and by necessity fell into 
doing evil. 


205 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


\ 
els TO KaKkov Trotely, 7) EXabev avTiv Tordde TWA 
, 
ywopmeva; aupotepa yap aridava. 
n , 

Ki 5é tus Kal adéuevos tis hvcews Kata TO 
mepuxévar Ttavta éEnyoito, Kal &s yedolov awa 

A / / \ lA nm ef 4 
bev havar TepuKeval TA LEpH TOV OXOV peTAaBAAA- 

, lal 

ew, Gwa 5é ws emt Tu TOY Tapa diow oup- 
Bawvovtov Oavydlew 7 Svcxepaivery, addws TE 
kal THs Starvcews eis TadTa ywopéevns, €& wv 
éxaotov ovvicTataL. To yap oKEdacpos oTOLY- 
elwv €& wy ouvexpiOnv, 1 TpoTn Ted ev 

/ rn a n 
oTepeuviov eis TO yew@des, TOD Sé mvevpaTiKOD 
eis TO dep@des> Wate kal tadta avadndOjvar 
eis Tov Tod GrAov Aoyov, elite KaTa TeEpiodor 

/ a 

éxtrupoupévou elite adios apuotBais dvaveou- 
pévov. 

Kal 76 otepéuvov € Kal TO mvevpaTiKoY pn 
pavrdlov To aro THs mpeTHS yevécews. Ta yap 
tovto €xOés Kal tpltnv tpépav ex tdv oiTior 
Kal Tod éAKopévou aépos THY émipponv édaBev. 

a * , > a ¢ , 
TovTo ov, 6 éhaBev, petaBarret, ovyx 01 NTHP 
érexev. vmodov 8, bt. éxelv@ oe iav Tpoc- 
TrAéKeL | TH idiws ToL@, OVSEY 6VTL OlpaL TpPOS TO 
vov Neyouevov. 

/ ? / / a la) ? 4 

7. ‘Ovopata Oépevos cavt@ TadTa, ayabds, 

? f > / »” 4 ¢€ / 
aidipov, arnOys, éudporv, ciuppov, brépdpor, 

1 rpoomAéxer has no subject: oé 7: Fournier: ob Atay 
mpoomAékn Rend. 

4 vil. 32. 

2 iv. 4. Lit. the pneumatic or breath element. See Index iii. 

3 iii. 3. Justin, Apol. i. 20; ii. 7, contrasts the Christian 
theory of the destruction of the world by fire with the Stoic. 


4 rpoomAéker has no subject. éxeive must be taken 
separately from 7@ idiws roig and refer to Tutto 6 ~AaBev. 


266 





eC eens 





BOOK X . 


or was she not aware that such was the case? 
Both alternatives are incredible. 

But supposing that we even put Nature as an 
agent out of the question and explain that these 
things are “naturally” so, even then it would be 
absurd to assert that the parts of the whole are 
naturally subject to change, and at the same time to 
be astonished at a thing or take it amiss as though 
it befell contrary to nature, and that though things 
dissolve into the very constituents out of which they 
are composed, For either there is a scattering of 
the elements! out of which I have been built up, 
or a transmutation of the solid into the earthy and 
of the spiritual ? into the aerial ; so that these too 
are taken back into the Reason of the Universe, 
whether cycle by cycle it be consumed with fire? 
or renew itself by everlasting permutations. 

Aye and so then do not be under the impression 
that the solid and the spiritual date from the moment 
of birth. For it was but yesterday or the day before 
that all this took in its increment from the food eaten 
and the air bréathed. It is then this, that it took in, 
which changes, not the product of thy mother’s womb. 
But granted that thou art ever so closely bound up 4 
with that by thy individuality, this, I take it, has no 
bearing upon the present argument. 

8. Assuming for thyself the appellations, a good 
man,° a modest man,®° a truthteller,’ wise of heart, 


> See on x. 16. 

6 Capitolinus and Ammianus call Marcus verecundus. 

7 Only two kings have had the honourable cognomen of 
Truthteller, Marcus and Alfred the Great. The former was 
given Verissimus as a pet name by Hadrian when a child, 
and the town of Tyras in Scythia stamped it on its coins and 
Justin and Syncellus use it to designate Marcus. 


267 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Tpoaexe, pajrrore perovopaty” Kab <ei>! drronhvers 
radTa Ta dvopaTa, Kal Taxéws émdme én’ aura. 
HEépnoo dé, O74 TO pev “ éuppov” éBownero ool 
onpatvew Thy ép Exacta Suadgrrexny € emia Tac wv 
Kat TO atrapevOvupntov: TO dé “avudppwr,” THY 
Exovolov amoveEW TaY UTd THs KoWHs hicews 
atrovepopevev: TO Se “ dréppparv,” Tv UTépTtaciw 
Tov ppovovvtTos popiov wmép elas 7) Tpaxelas 
Kwnoes® THs capKos Kal TO SoEdpiov Kal Tov 
Oavarov Kab doa To.abTa. éav ov dvaTnpis 
ceaurov éy TOUTOLS Tots dvopact 7) YX opmevos 
TOU UT addov KaTa TavTGA ovoudtea Gar, éon 
Erepos, Kai els Biov eioedevon Erepov. TO yap 
ere TouodTov eival, olos péypt viv yéyovas, Kal év 
Bip TOLOUT@ omapac ces Fat Kat poruveo Gar, Aiav 
éotly dvarcOrjrov Kat prroyrixou, Kal oprolov Tois 
jycBpwrors Onptopaxors, olTLVES pearol T pau pd- 
TOV kal AVOpov Tapaxadovow Gps els Ty 
aispov purayOhvar, TapaBrAnOnodpevor TorodTor 
Tots avtois dvv&t Kal Ojypaci. 
*EuBiBacorv. otv cavtov eis Ta OXYya TadTA 
ovouata’ Kav pev én” avTav pévey SUVN, péEVE, 
@aTrEep eis MAKAaPwWY TLVAS VHTOUS MET@KLOMEVOS" 
éav 6€ aicOn, ott exmimtes, Kal ov TEpixparTels, 
amb Oappav eis ywviay tivd, Oto KpaTHaess, 4) 
Kal wavtdmacw &&0. Tod Biov pn dpytlomevos 


GAA aTA@s Kal édevOépws Kal aidnuoves ed* 


1 <ei> Schenkl. frie . 
2 «whoes Schenkl: cvhoews A: xlvnow P. 
3 T have written ed for év PA. 





‘ For Marcus’ views on suicide see iii. 1; v. 29; viii. 47 


ad fin. ; ix. 2; x. 22, 32. He permits it when external condi- © 


268 


ees ee ee 


BOOK X 


sympathetic of heart, great of heart, take heed thou 
be not new-named. And if thou shouldst forfeit 
these titles, e’en make haste to get back to them. 
And bear in mind that mise of heart was meant to 
signify for thee a discerning consideration of every 
object and a thoroughness of thought; sympathetic 
of heart, a willing acceptance of all that the Uni- 
versal Nature allots thee; great of heart an uplifting 
of our mental part above the motions smooth or 
rough of the flesh, above the love of empty fame, 
the fear of death, and all other like things. Only 
keep thyself entitled to these appellations, not 
itching to receive them from others, and thou wilt 
be a new man and enter on a new life. For to be 
still such as thou hast been till now, and to submit 
to the rendings and defilements of such a life, is 
worthy of a man that shews beyond measure a dull 
senselessness and a clinging to life, and is on a level 
with the wild-beast fighters that are half-devoured 
in the arena, who, though a mass of wounds and 
gore, beg to be kept till the next day, only to be 
thrown again, torn as they are, to the same teeth 
and talons. 

Take ship then on these few attributes, and if 
thou canst abide therein, so abide as one who has 
migrated to some Isles of the Blest. But if thou 
feelest thyself adrift, and canst not win thy way, 
betake thyself with a good heart to some nook 
where thou shalt prevail, or even depart altogether 
from life) not in wrath but in simplicity, inde- 
pendence, and modesty, having at least done this 


tions render the life of virtue impossible, or when a man finds 
in himself a failure to live the true life (cp. St. hganeees 
‘* Let me die lest I die”). 


269 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ye TovTo povoy mpdkas &v TO Biw, TO ovTas 
eEeNOciv. mpds pévTor TO pepvnoOat TOV dvop- 
adteov peyddh@s ovardj etal cor TO peuvnoOar 
Gedy, kal Otimrep od KohaxeverOar odToL OéXovow, 
arra éEopotodcOar éavtois Ta RoyiKA TavTa: 
Kal elvat THY wev TUKAVY TA GUKHS TOLODCAaY, TOV 
dé Kiva Ta*KUVOs, THY 6€ péALOTAY TA pErioons, 
Tov ¢ avOpwrov Ta avOparrov. 

0’. Minos, TONE HOS, TToLa, vapKa, Sovrela, 
Ka? Typépav amanreiperat gov Ta lepa éxeiva 
Soyuata, omdca o puovoroynros * gavtatn «al 
TMapameuTets. bet oe may ovTw _Brerrew kal 
Tpao ce, dare Kal To TeploTaTiKoy” aya ocvv- 
TeretcOar Kal aya TO Oewpytixoy évepyeic bat, 
Kal TO €x THs Twepl éExdotov éemiotHnuns avlades 
cw@tecbar AavOdvor, obyt KkpuTrTopmevov. 

Iléte yap amroTnTos atoravoes; mote bé 
ceuvotntos; mote 5é THs ep ExdoTov yvwpicews, 
‘Ti Te €otl KaT ovciav, Kal Tiva yopav eye ev TO 
Koop, Kal él tocov TépuKev VpiotacbaL, Kal 
éx Tivev ovyKéxpitat, Kal Tiot SivaTaL UTapxeL, 
kal tives Svvavtat avto Siddvar Te Kal 
adatpeio Bas. 

£s ‘Apaxviov puiay Onpdcay péya ppovei, 
adxXos bé Aayidiov, aos O€ & omox?) apuny, adXos 
be ovidia, aos Oé dpKTous, a&dXos Lapparas. 
ovUToL yap ov AnoTal, éav Ta Soypata éEeTafns; 


1 apuotoroyhrws Gat. (cp. ix. 41). 
2 mpaxtixdy (what is practicable) Cor. 


1 ep. Diog. Laert. Plato, 42; Ignat. Hph. §§ 1, 10; Justin, 
Apol. i. 21; Diogn. Hp. § 10; Julian, Conviv. 427. 21, puts 
similar words in the mouth of Marcus. 


270 





ee 











BOOK X 


one thing well in life, that thou hast quitted it thus. 
Howbeit, to keep these attributes in mind it will 
assist thee greatly if thou bear the Gods in mind, 
and that it is not flattery they crave but for all 
rational things to be conformed to their likeness,! 
and that man should do a man’s work, as the fig tree 
does the work of a fig-tree, the dog of a dog, and 


_ the bee of a bee. 


9. Stage-apery, warfare, cowardice, torpor, serv- 
ility—these will day by day obliterate all those 
holy principles of thine which, as a student ot 
Nature,’ thou dost conceive and accept. But thou 
must regard and do everything in such a way that 
at one and the same time the present task may be 
carried through, and full play given to the faculty 
of pure thought, and that the self-confidence en- 
gendered by a knowledge of each individual thing 
be kept intact, unobtruded yet unconcealed. 

When wilt thou find thy delight in simplicity ? 
When in dignity? When in the knowledge of each 
separate thing, what it is in its essence, what place 
it fills in the Universe, how long it is formed by 
Nature to subsist, what are its component parts, to 
whom it can pertain, and who can bestow and take 
it away ? 

10. A spider prides itself on capturing a fly ; one 
man on catching a hare, another on netting a sprat, 
another on taking wild boars, another bears, another | 
Sarmatians.* Are not these brigands, if thou test 
their principles ? 


2 apva.oroyntws, would mean without due study of Nature. 

3 See Domaszewski, Marcus-Saiile Plates, 62. 102, for 
Marcus ‘‘taking Sarmatians”’; and cp. the story of Alexander 
and the Scythian, Quintus Curtius vii. 8. 


271 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ta’. Ids eis addnra mavra pera Barnet, 
Bewpntucny péOodov KThoat, Kal Sunvendds ™poo- 
exe, Kal ouyyypvacOnte mept TovTO TO Hépos. 
ovdey yap ovTM peyaroppootyns TOLNTLKOV. 
é£eStcato (70 oOpa Kal évvoncas, Ort Ocov 
oveéT@ TavTa TavTa KaTadTrely amovTa é& 
avOporav Sejce, avnxev Orov éavTov SiKato- 
atvn pev eis ta Ud éEavTod évepyovmeva, ev Sé 
Tois adrors cupBaivovar TH TOV drov dice. 
ti & pet tis 7) UTroAHWeTar Tepl adTod 7 paket 
KaT avrob, ovd eis voov BdrXreTtat dbo TovToLs 
apkovpevos ei avtos Sixavomparyet 70 vov 
T paca opevov Kal pore’ TO vv ar ove L0mevov 
eat aoxonrias be mdoas Kar orrovdas apjxe, 
Kal obdey aXXo Bovneran, 7) 7) evdetay Tepatverv bua 
ToD vojov kab evOetar mepaivorre érec at TO dep. 

8’. Tis brovoias xpeta, Tapov cKorely, Th 
det mpaxOjvar; Kap pev owvopas, eumev Os 
dpetaatpen rt TAaUTH x@peiv: éay 5é un cuvopas, 
emréyew Kal cuuBovrors Tois aplorors xpijeOae: 
oN s érepad Twa Tpos TadTa avttBaivn, Tpovévat 
Kata TAS Tapovaas adopuas edoyes wéveas 
€y6evov Tob pawwopevov dixaiou. dpiatov yap 
Kararuyy ave TOUTOU, émel TOL } ye aTOTTMOIS 
amo TovTou éotiv.” 

Dxoraiov Te Kal dpa eveivyTov éorar ral 
pardpov dpa Kal cuveotnkds 6 TO NOYO KATA 
Tay ET opeEvos. 

wy’. TIluvOavecOar éavtod ev0ds e& dtrvov 

/ “é , , ING YER 
yivopevov: “Myre Sioicer cot, av bd dddov 


1 «i Jackson: ef A: dinatompayeiv . . . pidczy P. 
2 Zaorw PA: fora: Men. 


272 





BOOK X 


11. Make thy own a scientific system of enquiry 
into the mutual change of all things, and pay diligent 
heed to this branch of study and exercise thyself in 
it. For nothing is so conducive to greatness of mind. 
| Let a man do this and he divests himself. of his 
body and, realizing that he must almost at once 
relinquish all these things and depart from among 
men, he gives himself up wholly to just dealing in 
all his actions, and to the Universal Nature in all 
that befalls him. What others may say or think 
about him or do against him he does not even let 
enter his mind, being well satisfied with these two 
things—justice in all present acts and contentment 
with his present lot.1_ And he gives up all engrossing 
cares and ambitions, and has no other wish than to 
achieve the straight course through the Law and, by 
achieving it, to be a follower of God. 

12. What need of surmise when it lies with 
thee to decide what should be done, and if thou 
canst see thy course, to take it with a good grace 
and not turn aside; but if thou canst not see it, to 
hold back and take counsel of the best counsellors ; 
and if any other obstacles arise therein, to go 
forward as thy present means shall allow with 
careful deliberation holding to what is clearly 
just? For to sueceed in this is the best thing of 
all, since in fact to fail in this would be the only 
failure. 

Leisurely without being lethargic and cheerful as 
| well as composed shall he be who follows Reason in 
everything. 

13. Ask thyself as soon as thou art roused from 
sleep: Will it make any difference to me tf another does 


1 ix. 6 ete. 


273 





MARCUS AURELIUS 


/ 1 \ él \ rn 4 » > 
yérntar* ta Sixara Kal Kad@s éxyovta;” ov 
Sioicer. =pnte émidedAnoat, St. ovTOL of ev Tots 

\ »” > , A / / 
Tept GdXrwv érraivois Kal Woyos PpvaTTopevor, 
ToLovToL pev err THs KAlvns eiai, ToLodTOL Sé él 
Ths Tparétns, ola b€ movodaw, ota 5é hevyovou, 

e \ , Sg \ / \ 
ola 8€ ditwKovaow, ola Sé€ KXémtoVaLW, ola Se 
apravovow, ov epot cat Toow ara TO TiYwo- 
TaT@ EAUTOV [MEpeL, © yiverar, OTav 06d <Tis>, 
TisTLS, aidws, (adieu, VOpMos, ayabos Saipwv; 


wo. TH wavra didotcn Kal arrorauBavotcn 


dvoe. 6 wWemawdevpévos Kal aidjpov r€éyer* “ Ads: 


0 Oérexs, arroraBe 6 Oérets.” — éyeu SE TOVTO Ov 


KaTabpacvvopevos, aGNAa Treapyav povov Kal 
EWVOOV AUTH. 


/ > 4 > \ \ € 4 rn 
le. ‘Oniyov €oTl TO UrrohevTopevov TOUTO. | 


Sijcov as év dpet. ovdey yap Siadéper, éxel aq 
ade, édv Tus mavraxod @s év Toner Te KOT MO. 
idétwoapr, é ioropnodtod ar oi avO poo avOpwrov 
adn Oivov KaTa puow CavrTa. € ad hépovow, 
GT OKTELVATWO aD. KpéiT TOV yap 7 7) OUT@ Civ.” 
is’. Mnxé@? dros rept Tod, olov twa evar TOV 
aryab ov avdpa <ei>, SvaréyerOar, adda eivar 
TOLOUTOV. 
6. Tod drov aidvos, Kal THs ods ovcias 
cuvexas pavtacia,® cal 6tt TavTa Ta KATA Epos. 
1 Yeynra Lofft ; but cp. viii. 56 for meaning. 
2 < uh> tre (jv would seem to make better sense. 
3 pavracia <%orw> Reiske. 
1 vii. 3; ix. 41. : 
2 iii. 4. ad fin. ; vi. 59; vii. 62; viii. 52, 53; ix. 34. : 
3 vii. 17. 4 cp. Job i. 21. i 
> x, 23. This striking phrase seems from a comparison * 





§ 23 to mean: Count your life here in the city and Court, or. 
274 


BOOK X 


what is just and right? It will make ‘none. Hast 


_ thou forgotten that those who play the wanton! in 
_ineir praise and blame of others, are such as they 
are? in their beds, at their board ; and what are the 
_ things that they do, the things that they avoid or 





I 





pursue, and how they pilfer and plunder, not with 
hands and feet but with the most preci@us part of 
them, whereby a man calls into being at will faith, 
modesty, truth, law, and a good ‘ genius’ ?® 

14. Says the well-schooled and humble heart to 
Nature that gives and takes back all we have; Give 


| what thou nilt, take back what thou nilt.* But he 


says it without any bravado of fortitude, in simple 
obedience and good will to her. 

15. Thou has but a short time left to live. Live 
as on a mountain®; for whether it be here or there, 
matters not provided that, wherever a man live, he 
live as a citizen of the World-City.6 Let men look 
upon thee, cite thee, as a man in very deed that 
lives according to Nature. If they cannot bear 
with thee, let them slay thee. For it were better 
so than to live their life. 

16. Put an end once for all to this discussion of 
what a good man should be, and be one.’ 

17. Continually ‘picture to thyself Time as a whole, 
and Substance as a whole, and every individual 


maybe, camp, as no whit worse than life in the free and 
health-giving air of a mountain-top with all its serenity and 
leisure for .study and contemplation. It rests with you to 
make your ‘‘ little plot within you” what you please. But, 
taken alone, ‘‘ Live as on a mountain” might mean ‘‘ Live in 
the open light of day under the eyes of God and men ina 
purer atmosphere above the pettinesses of the world.” 
iv. 3, § 2. 
7 Dio (71. 34, § 5) says of Marcus és aAndds ayabds avhp Fr. 


275 
Tr 2 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


@S pev 7 pos ovolav KeyxXpapiss @s 6€ mpos 
x povov Tpumdvou mepLaT pon. 
un. Kis é Exaorov TOV UmroKerpevov épiotavTa 
émivoeiy avTo On Stadvopevov Kal év petaBorH 
Kal olov one 7 oKxeddcer ywvopevoy i) KabdoTe 
&xaotov wépuKev WoTrep OvnjcKery. 
U "4 > DI / A > 4 
0’. Oloi ciow écBiovtes, xabevdovtes, dyev- 
OVvTES, amoTatoovTes, Ta adda. eita olot ay 6po- 
vopovpevort * Kal yaupovpevot 7) Xareraivovres 
Kat €& 0 dmEpoxiis emuTHTTOVTES. 7 po odyoU dé 
€Sovdevov Toco, Kal dL ola, Kal pet OdLyov év_ 
TOLOUTOLS ETOVTAL. 
é / e / a / e 4 ° 
K. Luphépe Exdot@, 6 déper ExdoT@ 7 
Tov brwv vows: Kal TOTE cuméper, STE exeivy 
péper. . 
/ \ v 
Ka. “Epé bev OuBpov yaia: ea b¢ 6 0 ceuvos ) 
> c 
aiOrp.” épa $88 0 KOo [os Trovija at, Oo ap PERM | 
Ee 
yiveo Bau. eye | ovv TO Koo Ue, Oru * ‘col cuvepo. 
pants & ottw KaKeivo réyetat, Sti “ hired TOVTO 
yiveoOat” ; . 
KB. “Hrow évtad0a Sys cal 45 etOixas, tp 
” e 4 \ an A x > / 
eo imayes Kal Toro nO eres, i aTrobuna Kus 
Kal amehevtoupyng as: Tapa Sé Tadta ovdév. 
ovKouv evOvpet. 
, ¥ >\ , e a_@ 
ky. “Evapyés éotm del 70, bt + ToLovTO 
éxetvot” 06 aypos éott: Kal Tas Tata éotl TAdT 
évOdde Tots év dxpw TO Sper, 7) eri TOD aiytanod, 









1 avdpovotuevor can hardly be right, but dvdpoyuvotpuer 
which at once occurs to one is soon seen to be out 
keeping with the other words in the passage: &Bpuvduer 
Reiske. 

2 éxeivos Reiske: todto éxeivo Cor.: raid éxelyw Richards. 


276 





BOOK X 


thing, in respect of substance, as but a fig-seed and, 
in respect to time, as but a twist of the drill. 
18. Regarding attentively every existing thing 
reflect that it is already disintegrating and changing, 
and as it were in a’ state of decomposition and 
dispersion, or that everything is by nature made but 
to die. 
19. What are they like when eating, sleeping, 
coupling, evacuating, and the rest! What again when 
lording it over others, when puffed up with pride, 
when filled with resentment or rebuking others from 
a loftier plane! Yet but a moment ago they were 
lackeying how many and for what ends, and anon 
will be at their old trade.! 
20. What the Universal Nature brings to every 
thing is for the benefit of that thing, and for its 
benefit then when she brings it.? 
21. The earth is in love mith showers and the majestic sky 
is in love.2 And the Universe is in love with making 
whatever has to be. To the Universe I say: Together 
mith thee I will be im love. Is it not a way we have 
of speaking, to say, T'his or that loves to be so? 
22. Either thy life is here and thou art inured to 
it; or thou goest elsewhere and this with thine own 
will; or thou diest and hast served out thy service. 
There is no other alternative. Take heart then. 
23. Never lose sight of the fact that a man’s 
‘freehold ’4 is such as I told thee, and how all the 
conditions are the same here as on the top of a 
1 Or, taking Gataker’s emendation (émolas), in what plight 
will they be! Sive23. 

® Kur. Frag. 890. After ceuvds Kur. has otpavds aAnpod- 
Mevos *OuBpov weoeiy eis yatay ’Appodirns tao. cp. Aesch. 
Dan. aes hy imitated by Shelley in his Love’s Philosophy. 

v. 3, § 4. 


277 








MARCUS AURELIUS 


# Omov Oérers. avTiKpus yap ebpyoers Ta TOD 
II\dtevos: “ =nxov év Sper,” dyoi, “ weptBarro- 
pevos,” Kal} TBSarrov Aarnxipata.t 

KO. Té éort pou TO HyewoveKov pov; Kal moiov 
TL €y@ avTo Tous viv; Kal Tpos Th TOTE AUTO 
vov XpOmar; pare Kevov vod eae; pHte amohuTov | 
Kab ameoT ag LEVvOV Kowevias ; pyre T POO TETHKOS 
kal avaKkexpapévov TO capKioiw, WaTE TOUT@ 
owt perred ar; 

ke. “O Tov _kUptov pevyor Spamérns: KUpLOS 
dé 0 vO_OS Kal o Tapavopav Spamerns. GNX 
Kal 0 AvTrOUpEvos n opyebopevos n poBovpevos 

v? Bovnerat TL ryeryoveva H yiverOar 4) yevér Oat | 
TOV vmod Tod ra mavTa SvotcodvTos TETAYMEVOV, 
ds éoTe vojL0s vemer, boa éxdor@ émeBadnret. O° 
apa poBovpevos 4 Avrovpevos 7 bpyfpuevos 
Bscosrdvase 

Ks". 2réppa els. pajytpav adels amex@pnce 
Kal AowTrov AAAN aiTia maparaBotoa épyaveray 
Kal aToTeNEt Bpédos, é& olov olov: maXwv Tpopiy 
dua apvyyos adifce Kal ovmov addy aitia 
Ta araBodca aicOnow Kal oppny wal TO OAOV 
Sony Kal popny Kab adda dca Kal ola motes 
tavta ow [Ta] év TovavTn éyxadter yiwopeva 










1 «al, perhaps cane? : BddAAwv Cor.: BddAAew A: BddrAew Pz 
BaAnxhpara Stich.: BAhxmara A. 2 ob Nauck: @ PA. 





1 iv. 3 ad init. ; x. 15. 
2 Theaet. 174 D: "Aypoikov kal dmatdevrov amd aoxoAlas ovde 
HTTov TAY voMewy TY ToOLODTOV avaryKaioy yevérOat onndy ev pet 
Td rTeixos meptBeBAnuevoy. It is not easy to see the appli 


in the midst of his royal city is no better off, nee facto, than 
278 





BOOK X 


mountain! or on the sea-shore or wherever thou 
pleasest. Quite apposite shalt thou find to be the 
words of Plato*: Compassed about (by the city wall 
as) by a sheep-fold on the mountain, and milking 
flocks. 

24, What is my ruling Reason and what am I 
making of it now? To what use do I now put it? 
Is it devoid of intelligence? Is it divorced and — 
severed from neighbourliness? Does it so coalesce 
and blend with the flesh as to be swayed by it? 

25. He that flies from his master is a runaway. 
But the Law is our master,’ and he that transgresses 
the Law is a runaway. Now he also, that is moved 
by grief or wrath or fear, is fain that something 
should not have happened or be happening or happen 
in the future of what has been ordained by that 
which controls the whole Universe, that is by the 
Law laying down all that falls to a man’s lot. He 
then is a runaway who is moved by fear, grief, or 
wrath. 

26. A man passes seed into a womb and goes his 
way, and anon another cause takes it in hand and 
works upon it and perfects a babe—what a con- 
summation from what a beginning!* Again he® 
passes food down the throat, and anon another cause 
taking up the work creates sensation and impulse 
and in fine, life and strength and other things how 
many and how mysterious! Muse then on these 


the shepherd in his mountain fold. It is the little ‘ plot 
within him,” his ruling Reason that makes the difference. 
The use of év dpe twice in this section appears to have a 
reference to its use in § 15. 3 ii. 16 ad jin. 

4 cp. the remarkable parallel in Justin, Aol. i. 19. 

5 There is no subject expressed. It is possible to take the 
child as the subject, 


279 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


° con \ 
Gewpeiv kal thv Sivauw ottws opav, os Kal THY 
an ¢ Lal n 
Bpi8ovcav Kal thv avwdeph opdpev, ovyl Tots 
opOarpois, AA’ ovy HTToOv évapyas. 
KC’. Yvvey@s émivoeiv, THs TavtTa ToLadrTa, 
omoia viv yivetat, Kal mpocbev éyiveto: Kal 
rn \ 
émivoeivy yevnooueva. Kat dra Spdwata Kal 
oKnvas opoedets, boa ex Teipas THS os 7} THS 
mpeaButépas iotopias éyvws, mpd oupatov 
/, > \ e- ¢ fel \ > \ 
tiWecOat, olov avrnv 6rAnv ‘“Adpiavod Kai addnv 
isd > / \ > \ ef: , 
dAnv -2Avt@vivov Kal avrAny 6drnv Piri Tov, 
> / 4 / X\ > a nr 
AreEdvdpou, Kpoicou: travra yap éxeiva towadTa 
7, povov ov érépav. 
/ / / \ CW Ss ¢ lal A 
Kn. Wavtdfov travta tov éh w@tiwiovv AvTrOv- 
pevov 7) SvcapecTodytTa Guotov TO Ovopév@ yotp- 
vdieo Kal amoNaxTifovtse Kal Kexpayort Gpmovov Kal 
6 oipe@lov émli Tod KALWiOiov povos cLwTA THY 
évoeow uav Kal Ste povm TO AoyiK@e Cow 
dé50Tat TO éExovoiws EmecOat Tois yivopevois* TO 
5é rec bas Widov Taow avayKaiov. 
y \ , >4? ei. ka tal 
KO’. Kara pépos éf éxdotov, av motels, 
e 
epiotdvev épwta ceavTov, “ Ki o Odvatos Sevvov 
Sia TO TovTOV oTépecOar.” 
7 
x. “Otay mpooxortys émi twos dpaptia, 
evOvs petaBas émiroyifou, Ti Tapouovoy dpapTav- 
els" olov apyipiov ayabov eivat Kpivav <i> 
\ ‘ 
Thv ndovav 7 TO So€dpiov Kal Kat’ eidos. 





1 vii. 49. 2 viii. 25, 31. 

3 cp. Sen. Hp. 107: ducunt volentem fata nolentem trahunt ; 
de Vit. Beat. 15; Cleanthes, Hymn to Zeus: as ebouat y' 
doxvos: iv d& un O€Aw Kakds yevduevos, ovdev HrTov Eomat. 


4 vii. 26; xi. 18, § 4. 


5 Marcus had a horror of avarice; cp. Vule. Gallic. Vit. 


280 














BOOK X 


things that are done in such secrecy, and detect the 
efficient force, just as we detect the descensive and 
the ascensive none the less clearly that it is not with 
our eyes. 

27. Bear in mind continually how all such things 
as now exist existed also before our day! and, be 
assured, will exist after us. Set before thine eyes 
whole dramas and their settings, one like another, 
all that thine own experience has shewn thee or thou 
hast learned from past history, for instance the entire 
court of Hadrianus,? the entire court of Antoninus, 
the entire court of Philip, of Alexander, of Croesus. 
For all those scenes were such as we see now, only 
the performers being different. 

28. Picture to thyself every one that is grieved at 
any occurrence whatever or dissatisfied, as being like 
the pig which struggles and screams when sacrificed ; 
like it too him who, alone upon his bed, bewails in 
silence the fetters of our fate; and that to the 
rational creature alone has it been granted to submit 
willingly to what happens, mere submission being 
imperative on all.® 

29. In every act of thine pause at each step and 
ask thyself: Is death to be dreaded for the loss of this ? 

30. Does another’s wrong-doing shock thee ? 
Turn incontinently to thyself and bethink thee what 
analogous wrong-doing there is of thine own,‘ such 
as deeming money to be a good® or pleasure® or a 
little cheap fame?’ and the like. For by marking 
Avid. Cass. viii. 5: in imperatore avaritiam acerbissimum esse 
malum. Yet he was accused of it and repudiated the charge 
(Capit. xxix. 5); and he is also exculpated by Dio (71. 32, 
§ 3), and in the Oxyrr. Papyri (i. p. 62) we find an Kg gyptian 
official expressly calling him &ptAdpryupos. 

8 See on v. 5. 7 See on iv. 19, 

281 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


4 \ > / 7 f > / A 
TOUT@® yap EémiBad\rAwWY TaYews ETLANONH TIS 
opyis supmimrovtos Tob, Ste Bidlera: ti yap 

la Bd > & ” > lol \ 
Tomoe; 7}, e Stvaca, apere avTod TO PBuat- 
Opevov. 

ra’. Latipova idsov Ywxpatixoy pavratov 
a > s x € / \ > / ide 
H EKvroynv 4) Tpéva, xai Evdpatny idov 
Evtuyiova 7) Yirovavov pavtavov, Kal ’Adki- 
fpova Tporasopopov gavrafov, Kal Xevjpov! 
idov Kpitwva 7) Bevodavta davtavov, Kal eis 
éavtov amiov tov Katodpov twa davragou, 
Kal ép Exdotou TO avddoyov. eita cUpT poo TINT- 

6 ad fal e 
étw cou: “Ilod otv éxeivor;” ovSapod 4 oTrovdn. 
oUTas yap cuvex@s Jedon Ta avOpeTiva KaTrVOY 
Kal TO pndév' wadioTa éav cuppvnpovetons, Tt 
To amak petaBarov ovxéts éotar ev TO atreipp 
xpove. Ti odv® évteivn; ti 8 odK apKel cor TO 
Bpaxy TovTO Koopiws SiaTrepaca; 
Olav trAnv kai brdbeow devyets; Ti yap éott 
TavTa TavTAa dAXO TARY yuuvaopaTa AOYoU éwp- 
lal / an 
axoTos axpiB@s Kal ducioroyws Ta év TO Bio; 
péve ov, mex pe CEotKeL@ons TavT@ Kal TAUTA, WS 
e , lal 
6 é€ppwpuévos otouayos Tavta éEouKeloi, @S TO 
\ rn a A / / > > a \ 
Naputpov Tip, 6 Te dv Barys, hroya €E avtov Kat 
avynv Trotee. 

~B’. Mydevi éEéctw eimeivy adnOevovts tepi 

~ a > id a xX > > ’ > \ 
cov, 6Tt ovY amrods 7) OTL OvK ayabos* adda 

1 Leopold transposed Sevijpor (see i. 14) and Zevoparra. 

2 ov (ri A) oy P: ev tim PA: évretvy Cor. (cp. ix. 28). 





1 vii. 63. 
2 Xenophon and Crito are well known. Severus was prob- 
ably the father of Marcus’ son-in-law (i. 14). Euphrates 


282 


Siliiisnatliveteerendemmemeraneetae dain oe 











BOOK X 


this thou wilt quickly forget thy wrath, with this 
reflection too to aid thee, that a man is under 
constraint !; for what should he do? Or, if thou art 
able, remove the constraint. 

31. Let a glance at Satyron call up the image of 
Socraticus or Eutyches or Hymen, and a glance at 
Euphrates the image of Eutychion or Silvanus, and a 
glance at Alciphron Tropaeophorus, and at Severus 
Xenophon or Crito.2 Let a glance at thyself bring to 
mind one of the Caesars, and so by analogy in every 
case. Then let the thought strike thee: Where are 
they now? Nowhere,* or none can say where. For 
thus shalt thou habitually look upon human things 
as mere smoke‘ and as naught; and more than ever 
so, if thou bethink thee that what has once 
changed will exist no more throughout eternity. 
Why strive then and strain®? Why not be content 
to pass this thy short span of life in becoming 
fashion? » 

What material, what a field for thy work dost 
thou forgo! For what are all these things but objects 
for the exercise of a reason that hath surveyed with 
accuracy and due inquiry into its nature the whole 
sphere of life? Continue then until thou hast 
assimilated these truths also to thyself, as the vigorous 
digestion assimilates every food, or the blazing fire 
converts into warmth and radiance whatever is cast 
into it.6 ; 

32. Give no one the right to say of thee with 
truth that thou art not a sincere, that thou art not a 
was the philosopher friend of Pliny and Hadrian. Nothing 
certain is known of the others. 3 vii. 58. 

4 xii. 33 and verses at end of ms. A. See Introd. p. 1. 


> The ms. reading what then (or, thou then) in what? is 
unintelligible. © ive. 


283 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


pevdécbw, 6 darts TOUTO@Y Tt mepl ood Umohmperat. 

Tav 5€ TovTO él col. tis yap 0 0 KwAUo@V aryaov 

elvai oe Kal atrAOdY; oD povoy Kpivoy pnKéte Chr, 

et p42) TOLOUTOS gon. OvdE yap aiped AOdyos pH 
an ” 

TOLOUTOV OVTa. 

Ay’. Ti éote To éml ravtTys THs DAs Svvapevov 
KaTa TO Uy“eoTaToY TpaxXOnvar H pnOjvar ; 6 Te 
yap av todto 7, éEeatw avto mpatas 7) eimreiv: 
Kal pn mpopacifov ws KwAUVOpEVOS. 

Ov rpotepov Tatvan otévar, Tply i) TODTO Tans, 
bt olov éatt Tois HOuTAaVOdaLY % TpUPH, TOLODTO 
oo. TO éml THs VroBarnropévns Kat UToTUTTOvENS 
iAns woeiy Ta oiKela TH TOD avOpwrrov KaTacKevT}’ 
amoxavow yap Set trodkapBavew trav, 6 e€eott 
KaTa Thy idiav piow évepyeiv. travtayod 8é 
éfeoTe. 

Td pev odv Kvrivdp@ od tavtaxod didotar 
péperbar TH (Olay Kivnow ovde TO bdare ovee 
mupt ov6€é Tots adnous, doa vTo piceas 7} ) Wuxis 
Gdoyou Siokeitau Ta Y4p Sveipryovta Kal éviaTa- 
peva TOA. vods 5é Kal AOYos Sua TavTOs TOD 
QVTLTLITTOVTOS OUTS mopever Oa dvvarat, @s 
mepuKe Kal @s Oénet. Tavrqy THY pyor@vny 
m™po Omparov TU Epevos, cal’ iy évexOyoerat 0 
AOyos Oia TavToV, a TIP ave, a NOs KaTw, ws 
Kduv6pos KaTa mpavoos, penne pdev emrubijres" 
Ta yap Nowra éyKoupara HTOL TOD coparixod 
éore Tob vexpod ) xepis Umodgyrews Kal THs 
avtTod Tod AOyou évdoc~ews Ov Opaver ovdEe Trove? 





1 viii. 32. 
2-v. 29; x. 8,§ 2. 
284 











BOOK X 


good man, but let anyone that shall form any such an 
idea of thee be as one that maketh a lie. All this 
rests with thee. For who is there to hinder thee 
from being good and sincere!? Resolve then to 
live no longer if thou be not such.? For neither 
doth Reason in that case insist that thou shouldest. 

33. Taking our ‘material’ into account, what can 
be said or done in the soundest way? Be it what it 
may, it rests with thee to do or say it. And let 
us have no pretence that thou art being hindered. 

Never shalt thou cease murmuring until it be so 
with thee that the utilizing, in a manner consistent 
with the constitution of man, of the material pre- 
sented to thee and cast in thy way shall be to thee 
what indulgence is to the sensual. For everything 
must be accounted enjoyment that it is in a man’s 
power to put into practice in accordance with his 
own nature ; and it is everywhere in his power. 

A cylinder we know has no power given it of 
individual motion everywhere, nor has fire or water 
or any other thing controlled by Nature or by 
an irrational soul. For the interposing and impeding 
obstacles are many. But Intelligence and Reason 
make their way through every impediment just as 
their nature or their will prompts them. Setting 
before thine eyes this ease wherewith the Reason 
can force its way through every obstacle, as fire 
upwards, as a stone downwards, as a cylinder down a 
slope,* look for nothing beyond. For other hindrances 
either concern that veritable corpse, the body,‘ or, 
apart from imagination and the surrender of Reason 
herself, cannot crush us or work any harm at all.° 


3 Aul. Gell. vi. 2, § 11 (from Chrysippus). 
4 iv. Al. Siva: 


285 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


\ 2»o> ¢ nm BJ / \ e / De® 
Kakov ovd oTLody: émel Tor Kal 6 TdcxYw@V avTo 
Kakos av evOds éyiveto. 

> \ n a BA 4 

Ent yotv tay adN\ov KaTacKevacpaToY 
TdavTwVv, 6 Tt av KaKOY TLL aUTOY cULBh, Tapa 
TOUTO xElpov yiveTat ad’TO TO Taaxov: éevTadOa Sé, 
ei Sef eitreiv, kal Kxpeitr@v yiverar 6 avOpwTos 
Kal émaiweT@tepos, Ops xpwpevos Tois mpoo- 
mimtovow. Shows S€ péuvnoo, Ste Tov piace 

/ / 
monitnv ovdev BraTTEL, 6 wodAW ov BraTTEL, 
ovdé ye modu BrarTEL, 5 vopov ov BrdTTE’ 
TovT@y O€ TOY KadovpevaV aKAnpHnuaT@V ovdév 

/ / a / / > / ” 
Brame: vopov. 5 Toivuy vowov od Braet, OvTE 
TONY OUTE TOALTHY. 

/ tal / e X al > a 

ro’. Te Sednry perp bid TOV adn eov Soypdroy 
> a \ > 
apkel kal TO Bpayvtatov Kal év péow Keipevorv 
> ¢ / > / \ > , Ld 
eis UTOmynow aduTias Kal adoBias. olor 

“ @DirXa Ta wey T divepos xapadis xéet, 
as avdpav yeven.’ 

gurrapia S€ Kal Ta Texvia cov: gudArdpia Se 
kal Tav’ta ta émiBod@vta aktoTictws Kal érev- 
dnpovvta 1) éx Tov évayTiov KaTapopeEva 1) oVXF 
wéyovta kal yrevdfovta: pudrdpia Sé opoiws Kal 
Ta SiadeEdmeva Thy boTEpodnuiav. TavTa yap 

y , 
TOUTS: “apos émuyiyvetas Opn” 
elta aveuwos KataBéBAnkev’ ere brn érepa 
avtl tovtTmy give. TO Sé ddLyoXpoVLoY KoLWoV 
macw? a\rX\a ov Tata, w aidvia écopeva, 





1 vii. 58. 2 x. 6. 3 Hom. Jf. vi. 147. 
286 


BOOK X 


Else indeed would their victim at once become 
bad. 

In fact in the case of all other organisms, if any 
evil happen to any of them, the victim itself becomes 
the worse for it. But a man so circumstanced 
becomes, if I may so say, better and more praise- 
worthy by putting such contingencies to a right use.! 
In fine, remember that nothing that harms not the 
city can harm him whom Nature has made a citizen? ; 
nor yet does that harm a city which harms not law. 
But not one of the so-called mischances harms law. 
What does not harm law, then, does no harm to 
citizen or city. 

34. Even an obvious and quite brief aphorism can 
serve to warn him that is bitten with the true 
doctrines against giving way to grief and fear ; as for 
instance, 


Such are the races of men as the leaves that the wind 
scatters earthwards.® 


And thy children too are little leaves. Leaves also 
they who make an outcry as if they ought to be 
listened to, and scatter their praises or, contrariwise, 
their curses, or blame and scoff in secret. Leaves 
too they that are to hand down our after-fame. 
For all these things 


Burgeon again with the season of spring * ; 


anon the wind hath cast them down,®> and the 
forest puts forth others in their stead. Trans- 
itoriness is the common lot of all things, yet there is 
none of these that thou huntest not after or shunnest, 


4 Ibid. 5 cp. Psalm 103. 16. 
287 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


pevryers kal Sixers. pure pov Kal KaTapicers* 
Tov O€ efeveryovta oe 6n aAXOS pnvicer. 

re’. Tov bylaivovra opOarpov TavTa opay 
def Ta dpara Kal fn) Aéyew, § ‘Ta xropa ra.” 
TOUTO yap opOarpuddvros éoTt. Kal THY byiatv- 
ovcay cuconyy Kat dodpnow eis mayra bei Ta 
aKxovora Kal oo ppavra éroujeny elva. Kal Tov 
byvaivovra, Toma ov T pos mavra TH Tpopipa 
OMoLws exe, @s puAnY T pos mavra, boa arérovea 
KATES KEVAT TAL. Kal Toivur THD dyvaivovaay 
dudvovay mpos Tavta del Ta ovpBatvovra érotuny 
elvau’ ) 06 héyouoa, «Ta Texvia calicbe,” 
Kal “ardvres, & te av mpage, emawveitaray, 
opbarpos éoTe Ta xNwpa Entav % ddovTes Ta 
aTana. 

AS. Ovdseis éoTw oUT@S EvTTOTMOS, @ aro- 
OvynoKovtt ov mapertnEovrat TLVES dorratopevor TO 
cup PBaivoy Kakov. omovdaios Kal copes Hv: [wn] 
TO Tavictatov éota Tis 0 Kal” avToY Aéyor" 
= “Avarrvevoopéy Tore aro TOUTOU TOU mavdaryoryoo. 
Xarerros pev ovdevt Ov 7, adda joPavouny, 
ore HOUXD KaTaywodKel Ov.” tabTa wey obv 
emt Tob omoudaiou. ed’ hav dé Toca dANa éort, 
dv & Todds O dmaddaxtiay jpav. todro obv 
évvonoets atroOvncKewv Kal evKorwTEporv éFeXeVoN 
oy Lopevos: éx TOLOUTOU Biov aTrépx oma, év o 
avtol oi Kowewvol, bTép ov Ta TocavTa nywvicduny, 
vEdpny, éppovtica, avrol éxetvou eBédovat pe 
Umayev adAAnV TLVa TUXOY eK TOVTOV pacTeVHY 





1 iv. 48. 
2 i. 8; vii. 41; viii. 49; ix. 40; xi. 34. Marcus was in- 
tensely fond of his children. Galen describes (xiv. 3, Kiihn) 


288 





BOOK X 


as though it were everlasting. A little while and 
thou shalt close thine eyes; aye, and for him that 
bore thee to the grave shall another presently raise 
the dirge.! 

35. The sound eye should see all there is to He 
seen, but should not say: / want what is green only. 
For that is characteristic of a disordered eye. And 
the sound hearing and smell should be equipped for 
all that is to be heard or smelled. And the sound 
digestion should act towards all nutriment as a mill 
towards the grist which it was formed to grind. So 
should the sound mind be ready for all that befalls. 
But the mind that says: Let my children be safe!* Let 
all applaud my every act! is but as an eye that looks 
for green things or as teeth that look for soft things. 

36. There is no one so fortunate as not to have 
one or two standing by his death-bed who will 
welcome the evil which is befalling him. Say he 
was a worthy man and a wise; will there not be 
some one at the very end to say in his heart, We 
can breathe again at last, freed from this schoolmaster,’ 
not that he was hard on any of us, but I was all 
along conscious that he tacitly condemns us? So much 
for the worthy, but in our own case how many 
other reasons can be found for which hundreds 
would be only too glad to be quit of us! Think 
then upon this when dying, and thy passing from 
life will be easier if thou reason thus: I am leaving 
a life in which even my intimates for whom I have 
so greatly toiled, prayed, and thought,‘ aye even 
they wish me gone, expecting belike to gain thereby 


his anxiety about Commodus; cp. also Fronto, ad Cues. 
av, 12. ® ep. Vopiscus, Vit. Aureliani, 37, §3; Sen. Hp. 11. 
4 Herodian, i. 4, § 3. 


289 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


enmivovres. ti av ody Tis avtéyoito THs évTadOa 
paKporépas diatprBijs; 

D) pévTou Sia TovTo éhatTov evpmernys avrois 
amr.Ot, ara TO icov &0os Siac od fev piros Kah 
evVvous Kat ihews: Kal pn Tad ws ATOTT@[EVOS, 
aNr’ domep éml TOU evOavarobytos evKod@s TO 
Puxapiov aro TOU TOLATOS éFevNel tar, TovavTnv 
Kal THY amd TOvT@Y aToxwpyaty Set yevéoOac 
Kal 4p TovTols » pias <ce> cuvipbe Kal 
oUvEK LEY. arra vov Starvet. dvadvopar ws 
amo oixelov pév, ov pay avOedxopevos, arn 
aBidotes: év yap Kal TodTO TOV Kata duct. 

NO. "EOicov én mavtos, @s oldv te, Tod 
Tpaccomevov umd Twos émilntetvy Kara cavTov" 
“ Odtos TobTO él Th dvaéper;” dpyov S€ amo 
cavTov, Kal cavTov mpa@rov é&ér ale. 

Aa. Méxvy0, bre TO vevpoo rac Toby éoruy 
éxeivo TO évoov é eyeexpuppévov" éxeivo pntopeta,t } 
éxetvo Con, éxeivo, ei Set eitrety, avOpwrros. 
pndérorte cvprrepipavtavou TO TepiKelwevov ayyel- 
des Kal 7a. opyavia tabra Ta TepiTeTAac Eva. 
buota yap éote TKETAPVO, povov Siadépovra, 
abort T poo gus éorw. erred. Tou ov aNd ov TL 
TOUToV dpehos ear TOV popiwv Xepis Tis 
Kwovens Kal ioxovons avTa aitias } THS KepKidos 
Th Upartpia, Kal Tod Kahdpou T® ypahovtt, Kal 
TOU MATTLYLOU TO HVLOXO.- 


1 Snropta A. Perhaps isropla. 





290 








BOOK X 


some further ease.! Why then should anyone cling 
to a longer sojourn here ? 

Howbeit go away with no less~kindliness towards 
them pn this account, but maintaining thy true char- 
acteristics be friendly and goodnatured and gracious ; 
nor again as though wrenched apart, but rather 
should thy withdrawal from them be as that gentle 
slipping away of soul from body which we see when 
a man makes a peaceful end. For it was Nature 
that knit and kneaded thee with them, and now she 
parts the tie. I am parted from kinsfolk, not 
dragged forcibly away, but unresistingly. For this 
severance too is a process of Nature.? 

37. In every act of another habituate thyself as 
far as may be to put to thyself the question: What 
end has the man in view ?* But begin with thyself, 
cross-examine thyself first. ° 

38. Bear in mind that what pulls the strings is 
that Hidden Thing within us: that makes our 
speech, that our life, that, one may say, makes the 
man. Never in thy mental picture of it include the 
vessel that overlies it* nor these organs that are 
appurtenances thereof. They are like the workman’s 
adze, only differing from it in being naturally 
attached to the body. Since indeed, severed from 
the Cause that bids them move and bids them stay, 
these parts are as useless as is the shuttle of the 
weaver, the pen of the writer, and the whip of the 
charioteer. 


1 Ts he thinking of Commodus ? 2 xe Ds 
3 0-16. 4 ili. 3 ad fin.; xii. 1. 


291 


BIBAION IA 


a’. Ta idva THs oyeeis Wuxiis* éavTiy opa, 
éavriyy SrapO poi, Eat ny, omotay dy Bovrnrat, 
Toul, TOV KapTrov ov péper avn Kaprrobrat 
—Tovs yap TOY putav KapTovs Kal TO ayddoyov 
érl Tov Soar addow KaprobvTat,—rob idtou 
Téhous Tuyxavel, étrov ay 70 Tou Biov mépas 
émloTh. ovx’ domep emt OpXnTE@s Kal droxpia- 
ews, Kal TOY TOLOUTY, aTeds yiverat y} 6An 
Tpakts, € édy Te éyko wn: adr éml TAVTOS pépous, 
Kal mov ay cararnpon, Tijpes Kal dmpoa dees 
Eau 70 _Tporebev Tol, wate eiteV, “ éyw 
anéxo Ta €ud.” 

“Ere 6é TMEpLepXeTaL TOV dXov Koo Mov, Kal TO 
Trepl avrov- KEvOV, Kal TO TX HPA. avtod, Kal els 
THY aTretpiay Tov ai@vos exTeiveTal, Kal THD 
mepvooeeiyy Tantyyevertav TOV Ghov epmrepthap- 
Baver kat Tepwoel, Kal ewpel bTe ovder vew- 
TEpov dpovrar ol pel? pas aude TEpLT TOT EpOV 
elOov oi po pay: anrra _TPOTOD | Twa O Tecoapa- 
KOVTOUTNS, éav voov orroc ovoby éxyn, mara 
Ta yeyovota Kal Ta éoopmeva éEwpaxe KaTa TO 





* vi. 83 viii. 35. cp. Epict. i. 17, § 1. 
2 cp. Epict. i. 19, § 11: yéyove ab (Gov Sore abrov evexa, 
mdvTa, ToLety. 3 xii. 36. 


292 





BOOK XI 


1. Tue properties of the Rational Soul are these: 
it sees itself, dissects itself, moulds itself to its own 
will,! itself reaps its own fruits ?—whereas the fruits 
of the vegetable kingdom and the corresponding 
produce of animals are reaped by others,—it wins 
to its own goal wherever the bounds of life be set. 
In dancing and acting and such-like arts, if any 
break occurs, the whole action is rendered imperfect ; 
but the rational soul in every part and wheresoever 
taken ® shews the work set before it fulfilled and all- 
sufficient for itself, so that it can say: / have to the 
full what is my own. 

More than this, it goeth about the whole Universe 
and the void surrounding it and traces its plan, and 
stretches forth into the infinitude of Time, and 
comprehends the cyclical Regeneration ‘ of all things, 
and takes stock of it, and discerns that our children 
will see nothing fresh,> just as our fathers too never 
saw anything more than we.® So that in a manner 
the man of forty years, if he have a grain of sense, 
in view of this sameness has seen all that has been 


Bn) a yee en AN 5 vi. 37; vii. 1 etc. 

5 cp, Lucr. ii. 978: eadem sunt omnia semper; Florio’s 
Montaigne, i. 19: ‘‘If you have lived one day you have seene 
all.” 


293 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


omoedés. idiov 5€ AoyiHs ~uyis Kal TO pireiv 
Tovs wAnolov Kal adjOaa Kal aidas xal TO 
pnodev éavTHs mpotiav, Strep idiov Kai vopmov. 
ef vy > »O\ / , > \ \ , 
ovTws ap ovdev SinveyKe Oyos OpOOs Kai NOyos 
dixavoovvns. 

> 8h > a \ 1 Io \ 

B. ?OQidhs emiteptrods Kai opyjcews Kai 
mayKpatiov Katabpovnces, édav THY pev eupedh 
goviyy Katapepions eis Exactov tav hOdyyar, 

\ 2 / Age TE? s ¢ a” 
Kai Ka éva mvOn ceavTov, Ei TovTou HTTwY él. 
Siatparnon yap: émi dé OpXnrEws 70 avddoyov 
Townoas Ka’ éxdo ry Kiynow 4) oxXéow" To 8 
avtTo Kal émi Tov Tayxpatiov. Oras ody, Ywpls 
apeThs Kal Tov am’ apeTis, wéuvnoo él Ta KaTa 
pépos tpéxew Kal tH Siaipécer avTov eis 
Kcatadpovnow iévat: TO © avto Kal éri Tov Biov 
6Xov petadep €. 

y. Ola éoriv y yux7 a) Eroupos, éav On 
amronvO vat dén Tob TOMATOS Kal 7 HTOL oBeoOhvat 
7 oxedacOhvat 7] TUppElvat. To 6é Eroupov 
TOUTO, va aro iduKAs Kpisews EpXNT aL, pa) KATA 
ida maparagey, [@s of Xproriavoi,)" arra 
Aedoyiopévws, Kal geuvas, Kal W@aTE Kal AdAXoV 
Teal, ATPAYOSas. 

/ / / an > 6 > /- 

&. Teroinkd tt cowovixds; ovKodv mpédnmat. 
ToUTO iva ael TpoxXELpovy aTravTa, Kal pndapod 
wavov. 

é. Tis cou » téyvn; “’ Ayabov eivat.” todto bé 

1 


as of Xpotiavoi: ungrammatical aud pretty certainly a 
gloss. See p. 381 ff. 


1 §t. Mark viii. 36. 
? A rather brutal combination of boxing and wrestling. 
3 viii. 36. 


294 








BOOK XI 


and shall be. Again a property of the Rational 
Soul is the love of our neighbour, and truthfulness, 
and modesty, and to prize nothing above itself !— 
a characteristic also of Law. In this way then the 
Reason that is right reason and the Reason that is 
justice are one. 

2. Thou wilt think but meanly of charming songs 
and dances and the pancratium,’ if thou analyze 
the melodious utterance into its several notes and in 
the case of each ask thyself: Has this the mastery 
over me? For thou wilt recoil from such a con- 
fession.2 So too with the dance, if thou do the like 
for each movement and posture. The same holds 
good of the pancratium. In fine, virtue and its 
sphere of action excepted, remember to turn to the 
component parts, and by analyzing them come to 
despise them. Bring the same practice to bear on 
the whole of life also. 

3. What a soul is that which is ready to be 
released from the body at any requisite moment, 
and .be quenched * or dissipated or hold together ! 
But the readiness must spring from a man’s inner 
judgment, and not be the result of mere opposition 
[as is the case with the Christians].° It must be 
associated with deliberation and dignity and, if 
others too are to be convinced, with nothing 
like stage-heroics. 

4. Have I done some social act? Well, I am 
amply rewarded.’ Keep this truth ever ready to 
turn to, and in no wise slacken thine efforts. 

5. What is thy vocation? To be a good man. 


4 iii. 11. 5 vy, 33; vii. 32. 6 See p. 382. 
7 vii. 13, 73; ix. 42,§5; cp. Prov. xi. 17: ri puxf abtod 
dyabdy rote? avnp éAehmov. 


295 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


TOS KaXwS yiveTar 7) ex Oewpnudtorv, TOY pev 
Tept THs TOD GAov hicews, THY Sé Tepl THs idias 
TOU av0 pwrrou KATATKEUAS ; 

$4 Upérov ai Tpay@diat TapnxOncav vTo- 
pynoriKal TOV oupBarvovtov wal 6 ore TavTa oUTH 
mépuce yiverOa Kal 6Tt, ols éml THS oKnViS 
puxayoryeiabe, ToUTOLS pay dx Geabe él THS 
peilovos oKNVAS. opatar yap, bTe obT@ bet Tabra 
mepaives Bau Kal OTe pépovow avTa Kal Ot 
Kexparyores, “le o KiOatpov.” Kal éyeTat bé 
Twa vo TOV Ta Spdpara TOLOVVTMY XPNTiMws, 
olov éatw éxeivo padora: 

Bi & npernOnv éx Oedv nal raid éuo, 
éyet Noyov Kal TodTO*” 
Kal Tad 
“Tots mpdypacw yap ovyl Ovpodcbau” 
Kal 
“ Blov Oepifew dote KapTipov otayuv"” 
Kal doa Troabra. 

Mera S€ tHv tTpaywdiav 7 apxata Kopoota 
mapnxOn, mabaryoryiKny Tappnotav éxouea, Kal 
Ths atudias ovK axpHnatas Ov avTiis THs evOup- 
pnpocvvns wUTopipyncKovaa: mpos olov te Kai 
Avoyévns Tavti mapenduBavev. yea TavTnv! <dé> 
H wéon Kop@dia, Kal ovrov 7) véa Tpds Ti TrOTE 
mapelAnTTat, ) KaT OdjLYyoV él THY ex pLnoEws 
iroteyviay vmeppvyn, ériatncov. O6Te pev yap 

1 satrns A: radTa tis P: radrny Stich. : <de€> Schenkl. 

1 Soph. Oed. Rex 1391; Epict. i. 24,§16. Perhaps Marcus 
had in mind the lines of Timocles (Athen. vi. 2) rpds adAAcrpig 


Te Wuxaywyndels mabe: MeO Hdovijs arHAGe watdevGels Gua. 
2 Kur. Antiope Frag. 207 ; vii. 41. 


296 











BOOK XI 


But how be successful in this save. by assured 
conceptions on the one hand of the Universal 
Nature and on the other of the special constitution 
of man? 

6. Originally tragedies were brought on to remind 
us of real events, and that such things naturally 
occur, and that on life’s greater stage you must 
not be vexed at things, which on the stage you 
find so attractive. For it is seen that these things 
must be gone through, and they too have to endure 
them, who cry Ah, Kithaeron!! Aye, and the 
dramatic writers contain some serviceable sayings. 
For example this more especially : 


Though both my sons and me the gods have spurned, 
For this too there is reason ; ” 


and again: 

It nought availeth to be mroth with things ;? 
and this : 

Our lives are reaped like the ripe ears of corn ;* 


and how many more like them. 

And after Tragedy the old Comedy was put on the 
stage, exercising an educative freedom of speech, and 
by its very directness of utterance giving us no 
unserviceable warning against unbridled arrogance. 
In somewhat similar vein Diogenes® also took up 
this réle. After this, consider for what purpose 
the Middle Comedy was introduced, and _ subse- 
quently the New, which little by little degenerated 
into ingenious mimicry. For that some serviceable 


3 Kur. Beller. Frag. 289 ; vii. 38. 
+ Eur. Hyps. Frag. 757 ; vii. 40. 
5 Diog. Laert. Diog. 7. 


297 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


éeyerar Kal wd TovT@Y TWA YXpHoLma, OvK 
ayvoeirars addrAa 7 GAN emLBorrn THs ToravTNs 
moujcews Kal Spapatovpyias mpos tiva morté 
oxotov amréBreev; 

¢. Ila@s évapyés mpoomimtes TO pn elvac 
adrAnv Biov wrdGeow eis TO Pirocodeiv odtws 
emiTHoeLov, @S TAUTHY, ev H VoV OV TUYXavELS. 
. Krd6bos Tob mpoaexods KNdbou atroKoTels 
ov dvvatat BN Kal ToD ddou gputod amoKxexdopba. 
ob 6 Kal avOpomos é évos avOparou atroa xia O- 
els ods Tis Kowevias AT OTETTMKED. KddBov 
bev odv AdXOS aTroKOTrTEL aVOpwTos Sé avTOS 
éavTov Tov mAnciov yopiver pmicncas Kal 
atroatpag eis" ayvoet bé, OTL Kal Tob dXov 
TOMTEYMATOS apa. dmrorétpnkev éavtov. TAY 
€xeivo ye S@pov ToD cvaTyCapévou THY KOLVMViaY 
Aios “efeore yap Tad Huiv cuppdvar TO 
T pooexet Kal Taw Tov ddov cupmAnportKois 
yever Oar. TAEOVAKLS péEVTOL yevopevov TO KaTa 
THY TOLAVTNV diaipeow dvcévwtov Kal dvcato- 
KaTdoTaTov <To> amrox@pooy motel. OAWS TE 
ovx BpoL0s 0 KNGOOS O 6 an axis, cupBracTioas 
Kal CUUTIVOUS cUppEeivas TO ETA THV amoKxomny 
avOis éyxev tpi GEevrt, 8 tb mote Aéyovow ot 
putoupyo. opobapmveiy ev, pn opmodoypa- 
tev 6€. 

0. Ot évortdpevot TpotovTs. cot KaTa TOP 
opOov AOyov, WaoTEp aro THs wyods mpdEews 





1 Lucian, de Salt. 35, says of the Art of Dancing (Panto- 
mime) that it requires the acme of culture and even of 
philosophy ! 

2 cp. Lucan i, 493; “exeat aula qui vult esse pius”; 


298 


a 


BOOK XI 


things are said even by the writers of these is 
recognized by all. But what end in view had 
this whole enterprize of such poetical and dramatic 
composition ? } 

7. How clearly is it borne in on thee that there i is 
no other state of life so fitted to call for the 
exercise of Philosophy as this in which thou now 
findest thyself.? 

8. A branch cut off from its neighbour branch * 
cannot but be cut off from the whole plant. In the 
very same way a man severed from one man has fallen 
away from the fellowship of all men. Now a branch 
is cut off by others, but a man separates himself 4 
from his neighbour by his own agency in hating him 
or turning his back upon him ; and is unaware that 
he has thereby sundered himself from the whole 
civic community. But mark the gift of Zeus who 
established the law of fellowship. For it is in our 
power to grow again to the neighbour branch, and 
again become perfective of the whole. But such a 
schism constantly repeated makes it difficult for 
the seceding part to unite again and resume its 
former condition. And in general the branch that 
from the first has shared in the growth of the tree 
and lived with its life is not like that which has been 
cut off and afterwards grafted on to it, as the 
gardeners are apt to tell you. Be of one bush, but 
not of one mind. 

9. As those who withstand thy progress along the 
path of right reason will never be able to turn thee 


Montaigne iii. 9 (Florio’s version): ‘Plato saith that who 
escapes untainted and clean-handed from the managing of the 
world escapeth by some wonder.” See also whove viii. 1. . 

3 St. Paul, Rom. xi. 19. 4 iv, 29; viii. 34, & ix, 23: 


299 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


> / > / oe \ lol 
amotpéyat oe ov Suvyncovta, ottas nde Tis 
TMpos avTovs evpevelas éxKpovéTwoar: ~adXa 
, \ >> 5) , © aig, \ 
gurXacce ceavTov em appoTépwv ‘omoiws, M7 
povov él ths evaoTtabods Kpicews kal mpdkews, 
GNA Kal él TIS Tpos TOds KWAUVELY ETTLYELPOUVTAS 
* / , 
) ad\dAws Svaxepaivovtas tmpaoTtynTos. Kal yap 
TovTo aabevés, TO YaneTTAivew avTOIsS, WaoTrEP TO 
amoothva. ths mpdkews Kal évdobvar Kata- 
/ > / \ > / / e 
mrayéevTa* auphorepo yap érions NevTOTaKTAL, O 
\ ce / ec \ 3 \ \ \ 4 
pév UTroTpécas, 0 O€ ddXOTPLMbeEls pos TOV hiceL 
ouyyevn Kai pirov. 

/ ‘ce Oo by ” / ) Ul / / »” 1 
gs UK Eat xXeipwr ovdenia Puats Téyvys. 
Kal yap ai téyvar Tas hivoes pupodvTar. ei Se 
TOUTO, 7) Tac@v TOV adAAwWY TEeXewTATH Kal 
TepirntTikwTaTn pias ovK av atrodeitroLToO 
THs TeXVIKHS evunxavias. Tacar 5é ye Téxvat 
TOV KpeLTTOV@D EveKev TA YELPwW TroLODELY’ OvKOdY 

\ € \ 4 \ \ v \ / 

Kat  Kown vats. Kat dn evOev pev yéveois 
duxatoovrns, amo S€ TavTns ai Rotral apertat 
ddiotavtat: ov yap tTnpnOnoeTar TO SiKxaLov, éav 
nrov Siahep@pucba pds TA péoa 7 eveEaTaTyTOL 
Kal TPOTT@TLKOL KAL METATTMTLKOL @DLEV. 

ta’. + Ei pév ody? <p> Epyetar t+ emi cé Ta 

/ ? e , \ \ igh, . 
mpaypwata, av ai divers Kai puyai GopuBodai ce, 
GANA TpOTOV TWA AUTOS em éxeiva Epyn, TO your 
Kpipa TO Tepl av’Tav novyalétw KaKeiva pevel 
atpepodvtTa Kal ovTe Si@Kwv UTE hevywr OfOHaN. 

1 Apparently a quotation from some unknown poet. 

2 om PA: [ei uev] Ox Leopold. 

300 








BOOK XI 


aside from sound action, so let them not wrest thee 
from a kindly attitude towards them!; but keep a 
watch over thyself in both directions alike, not only. 
in steadfastness ? of judgment and action but also in 
gentleness towards those who endeavour to stand 
in thy path or be in some other way a thorn in thy 
side. For in fact it is a sign of weakness to be wroth 
with them, no less than to shrink from action and 
be terrified into surrender. For they that do the 
one or the other are alike deserters of their post,® 
the one as a coward, the other as estranged from a 
natural kinsman and friend. 

10. ‘Nature in no case cometh short of art.’ For 
indeed the arts are copiers of various natures. If 
this be so, the most consummate and comprehensive 
Nature of all cannot be outdone by the inventive 
skill of art. And in every art the lower things 
are done for the sake of the higher*; and this 
must hold good of the Universal Nature also. Aye 
and thence is the origin of Justice, and in justice all 
the other virtues have their root,® since justice will 
not be maintained if we either put a value on 
things indifferent, or are easily duped and prone to 
slip and prone to change. 

ll. If therefore the things, the following after and 
eschewing of which disturb thee, come not to thee, 
but thou in a manner dost thyself seek them out, 
at all events keep thy judgment at rest about them 
and they will remain quiescent, and thou shalt not 
be seen following after or eschewing them. 


1 x. 36, § 2 etc. de As 39 TX: 20, 

# v.16, 305 vii. 55. 

5 iv. 37; v. 34. cp. Theognis, 147: év S€ dixaoovyy ovaA- 
ANBEnv waa’ aperh ory, 


301 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


8’.  Xdhaipa >oyijs avroerdys,} Tay pyre 
> / > / # »” / 
exTetyntar emi TL ponte €ow avvTpeyn, pnjTe 
omeipyntat t+? pare ouvitavy, adda hoti Aapt- 
nTaL, @ THV adnOevav Opa THY TavT@Y Kal THY 


c 
nr 


€v AUTH. 

ty. Katadpovijces pot tis; deta éya bé 
drpopat, iva ph Te KaTappovyicews aEvov Tpdccwv 
}) Réyov evpicxapar. puonoe; beTat' adra 
éy@ evpevns Kal evvous TavTi, Kai TOUT@ avT@ 
érouos TO Tapopwpevoy SetEar, ovK dverd.oTiKOS 
ovde @S KaTETLOELKVUpEVOS, STL avéxopwal, ada 
yunotos Kal XPNITAS, olos 0 Peoxiov Exeivos, él 
ye “) TpoceToeito. Ta éow yap Sei Toradra 
elvat, kal vTo Tov Oeav BréTrEcBar avOpwrov 
mMpos pnoev ayavaxtixds StatiOéyevoy unde 
dewvorrabodvTa. Ti yap cot Kakov, ei avTos viv 
motets TO TH PvE cov oixetov Kal déyn TO vdv 
TH Tov bAwv hioe evKatpov, avOpwros TeTapévos 
mpos To yiverOar dv Srouv 81 TO KoWwh cupdhépor; 

wo. “AdAAjA@Yv KaTappovodytes  aAANNOLS 
apeckevovtat Kal addAjdwv UTepéxery OédovTes 
GAAS UTOKATAKNivoYTAL. 

te’. ‘Os campos Kai KiBdnros 0 réyor, “’Eyo 


/ ¢€ Xr n ’ / 0 ” 7 a r 
TpOnpHnuat aTABS cor TpoahEeperGar. Ti TorEis, 


bs nr > a , > n , 

avO pore; TovTO ov Sei Tpodeyerv. avTod davnc- 
n / 

eta: éml Tod pet@rrov yeypapbar ddeire, evOds 


1 abroreAns Reiske. 2 ératpnra: Schenkl. 





1 viii. 41 ; xii. 3. 2 viii. 51. 

3 v.25; Hpict. iii. 18,§9; x. 32. ‘4 xi. 18, § 9. 

5 Marcus is probably thinking of Phocion’s last words, see 
Aelian xii. 49 pndev ’A@nvatois pvnotkaxhoew wtp tis map’ 
abtav pirornatas hs viv mivw (sc. the cup of hemlock); but 


302 


BOOK XI 


12. The soul is ‘a sphere truly shaped,’! when it 
neither projects itself towards anything outside nor 
shrinks together inwardly, neither expands nor 
contracts,? but irradiates a light whereby it sees the 
reality of all things and the reality that is in itself. 

13. What if a man think scorn of me? That will 
be his affair. But it will be mine not to be found 
doing or saying anything worthy of scorn. But what 
if he hate me? That will be his affair? But I will 
be kindly and goodnatured to everyone, and ready 
to shew even my enemy where he has seen amiss, 
not by way of rebuke* nor with a parade of for- 
bearance, but genuinely and chivalrously like the 
famous Phocion,® unless indeed he was speaking 
ironically. For such should be the inner springs of a 
man’s heart ° that the Gods see him not wrathfully 
disposed at any thing or counting it a hardship. 
What evil can happen to thee if thou thyself now 
doest what is congenial to thy nature, and welcomest 
what the Universal Nature now deems well-timed, 
thou who art a man intensely eager that what is for 
the common interest should by one means or another 
be brought about ? 

14. Thinking scorn of one another, they yet fawn 
on one another, and eager to outdo their rivals they 
grovel one to another. 

15. How rotten at the core is he, how counterfeit, 
who proclaims aloud: J have elected to deal straight- 
Jorwardly with thee! Man, what art thou at? There 
is no need to give this out. The fact will instantly 
declare itself. It ought to be written on the fore- 


Heylbut (Rhein. Mus. 39. p. 310) refers to a story in Musonius 
Rufus, p. 55, Hense. 
pat ’ St. Luke xi. 39: 7d ZowOev buav—‘‘the inward parts.” 


393 


- 


MARCUS AURELIUS 
7) pov TOLOUTOV mXet" 
éFéyvet, @S TOV épac ray év TO BrEppare mara 
evOus yvwpifer: 0 épwpevos. To“wovTov brws Set 
TOV aTody Kai ayabor eivat, olov ypacwva, iva 6 
Tapactas dua TO TpoceOeiv, Oére ov Oérex, 
aic@ntar. émetndevors Sé€ amAOTHTOS TKdAMN” 
éotiv. ovdév éotiv aicxov NvKOpiNLaS: TaVT@V 
Mddiota ToUTO hedye. 0 ayabds Kal aTrods 
Kal evpevns ev Tols Gupaow exovot Tavita Kal ov 
NavO aver. 

i. KddXota biafiv, Stvams aitn é&v TH 
Wyn, éav mpds Ta adiddopd tis adiadoph. 
adiapopnoer dé, éav Exactov avtav Oewpy dinpn- 
pévears Kal ONKOS xa Hepvnpévos, OTL ovdev 
avTay brody ypu Tept avroo hpiv éuTrovet oveé 
epxeTar ep’ pas: adra Ta pev aTpepel, 2) ES bé 
éopev oi Tas repl auTa@v Kpioes yevvavres Kal 
olov ypadovtes év éavTois, éEov pév pun ypaderv, 
éfov €, Kay mou AdOy, evOus efareiyrar ore 
OAryou xpovov éoras y TowavTy _Tpoaox Kal 
NouTrov meTavoeTat 0 Bios. Ti pévTOL SvaKohov 
adds * exetv Tabra; el ev yap Kata puow 
éort, Xaipe avrois Kal padva ear gow et be 
Tapa pvowr, oijret, ti éotl ool Kata TH ony 
gvow, Kal émi todTo omedde, Kav ddokov 7 
TavtTl yap ovyyvepun, TO idsov ayabdov fEnrt- 
ovvTe. 


1 ger PA: nxet Reiske. 2 cxauBy (a bent stick that 
can never be made straight) Salm. ® Kad@s P, 





1 The word is Thracian for a native sword (Pollux x. 38), 
as we might say a kukri. Here any concealed weapon to 
stab the unsuspecting. 


304 


> \ > val v 
evOds €v Tois upacty , 


BOOK XI 


head. There is a ring in the voice that betrays it 
at once, it flashes out at once from the eyes, just as 
the loved one can read at a glance every secret in 
his lover’s looks. The simple and good man should 
in fact be like a man who has a strong smell about 
him, so that, as soon as ever he comes near, his 
neighbour is, will-he nill-he, aware of it. A calculated 
simplicity is a stiletto! There is nothing more 
hateful than the friendship of the wolf for the 
lamb. Eschew that above all things. The good 
man, the kindly, the genuine, betrays these character- 
istics in his eyes and there is no hiding it.? 

16. Vested in the soul is the power of living ever 
the noblest of lives, let a man but be indifferent to- 
wards things indifferent. And he will be indifferent, 
if he examine every one of these things both in its 
component parts ° and as a whole, and bear in mind 
that none of them is the cause in us of any opinion 
about itself, nor obtrudes itself on us. They remain 
quiescent,* and it is we who father these judgments 
about them and as it were inscribe them on our 
minds, though it lies with us not to inscribe them 
and, if they chance to steal in undetected, to erase 
them at once. Bear in mind too that we shall have 
but a little while to attend to such things and 
presently life will be at an end. But why complain 
of the perversity of things? If they are as Nature 
wills, delight in them and let them be no hardship 
to thee. If they contravene Nature, seek then 
what is in accord with thy nature and speed towards 
that, even though it be unpopular. For it is par- 
donable for every man to seek his own good. 


2 cp. Ecclesiasticus xix. 29: ‘‘A man shall be known by his 
look.” 
iii. 11; xii, 184 xi TI, © * vii. 47. 8 v. 35" vi. 2, 
395 


x 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ul. lodev érnrvOev exacrov, cai éx tivwv 
&xactov wrroxepévov, Kal eis ti petaBarrer, 
Kal olov éotat petaBarov, Kal ws ovdév KaKov 
mMeloeTa. 

in. Kal? 7 parton, Tis 1) _T™pos avOpaTrous poe 
oxéous: Kal OTL aAAHA@Y evexev yeyovapev" Kal 
cal? eTEpov Adoyou TpooTna opevos avTav yéyova, 

@s Kplos Toiuyns i) Tadpos ayéAns. avobev Sé 
émuO. amo Tod, el 2) ATOMOL, guous » Ta Oda 
dtorKkoboa: €i TOUTO, Ta YElpova TOV KpELTTOVOV 
evexev, TaUTA O€ adMijov. 

Acdtepov S€é, omotoi twés ciow él Tis 
TpaTrétns, ev TO KALVapio, TAAXA> wadoTa é, oias 
avayKkas Soypuatov Kepévas Exovow, Kal adra dé 
taita uel olov Tudou Trotodow. 

Tpitov, 671, ef péev op0as TadTa Totovew, ov 
def dSucyepaiver: § ovK opbas, Snover 
dKovTes Kal _ayvoobrres. Taca yap puxn @ aKxovca 
oréperat, domep Tov adnOovs, odtTws Kal TOD 
KaT agiav EKATTO poo pépecOar, ax Oovrar 
yoov dxovovres aSicot Kal dyvapoves Kal T deov- 
éxtat Kal Kxa0arat dpaptyntixol mept Tovs 
TANnoLOv. 

Téraprov, ott al adtos TOANa aGuwapTavers, Kal 
aos TOLODTOS ely Kal el tive Sé dpaprnwatoy 
amex, ara THY ye €&w Tounrucny * éyers, el 
ab ola Sevdiay 7) a7] Sofoxoriay } }) ToLovTO TL KaKOY 
antéxn TOV Opoiwy apapTnudtov. 

1 kat PA=k(epadrda)a’ Rend., but cp. vii. 51. ? éwororichy A. 

1 jii. 11. 2 v. 16, 30; viii. 27. 3 viii. 56, 59. 

4 Dio Chrys. Orat. ii. de Regno,97 R, 6 3& raidpos capes 
mpos BactAéws eixdva meroinra. Epict. i. 2, § 30. 


306 








BOOK XI 


17. Think whence each thing has come, of what 
it is built up,! into what it changes, what it will be 
when changed; and that it cannot take any harm. 

18. Firstly: Consider thy relation? to mankind 
and that we came into the world for the sake of one 
another *; and taking another point of view, that I 
have come into it to be set over men, as a ram over 
a flock or a bull over a herd Start at the 
beginning from this premiss: If not atoms,° then an 
all-controlling Nature. If the latter, then the 
lower are for the sake of the higher and the higher 
for one another.® 

Secondly : What sort of men they are at board 
and in bed and elsewhere.’ Above all how they 
are the self-made slaves of their principles, and how 
they pride themselves on the very acts in question. 

Thirdly : That if they are acting rightly in this, 
there is no call for us to be angry. If not rightly, 
it is obviously against their will and through 
ignorance.’ For it is against his will that every soul 
is deprived, as of truth, so too of the power of dealing 
with each man as is his due. At any rate, such 
men resent being called unjust, unfeeling, avaricious, 
and in a word doers of wrong to their neighbours. 

Fourthly: That thou too doest many a wrong 
thing thyself and art much as others are,® and if 
thou dost refrain from certain wrong-doings, yet 
hast thou a disposition inclinable thereto! even 
supposing that through cowardice or a regard for 
thy good name or some such base consideration thou 
dost not actually commit them. 


iv. 3, 82s viii. 17 3 ix. 395 x. 6. 


6 i hee Gs 7 viii. 14; x. 19. 
8 ii. 13 iv. 3; vii. 22,63. 
9 vii. 70; x. 30. 0 5,17 ad init. 


3°7 
x 2 


5 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Iléwrrov, 67 ovdé, ef auaptdvover, Kateid- 
npas* moda yap Kal Kat oixovoulay yiverat. 

\ v4 \ tal / : ral 7 
Kal OXw@s Toda Sel 1 pOTEpov palety, ‘va TL 
mept addotpias mpd~ews KatadnTTiKos TL 
atop nvntat. - 

“Extov, 67, Stay Nilay ayavaxths %) Kal 
8 On > a Se a] , 4 \ > 
voTrabis, axapiaios 0 avOperevos Bios kal per 
dArlyov mavres éferaOnpev. 

"ERSopov, 6 OTL ovKX ai mpafers avTa@v evox doba- 
w piv: éxeivar yap eiow év Tois éxeivov 
€ a > \ , / e€ / 3 
NYEMoviKois' ANNA al nMEeTEpAL VITOANWeELS. Gpov 
your kal Oérnoov adeivar tiv ws Trepl Sewod 
Kplow, Kal anipOev 1 opry7}. TOS ovv pets; 
Noyes dpevos, Ore ovK alo pov" éay yap pi) 
povoy 4 TO aia Xpov KaKon, avayen Kai oé 
TOAAA dpapravey Kal AnoTHY Kal TavTotov 
yevéo Oat. 

"Oyboor, bo@ xarerrorepa emipépovow ai 
apyal kat dar ai él Trois ToLOUTOLS, Hep 
atta éortiv, éd ols dpytfoueOa Kai AvTOvpEOa. 

“Evvarov, étt ro eUpEves avixntov, éav yvnovov 


a7] Kal wn, ceonpos unde UmoKptoes. th yap cot 


TOLTEL 0 UPpratiK@Tatos, € éav Suatenis eupevs 
avT@ Kal, eb OUTMS ETVYXE, TPEos TrapaLns Kal 
perabddonys evoxoha@v Tap avTov éxeivov Tov 
Kaupor, ére Kaka Toul oe emrex erpet” ‘ M», 
Téxvov' pos adAXo TepvKapev. eyo pev Ov p1) 





1 Or, ‘‘with an eye to circumstances,” ‘‘ with some further 
end in view,” knowledge of which would justify the action or 
shew its necessity. 

2 ix. 38. 3 vii. 16; viii. 40; ix. 13; xi. 11, 16. 

4 vii. 16. PKG. 


308 


BOOK XI : 


Fifthly: That thou hast not even proved that 
they are doing wrong, for,many things are done even 
‘by way of policy.’! Speaking generally a man must 
know many things before he can pronounce an 
adequate opinion on the acts of another. 

Stathly: When thou art above measure angry or 
even out of patience, bethink thee that man’s life is 
momentary, and in a little while we shall all have 
been laid out. # 

Seventhly ; That in reality it is not the acts men 
do that vex us—for they belong to the domain of 
their ruling Reason—but the opinions we form of 
those acts. Eradicate these, be ready to discard 
thy conclusion that the act in question is a calamity, 
and thine-anger is at an end. How then eradicate 
these opinions? By realizing that no act of another 
debases us. For unless that alone which debases 
is an evil, thou too must perforce do many a 
wrong thing and become a brigand® or any sort of 
man. 

Eighthly: Bethink thee how much more grievous 
are the consequences of our anger and vexation at 
such actions than are the acts themselves which 
arouse that anger and vexation. 

Ninthly : That kindness is irresistible,® be it but 
sincere and no mock smile or a mask assumed. For 
what can the most unconscionable of men do to 
thee, if thou persist in being kindly to him, and 
when a chance is given exhort him mildly and, at 
the very time when he is trying to do thee harm, 
quietly teach him a better way’? thus: Nay, my child, 
we have been made for other things. I shall be in 


6 Sen. de Ben. vii. 31: vincit malos pertinax bonitas. 
7 v. 283 vil 27: viii. 59 5 °x. 45 xi. 13: 


399 


10 


ll 


: MARCUS AURELIUS 


BraBo, od b€ Brann, Téxvov.” Kal Sevevivar 
evapars Kat OALKOS, OTL TOUTO oOvUTwS éyel, 
dte ovee peacoat avTo tTolwodcw ovd dca 
ovvayeractixa mépucev. Sel Sé pte eipwriKas 
avro movety LTE overSir TKO, Grra prro- 
oTopyes Kal  ABHKTOS TH Wuyn Kal pn ws év 
oXOAN, pndé i iva aos Tapacras Gavpdon: GN’ 
TOL mpos povov, Kal éay Adrot TiVes TEPLETTHK- 
wow. 

Totter TOV évVéa Kepahaiov pepyngo, OS 
mapa TOV Movooy Sapa etAnges* Kal aphas 
more avOpwmos elvat, ews Cis. pudaxréov de 
érions TO OopyifecOar adtois TO KoNaKEvELY 
avTovs* apporepa yap aKowavnra Kat T pos 
BraBnv péper. mpoxerpov dé év Tats _ Opyais, 
Ore oul TO Oupota ba avoptKov, ada TO ™pGov 
Kal ipmepov, domep avO pwrixarepor, obras Kal 
appevik@Tepov, Kal loxvos Kal vetpov Kal av- 
Spetas ToUT@ péreoTW, ovxt TO aryavaKkToovTe Kal 
Sucapectodvre. bow yap anabeta TOUTO oixevd- 
TEpOV, TOT OUT@ Kal Suvdpet. domep Te 1) ory 
acGevovs, ovTwS Kal 1 Opyn.  aphoTepor yap 
TéTp@vTat Kal evdedoxacw. 

Ei 6é Bowne, Kal déxaTov mapa TOU Movonyé- 
Tov Sapov raBe, Ore TO pn aktovv dpapravew 
TOUS pavrous pavicon" aduvarou yap édpieras. 
To 6é Turyx@peiv adows pev eivae ToLovTous, 
akwobv bé, pn eis oe apapravew, ayvopov Kai 
TUpaVVLK ov. 

1 4 tot Fournier. 





1 ix. 4. 2 ixi. ba: 
3 cp. Dio 71. 3, § 4. Ay BL 


310 


BOOK XI 


no mise harmed, but thou art harming thyself,} my 
child. Shew him delicately and without any 
personal reference that this is so, and that even 
honey-bees do not act thus nor any creatures of 
gregarious instincts. But thou must do this not in 
irony? or by way of rebuke, but with kindly 
affection and without any bitterness at heart, not as 
from a master’s chair, nor yet to impress the 
bystanders, but as if he were indeed alone even 
though others are present. 

Bethink thee then of these nine heads, taking 
them as a gift from the Muses, and begin at last to 
be a man while life is thine. But beware of flattering 3 
men no less than being angry with them.‘ For 
both these are non-social and conducive of harm. In 
temptations to anger a precept ready to thy hand is 
this: to be wroth is not manly, but a mild and 
gentle disposition, as it is more human, so it is more 
masculine. Such a man, and not he who gives way 
to anger and discontent, is endowed with strength 
‘and sinews and manly courage. For the nearer such 
a mind attains to a passive calm,° the nearer is the 
man to strength. As grief is a weakness, so also is 
anger. In both it is a case of a wound and a 
surrender. 

But take if thou wilt as a tenth gift from Apollo, 
the Leader of the Muses, this, that to expect the 
bad not to do wrong is worthy of a madman; for 
that is to wish for impossibilities.6 But to acquiesce 
in their wronging others, while expecting them to 
refrain from wronging thee, is unfeeling and despotic.’ 


5 The Stoic dmddera. Sv. 17; vii. 71; 1x. 42, 
7 vi. 27; Sen. de Ira ii. 31. &yvwpov might also be trans- 
lated senseless. 


311 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


0. Tésoapas pddiota TpoTas Tod HyepoviKod 
mapaduraxtéov Sunver@s Kai, éredav pwpao- 
nS, aTaderTTéov érriréyovta ép’ ExdoTtov ovTwS: 
“Todto to hdvtacua ovK avayKaiovy TovTO 
AUTLKOY KOLVwViAS’ TODTO OVK aro TaUTOD péArELS 
eye.” TO yap py ap éavtod réyew ev toils 
atoTwTdtos vowte. Tétaptov oé éott, Kal” 6 
GeavT@ overd.eis, OTL TODTO HTTwpEéVOU éaTi Kal 
UToKaTaxhwopevov TOU év col Gevorépov sépous TH 
aT Yor épa Kal Ovnth Molpa TH TOV TwWpaTOS, Kal 
Tals TovToU Taxelas iSéaus.” 

Kk, To pev mvevpdtiov® cov Kal TO Tupmdes 
wav, dcov éyKéxpatat, Kaitos dice: avadeph 
évtTa, Suos Tweopeva TH TOV Orov SiaTdéet, 
mTapaxpateitar évtav0a éml tod cuyKpipatos. 
Kal To yewbes 5€ TO ev gol Tay Kal TO vypov, 
Kairot katogeph dura, Gpas eyiryeptar Kai 
EornKe THY oux EauT@V puoreny oTacw. ovTWS 
dpa Kal Ta oTtovxeia DmaKover Tots bros, 
emevdav mov KaTataxOh, avy Bia pevovta, HEX PIS 
av exeiBev Tadw TO évddotpov THS Stadvcews 
onpiyyy. 

Ov Seuvov obv povov TO voEpov wou Mépos 
amrevBes elvat Kat ayavaxreiy 7H éavtob XOpas 
KaiTou oudev ye Biavov TOUT émutdaoerat, anna 
ova doa KaTa puow éoriv avT@ ov pévToe 
avexeTat, ana THY évavTiav éperau. 1 yap emt 
Ta adixjpara Kal Ta dKkohacTiwara Kal Tas 
opyas Kal Tas AUTAas Kal Tos PoBovs Kivynots 
ovdev GAAO éeotly 4) adiatapévov THs Picews. 
1 fSovais P. =” ~Perhaps rvevparixer, cp. iv. 4, see Index iii. 


312 


BOOK XI 


19. Against four perversions of the ruling Reason 
thou shouldest above all keep unceasing watch, and, 
once detected, wholly abjure them,! saying in each 
case to thyself: This thought is not necessary ;? thas is 
destructive of human fellowship; this could be no 
genuine utterance from the heart.—And not to speak 
from the heart, what is it but a contradiction in 
terms?—The fourth case is that of self-reproach,’ 
for that is an admission that the divine part of thee 
has been worsted by and acknowledges its inferiority 
to the body, the baser and mortal partner, and to its 
gross notions. 

20. Thy soul and all the fiery part that is blended 
with thee, though by Nature ascensive, yet in 
submission to the system of the Universe are held 
fast here in thy compound personality. And the 
entire earthy part too in thee and the humid, although 
naturally descensive, are yet upraised and take up 
a station not their natural one. Thus indeed. we 
find the elements also in subjection to the Whole 
and, when set anywhere, remaining there under con- 
straint until the signal sound for their release again 
therefrom. 

Is it not then a paradox that the intelligent part 
alone of thee should be rebellious and quarrel with 
its station? Yet is no constraint laid upon it but only 
so much as is in accordance with its nature. How- 
beit it does not comply and takes a contrary course. 
For every motion towards acts of injustice and licen- 
tiousness, towards anger and grief and fear, but be- 
tokens one who cuts himself adrift from Nature. Aye 

oie J 0m (13 2°1v., 24. 

3 v. 36; viii. 10. cp. Fronto, ad Caes, iv. 13, where | 


Marcus reproaches himself when 19 years old for backward- 
ness in philosophy. 


323 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Kal orav dé Tue TOV cupBarvovteov dvaxepaivy 
TO TryEwovtKov, KaTaReEtTeEL Kal Tore THY éavTod 
YoOpav. mpos ootoTnTa’ yap Kal OcocéBevav 
KATECKEVATTAL OVX *TTOV 7) TMpos StKaLoowvny. 
Kal yap tadta év elder éotl THs evKowwvnoias, 
wadrrov 8 mpecBiTepa Ttav SiKatompaynud- 
Tov. 
, \ \ -= > , bd + ey | a“ , 
ka. Qt pr els Kal 0 adtos éotiv ae Tod Biov 
, <a A Ne Edo 2 ¢ a , 
cKoTOS, odTOS els Kal Oo avTos 6’ bdov Tod Biov 
elvat ov ddvarar. ovK apKei <6e> TO elpnuevor, 
ea pa) xaxeivo mpooOis, Omoiov civat Set tobrov 
TOV oKOTOV. WoTEP Yap OvXY % TavTwV TOV 
oT@cody <Tois> Trcioot SoxotvTav ayalav 


broAnwes opoia éotiv, GAN } TOV TOL@Vvdé TLveV, _ 


a fal »* tal 
TOVTEGTL TOV KOLWOV, OUTM Kal TOV oKoTrOV Set 
\ e 
TOV KOWWVLKOVY Kal TONLTLKOY UToaTHCacOaL. 06 
\ a c / 
yap eis TodTov wdcas Tas idias Opmas aTevOivov 
- id td 
macas tas mpdtes opolas aTodwHce Kal Kata 
TOTO del 6 avdTos éaTat. 
\ fol \ > \ \ \ iS 2 
KB. Tov pov Tov dpevov Kat Tov KaToLKid.oV 
, 
Kal THY TTOLAY TOUTOU wal Siac oBnow. 
Ky’. Loxparns Kal Ta TOV TOANOY SoypaTa 
‘Aapias’” éxaret, Tadiov deipara. 
4 al 
KO. Aaxedarporvior tots pev Eévors ev tails 
7 ig \ fal lel \ , - See > \ 
Gewpiars TO TH oKid Ta BaOpa étiPecav, avToi 
dé, ob éruyor, éxabéCovTo. 
1 igérnta PA: em. Cas. 


2 dpewdy and xaroidioyv require transposing to give robtov 
its correct meaning. 





mer ct! 
. 2 xii. 2. doidtns = Sixarcootyvyn mpds Seods, see Stob. Hel. 
‘ p 
ii. 104. ® But cp. xi. 10. 


314 


—_— 


BOOK XI 

and when the ruling Reason in a man is vexed at any- 
thing that befalls, at that very moment it deserts its 
station.! For it was not made for justice alone, but 
also for piety? and the service of God. And in 
fact the latter are included under the idea of a 
true fellowship, and indeed are prior to the practice 
of justice.® 

21. He who has not ever in view one and the same 
goal of life cannot be throughout his life one and 
the same.* Nor does that which is stated suffice, there 
needs to be added what that goal should be. For 
just as opinion as to all the things that in one way 
or another are held by the mass of men to be 
good is not uniform, but only as to certain things, 
such, that is, as affect the common weal, so must 
we set before ourselves as our goal the common 
and civic weal. For he who directs all his individual 
impulses towards this goal will render his actions 
homogeneous and thereby be ever consistent with 
himself.® 

22. Do not forget the story of the town mouse 
and the country mouse, and the excitement and 
trepidation of the latter. 8 

23. Socrates used to nickname the opinions of the 
multitude Ghouls,” bogies to terrify children. 

24. The Spartans at their spectacles assigned to 
strangers seats in the shade, but themselves took 
their chance of seats anywhere. 


4 cp. Dio 71. 34, § 5: dmows dia wavrwy eyévero Kal év obdér 
HAAG : Aristides ad Reg. § 113 (Jebb), says he was 6 
avrds dia TEAOus. Shit 8: § Aesop, Fab. 297 ; Hor. Sat. 
ii. 6 fff. 7 Lamiae, or ‘‘ vampires,” “ ‘fabulous monsters 
said to feed on human flesh,” Hor. A. P. 540; Apul. Met. i. 57, 
cp. Epict. ii. 1, § 14: tatra Swxpdryns moppodvkeia éxddet: 
Philostr. Vit. Apoll. iv. 25, whence Keats took his Lamic. 


315 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


nr / € fel 
ke. T@ Ilepdinca 6 Ywxpatns tepi rod pi) 
” Q ’ > . etl » » ae ee | 
épxec@at tap avtov Iva,” éfn, “pn TO 
, Lewd > , ” fe nN s 
KaKloT@ Ore pep aTOhwpat, TOUTEOTL, [LN EV 
maQav ov dvvnO@ avrevrroijoat. 
Ul > | al lol > / 1 , ‘ 
Ks. Ep trois trav Edeciov'! ypapupact rapay- 
yerpa exertTo cuveyas wropipvyicKecOar Tov 
TAAALOY TLVOS TOV ApPETH YpNTAapevav. 
e / 4 ? \ > \ 
KE. Oi TvO@ayopeor éwbev eis tov ovpavov 
apopav, iv tromprncKopeOa TOY adel KaTa 
Ta avTa Kal woavtws TO éavT@v epyov dca- 
vuovtoy Kal THs takews Kal THS KaBapoTnTos 
kal THS yupvoTntos. ovdév yap TpoKaduvupa 
aot pov. 
’ e e , \ , G 
xn. Olos 0 XLwxpdtyns, 7d Kediov trelwo- 
, ov ¢ = / a \ c / ” 
pévos, OTE 1) Rav0inmn AaBotoa To ipatioy é&w 
mponrOev' kal & elev 0 Lwxpatns Tois éraipors 
aidecOeiot Kal avaywpyoacw, Ste adTov eidov 
oUTMs €oTadpévor. 
, ’ fal / \ > , > 
KO’. "Ev tO ypahew Kal avayweooKxev ov 
mpotepov apkes, mply apxOjs.  TovTO TOAA@ 
padXov ev TO Big. 
n / 
rN’. “ Aodros réducas, od pétecTi cot AOyov.” 


ra’. “"Eyov & éyéXacce pidrov xijp.” 
AB’. “Meépapovtar 8 apethy yarerois Balovtes 
émecou.” 


Ay’. “LdKov yem@vos [nteiy parvopévov- 


| °Emucovpelwy Gat. (from Sen. Hp. xi). The only ’Edeciwv 
ypdupara known were magical formulae. 





1 According to Diog. Laert. Socr. 9; Sen. de Ben. v. 6, §2; 
Arist. Rhet. A. 23, this was Archelaus, son of Perdiccas. 

2 cp. Fronto, ad Appianum, Nab. p. 251. 

% Sen. Zp. 11, attributes the precept to the Epicureans: 


316 





BOOK XI 


25. Socrates refused the invitation of Perdiccas ! 
to his court, T’hat I come not, said he, to a dishonoured 
grave, meaning, that I be not treated with generosity 
and have no power to return it.? 

26. In the writings of the Ephesians® was laid 
down the advice to have constantly in remembrance 
some one of the ancients who lived virtuously. 

27. Look, said the Pythagoreans, at the sky in the 
morning, that we may have in remembrance those 
hosts of heaven that ever follow the same course and 
accomplish their work in the same way, and their 
orderly system, and their purity, and their nakedness ; 
for there is no veil before a star. 

28. Think of Socrates with the sheepskin wrapped 
round him, when Xanthippe had gone off with 
his coat, and what he said to his friends when they 
drew back in their embarrassment at seeing him thus 
accoutred. 

29. In reading and writing thou must learn first 
to follow instruction before thou canst give it. 
Much more is this true of life. - 

30. ’ Tis not for thee, a slave, to reason’ why. 

» Fes ans 3 and nithin me my heart laughed.° 

32. Vi arte they will upbraid and spenh harsh words in 
her hearing.® 

33. Only a madman will look for figs in inter. 


aliquis vir bonus nobis eligendus est ac semper ante oculos 
habendus wt sic tanquam illo spectante vivamus et omnia 
illo vidente faci tamus. Hoc Epicurus praecepit. See, however, 
Plut. Symp. vii. 5 ad fin. 

4 It is not ae whether Ad-yos here means speech or reason 
or both. The citation, of which the author is not known, 
has no obvious application; still less has the following 
quotation from Homer. 5 Hom. Od. ix. 413. 

5 Hes. Op. 185, where the reading is &pa rots for aperhy. 


337 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


n e \ / n oe > x 
TOLOVTOS G6 TO Tadiov EnTrdv, Ste .ovK ett 
didoTat.” 

6’. “ Katadgidobvta 70 Tratdiov Seiv,” Edeyev 
6 “Enixtntos, “ &vdov émipOéyyecOar- Adpiov 
ios arroBavh.” Svognpua taita’ “ Ovdev Svcdn- 

? nr ° 
pov, "em, * “Gdda' huaikod twos Epyou cnpavt- 
ixov. 4) Kal Td Tos oTdyvas OepicOhvat 
dvadnpov.” ; 
/ 
re. “Onudhak, ctapvry, otadis, wavta peta- 
/ > > \ \ > > > \ nr \ 

BoXatl, ovK eis TO uy Ov, GAN eis TO viv pt) Ov. 

» Wes «A. ‘ f > s Sopot: 

ct. HOTHS Tpoarpécews ov yiveTau” TO 

riwk 
Tov “Eaixtnrov. 

nN’. “Téyvny be,” &pn,? “ wept 70 ovyxatarti- 
GecOat evpeiv, kai €v TH Tepl Tas Opyas TOT@ TO 
> \ / ivf > \3 / : 
mpocextikov purdocew, iva pel” vrreEatpéecews, 
iva Kowovixal, va kat akiav: Kal opéFews pev 
Tavrdracw améyecOa, exxrdicer 5é mpods pndev 

lal lal na > 
Tov ovK ep Hyiv xpHoOa..” 

' icf? \ a a eo 99 »¥ de 2S 

Ay’. “Ov repi rod TuxdvTOS ody,” Edn, “ éoriv 
©. , > \ \ an / @ x 7,” 
0 ayoVv, AXA TEpi TOD paiverGaL H Ln. 

nO’. ‘O Sa@xpdarns éreye “Ti OéreTe; Noyixav 

\ 4 Xx 2 4 a / 
yruxas éxyew 7 adroyov; Aoyxar. Tivov 
oyixav; tyov 7 davrAwv; “Tyiav. Ti oop 
ov Gnreite; “Ore éyopev. Ti odv payeobe Kai 

” 
diadépecbe; 
1 GAAa omit P: perhaps dvoua from Epict. iii. 24, § 91. 
perhap P 
2 pn Se A: Sel Kron. 


1 Kpict. iii. 24, § 87 quoted, not verbatim. 
2 ibid. iii. 24, § 88. 3 Epict. iii. 24, § 91. 
* tbid. iii. 22, § 105. 





318 


BOOK XI 


No better is he who looks for a child when he may no 
longer have one.' 

34. 4 man while fondly kissing his child, says 
Epictetus, should whisper in his heart®: ‘ To-morrow 
peradventure thou wilt die.’ Ill-omened words these ! 
Nay, said he, nothing is ill-omened that signifies a natural 
process. Or it is ill-omened also to talk of ears of corn 
being reaped. 

35. The grape unripe, mellow, dried—in every 
stage we have a change, not into non-existence, but 
into the not now existent.? 

36. Hear Epictetus : no one can rob us of our free 
choice.* 

37. We must, says he,> hit upon the true science of 
assent and in the sphere of our impulses pay good heed 
that they be subject to proper reservations,® that they 
have in view our neighbour's welfare; that they are 
proportionate to worth. And we must abstain wholly 
JSrom inordinate desire and shew avoidance in none of the 
things that are not in our control. 

38. It is no casual matter, then, said he, that ts al 
stake, but whether we are to be sane or no." 

39. Socrates was wont to say:& What would 
ye have? The souls of reasoning or unreasoning 
creatures? Of reasoning creatures. Of what kind of 
reasoning creatures ? Sound or vicious? Sound. Why 
then not make a shift to get them? Because we have 
them already. Why then fight and wrangle? — 


5 i.e. Epictetus. cp. iii. 22, § 105, and Manual, ii. 2. 

6 iv. 1; v. 20; vi. 50; 2.e. not unconditionally, but subject 
to modification by circumstances. 

7 Kpict. i. 22, §§ 17-21; Hor. Sat. ii. 3. 42, 

8 Only found here. 


F9 


BIBAION IB 


’ 7 > lal 3 > « a / ” 
a. Wdavra éxeiva, éf’ & Sia Tepiddov evyn 
> a ” 4 / 2\ \ n an 
éNeiv, 7)5n éxew Stvacat, éav pH cavTd POovas. 
TovTO 6é éoTw, cay Tay TO TapedMov KaTariT NS 
\ \ I > / a , \ \ \ 
cal 70 pEdov emeTpewns Th mpovoig kal 7d mapov 
povov atrevOvvns Tpos OaLoTHTAa Kal SiKatocvYnD. 
OoLoTHTA pmEeV, iva ids TO aTrovE“opeEvov" col yap 
avtTo » pias epepe Kal oé TovTo. Sixarocvvnvy 
Lo > L \ \ a L 
dé, iva edXevOépws Kai yowpls wepiTrOKAS N€yNS 
te TadnOH Kal mpdoons Ta KaTa vopov Kal 
> 3s S > / / / , 
kat akiav: pn éeutrodifn Sé€ ce pte Kaxia 
> / / e / / \ \ ‘\ 
arroTpia pHTe UTOANWIS pHTe hwvy woe pny 
aicOnows tod mepiTePpaypévov cor capKidiou: 
dwerat yap TO Tacyxor. 
*Eay ody, oTed7 os €&08 é i 
, oTEOnTOTE TpOs €£00M Yévyn, TaVTa 
, \ / 
TA GANA KATANITO@V povoY TO HYyE“ovLKOY GoU 
Kal TO év cot Geiov tyunons, Kal ur) TO mavcecOai 
mote <tTov> Civ PoBnOjs, GArAA TO ye pydéroTE 
” 2 4 a »” ” ” 
ap—acOar Kata pvow Chv, éon avOpwiros aévos 
TOD yevyncavTos Kocpmov Kal Tavon Eévos dv Tis 
matpioos Kal Oavpdfwov ws atpocdoxnta Ta Kal 





1 x. 33; Hor. Zp. i. 11 ad fin. 
320 








BOOK XII 


1. Att those things, which thou prayest to attain 
by a roundabout way, thou canst have at once if thou 
deny them not to thyself!; that is to say, if thou 
leave all the Past to itself and entrust the Future 
to Providence,? and but direct the Present in the way 
of piety and justice : piety, that thou mayest love thy 
lot, for Nature brought it to thee and thee to it; 
justice, that thou mayest speak the truth freely and 
without finesse, and have an eye to law and the due 
worth of things? in all that thou doest; and let 
nothing stand in thy way, not the wickedness of 
others, nor thine own opinion, nor what men say, nor 
even the sensations of the flesh that has grown 
around thee‘; for the part affected will see to that. 

If then, when the time of thy departure is near, 
abandoning all else thou prize thy ruling Reason 
alone and that which in thee is divine,’ and dread 
the thought, not that thou must one day cease to 
live, but that thou shouldst never yet have begun 
to live according to Nature, then shalt thou be a 
man worthy of the Universe that begat thee, and 
no longer an alien® in thy fatherland, no longer 
shalt thou marvel at what happens every day as if it 


2 vii. 8; St. Matt. vi. 34. % xi. 37 (Epictetus). 
4 vii. 68. Xie Ei 6 iv, 29; xii, 13. 


321 
Y 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


nuépav yivomeva Kal Kpeudpevos éx Todde Kal 
TOUOE. 

B’. ‘O Oeds ravta Ta Hyepovixa yupva TOV 
Dukav ayyelov Kal Prodv cal cabapyaror | 
Opa. pmove yap TO éavToOd voep@ wovov amreTar 
tav é& éavTod eis TadTa éppunKdTtwv Kal aTwyeT- 
evxpévov. éav S€ kal od TovtTo eions moreir, 
TOV TOALY TEploTAacMOY TEaUTOD TepLalpycets. 
0 yap fn) TA TepiKeiweva KpEeddia Opa@V HIrov ye 
éoOnTa Kat oixiav cal do€av Kal tHv ToradTny 
mepiBorny Kal oxnvav Oew@pevos aayoNjoeTat; 

y’. Tpla éoriv, é& dv cvvéctnkas: copatior, 
Tvevpatiov, vods. TovT@Y Tara péxpL TOD 
émripereicbar Sey od éote TO S€ Tpitoy povov 
Kupiws cov. Kal éav® ywpions amd ceavTod, 
ToUTéaTL amo THS as Sitavoias, boa GAXOL 
Towovalw 7) Aéyovow % boa avTos éroincas 7 
eimas, Kal doa @s médAXNOVTA Tapdocel ce, Kal boa 
TOD TeplKelpévov ToL Gwpatiov } ToD cuudUToU 
mvevpatiov ampoaipeta mpocectw, Kal boa % 
éEwPev mepippéovoa divn édiocet, WaTE TOV 
ovvepappéevoyv éEnpuévnv <xal> Kxabapav rv 
voepay Sivayw arorvtov éd éautis Chv Totodc- 
av ta Sixaa kal Bédovcay Ta ovpBaivorta 
kal Aéyovcay TarynOA—éav yopions, dyut, Tod 
Hryepmovixod TovTOV Ta TpoonpTnuéva ex Tpoc- 
maleias Kal TOU yxpovov Ta éréxewa 7) 


1 T should prefer caduvyudtor. 
2 dd éay Gat.: nat éay Stich.: 6 éav PA, 


322 





ii tl 





BOOK XIl 


were unforeseen, and be dependent on this or 
that. : 

2. God sees the Ruling Parts of all men stripped 
of material vessels and husks and sloughs. For 
only with the Intellectual Part of Himself is He 
in touch with those emanations only which have 
welled forth and been drawn off from Himself into 
them. But if thou also wilt accustom thyself to 
do this, thou wilt free thyself from the most of thy 
distracting care. For he that hath no eye for the 
flesh that envelopes him will not, I trow, waste his 
time with taking thought for raiment and lodging 
and popularity and such accessories and frippery.! 

3. Thou art formed of three things in combination 
—body, vital breath, intelligence.? Of these the first 
two are indeed thine, in so far as thou must have them 
in thy keeping, but the third alone is in any true 
sense thine.’ Wherefore, if thou cut off from thyself, 
that is from thy mind, all that others do or say 
and all that thyself hast done or said, and all that 
harasses thee in the future, or whatever thou art 
involved in independently of thy will by the body - 
which envelopes thee and the breath that is twinned 
with it, and whatever the circumambient rotation 
outside of thee sweeps along, so that thine 
intellectual faculty, delivered from the contingencies 
of destiny, may live pure and undetached by itself, 
doing what is just, desiring what befalls it, speaking 
the truth—if, I say, thou strip from this ruling 
Reason all that cleaves to it from the bodily in- 
fluences and the things that lie beyond in time and 


1 Lit. stage-scenery ; cp. Sen. ad Mare. 10. 
2 il, 2; iii. 16. Here mvevudriov = Wuxh (soul) in its lower 
sense, see Index III. 35x.-38. 


323 
yo? 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


Ta TapwXnKOTAa Toinons Te geavToVv, olos Oo 
’Etredox eos : 


“ Sghaipos cuxroTepys, wovin' mepunyér yaiwv,” 


/ a > / a a f \ 
poovov te Chv éxpereTnons, 0 Cs, TovTéste TO 
mapov; Suvioy 76 ye HEX PL Tou drroBaveiy vro- 
Nev omevov aTApPAKTwS KaL EvpEvas ” Kal iN€ws T@ 
cavTov daipovr Sia Bravar. 

PM 20 n € \ \ 

. Tlo\rdnis eOavpaca, mas éavTov perv 
ve n 4 lal \ / e fal 
exacToS padXov TavT@y Pidel, THV dé éavToU 

\ c ne , > / / / x 
Tept aAVTOD UTOAN Wi év EXdTTOVL Oy TiMeTAL 7 
THY TOV addrXwv. av yoov Twa Oeds émiatas 7 
dvddoKxaros éudpwov Kerevan, undev Kal’ éavTov 
évOupetobar xai diavoeicbar, 6 ph apa Kal 
yeyovioxav é€oice, ovdé mpds piay npuépav 
TOUTO UTromevel. oOUTM TOs TéXAS pmadXoOV 
aidovpeOa, Ti Tote mept nuav ppovycovcw, 7 
éauTous. 

é. lds srote TaVvTa KAROS Kal prravOpaTas 
Siar afavres ot Geol, ToUTo povov mapeidov, 70 
évious TOV avOparan, al Tavu Xpnorovs Kal 
TET TA T™pos To Oetov aomep cupPBorara Oepév- 
ous, Kal él mrelotov & épywv ociwy Kai 
iepoupyt@v cuvners TO Oei@ yevopuévous, éredav 
iA > / / s / J > > 
anak ato0dvact, unKkéte avis yiver Par, ar els 
TO TavTehes dmeo Bnevar; TovTO bé elrep apa 
Kal obras EXEL, ev iat, btL, €& as érépas éyeuy 
eu, é émoingay av. el yap Sixacov HV; ay av kal 
duvatov, Kal ei Kata pvow, hveyxev av adTo 7 

1 wovh A: novi Ps névy Cor.: wovty Peyron.: wepsfder PA; 


mepinryéi Cor. 
2 eiuevs Reiske : eiyeras PA. 


324 


BOOK XII 


the things that are past, and if thou fashion thyself 
like the Empedoclean 


Sphere with its circle true in its poise ieil-noanced 
rejoicing,} 

and school thyself to live that life only which is 

thine, namely the present, so shalt thou be able 

to pass through the remnant of thy days calmly, 

kindly, and at peace with thine own ‘ genius.’ ? 

4. Often have I marvelled how each one of us 
loves himself above all men, yet sets less store by his 
own opinion of himself than by that of everyone else. 
At any rate, if a God or some wise teacher should come 
to a man and charge him to admit no thought or 
design into his mind that he could not utter aloud 
as soon as conceived,? he could not endure this 
ordinance for a single day. So it is clear that we 
pay more deference to the opinion our neighbours 
will have of us than to our own. . 

5. How can the Gods, after disposing all things 
well and with good will towards men, ever have over-. 
looked this one thing, that some of mankind, and 
they especially good men, who have had as it were the 
closest commerce with the Divine, and by devout 
conduct and acts of worship have been in the most 
intimate fellowship with it, should when once dead 
have no second existence but be wholly extinguished ?4 
But if indeed this be haply so, doubt not that 
they would have ordained it otherwise, had it needed 
to be otherwise. For had it been just, it would 
also have been feasible, and had it been in conformity 
with Nature, Nature would have brought it about. 

1 viii. 41; xi. 12. cp. Hor. Sat. ii. 7, 95: tn seipso totus 
teres atque rotundus. 2 ii. 13; iii. 5 ete. 3 iii, 4 

+ For Marcus’ views on Immortality, see Introd. 


325 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


/ > \ a \ ee 4 y” > 
dios. ex 6H Tod pH ovtas. Eye, eitep ody 
oUTas éyer, TicTOVTIw col, TO pip Sefoar odTw 
yiverOar. opas yap Kal avtos, btt TodTO 

rn fol gts ' ¥ , > x > 
Tapatntav Sixaodoyhn mpos Tov Geov- ovx av 8 
otTw@ SiereyoueOa tots Oeois, et fut) Apioror Kal 
Sixatotatol ciow. et 5é ToOTO, odK av TL TEpLetOov 
adixws Kal Groyws ueAnuévov Tov ev TH 

Staxoopunce. 
/ ” b We a > la \ \ e 

s. "Eile cai doa amoywocKes. Kal yap 

\ , Aon 2 / \ \ \ ae Oe 4 
yelp 7) aptoTEepd, Tpos Ta GAXa Sia 70 avéOiaTtov 
apyos ovaa, Tod yarwwod éppwpyevéotepov %) 1 
SeEta xpatel. todTo yap eiicrat. 

¢ n a a ¢ \ rn / 

f’. ‘Orroiov det cataryndbOjvar bd Tod Oavarov 

\ , \ a \ ds a / 
Kal c@pate Kai Yuyn THY BpayvTynta Tov Biou, 
THY axdvetav TOU OTidw Kal Tpdcw ai@vos, THV 
acbéveray maons UNS. 

ny. Toupra tov prowdv Oedcacba Ta aitiody: 
. \ ’ \ a / la / A ore / 
Tas avahopas Tav mpd&ewv: Ti Tovos* Ti HSovN" 

/ / / , / ee an 3? 7 v 
tt Oavatos ti S0Ea: Tis 0 EavT@ acyorias aitLos: 

a > \ ¢ > BA BI 4 av , 
TOs ovodels UT Ardou eurrodifetar: bTL TavTa 
e / 
vroknwes. 

, iva > 3 - 3? rn lal , 

0’. “Opowov & eivar det ev tH TOV SoyudTwv 
AXpycer WayKpatiacrh, ovxXi povopayw o péev yap 

\ 7 e fol > / \ > n ¢ 
TO Eihos, © XpHTal, imoTiOeTat kal avatpeirar 6 

\ lal a v \ > \ ” A 
dé THv xelpa del Exe Kal otdev AO 7 avG- 
Tpéxrar avTny Sei. 





1 cp. Job (xiii. 3), J desire to reason with God, where a 
similar point is argued. 
2 iv. 26. 3 iv. 50; v..233 xii. 32, 


326 





BOOK XII 


Therefore from its not being so, if indeed it is not so, 
be assured that it ought not to have been so. For 
even thyself canst see that in this presumptuous 
enquiry of thine thou art reasoning with God.! But 
we should not thus be arguing with the Gods were 
they not infinitely good and just. But in that case 
they could not have overlooked anything being 
wrongly and irrationally neglected in their thorough 
Ordering of the Universe. 

6. Practise that also wherein thou hast no expect- 
ation of success. For even the left hand, which 
for every other function is inefficient by reason of a 
want of practice, has yet a firmer grip of the bridle 
than the right. For it has had practice in this. 

7. Reflect on the condition of body and _ soul 
befitting a man when overtaken by death, on the 
shortness of life,? on the yawning gulf® of the past 
and of the time to come, on the impotence of all 
matter. 

8. Look at the principles of causation stripped of 
their husks; at the objective of actions; at what 
pain is, what pleasure, what death, what fame. See 
who is to blame for a man’s inner unrest; how no 
one can be thwarted by another‘; that nothing is 
but what thinking makes it.® 

9. In our use of principles of conduct we should 
imitate the pancratiast not the gladiator. For the 
latter lays aside the blade which he uses, and takes 
it up again, but the other always has his hand and 
needs only to clench it. 


4 vy. 343 vii. 16. 

5 vy. 2; viii. 40; xii, 22. Shak. Ham. ii. 2. 256. 

8 Or, the prize-fighter not the duellist, Some take avaip- 
era to mean ‘ is slain,’ 


327 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


uv. Tlota! aira ra mpaypata, opav diatpodvta 
eis DANY, aitiov, avadhopar. 
ta’. “Hrixny? é€ovciay éyer avOpwros pn 
Cal +: x id f e \ > Lal \ 
moety AAO H GTrep péAreL O Oeds érrawveiv, Kal 
lal an ‘ 
dévetOas Ta, 5 dv véun adT@ o Geos. 
\ Cen an 4 / a / 
iB’. To é&fs TH pio pHte Oeots peutrréov: 
ovdev yap ExovTes 7) AKovTES GuapTdvovaetw* pHTE 
avOporos ovdév yap ovxL aKovTES. WaTE 
ovdev) wewmrréov. 
uy’. Iles yeroios kai Eévos 0 Oavpafov otiody 
Tov év TO Bio ywopévan. 
f ” > 4 4 / \ BJ / 
0. "Hrow avdyen civappévn <kal> atapd- 
» , 
Batos td&is,  mpdvora iddowpos,  huppos 
ELKALOTNTOS GTPOTTATHTOS. Eb ev OW aTAapd- 
Batos avdyxn, Ti avtireives; ef 5 mpovora 
> / \ ¢. / ” \ er 
emridexouevn TO ihdoxecOar aEvov cavTov moin- 
an > n / / > A \ 
cov ths €x Tov Oeiov BonOeias. ei Sé huppods 
avnyemovevtos, acpénte, Ste év toot [To] 
KAVSaVL avTOS ExELS EV TAUTO TLVA VODY HryEepov- 
/ ¢ uA 
txov. Kav Tapadgépn ce 0 KAVOwY, TapadepéT@O 
\ 7 \ / + \ \ 
TO capkidvov, TO mvevpaTiov, TAaAXa* TOV yap 
voov ov mapoice. (te.) “H 70 pev tod AvyvoU 
has, péxpt cBeoOH, haiver Kal thy adynv ovK 
amoBanrnre: 7 dé év col addrAnOera Kal dixarocvvn 
Kal cwppoctvn tpoatroa ByceTat; 
i’. "Eml tod davtaciay mapacyovtos, bt 
¢ “TT; 8 \ 25 > a ee » 204 
Hpaprev* é dal oida, ei TodTO duadprnpua;” ei dé 
Kal tyaptev, Tt KaTéxpiwev avtTos éavTov Kal 
1 Gat. for roaita: de? aird Reiske. 
2 +d bAuhy (cp. § 18) A at end of § 10. 
328 


BOOK XII 


10. See things as they really are, analyzing them 
into Matter, Cause, Objective.! 

11. What a capacity Man has to do only what God 

shall approve and to welcome all that God assigns 
him! 
12. Find no fault with Gods for what is the course 
of Nature, for they do no wrong? voluntarily or 
involuntarily ; nor with men, for they do none save 
involuntarily.? Find fault then with none.4 

13. How ludicrous is he and out of place who 
marvels at anything that happens in life.® 

14. There must be either a predestined Necessity 
and inviolable plan, or a gracious Providence, or 
a chaos without design or director. If then there 
be an inevitable Necessity, why kick against the 
pricks? Ifa Providence that is ready to be gracious, 
render thyself worthy of divine succour. But if a 
chaos without guide, congratulate thyself that amid 
such a surging sea thou hast in thyself a guiding 
Reason. And if the surge sweep thee away, let it 
sweep away the poor Flesh and Breath with their 
appurtenances: for the Intelligence it shall never 
sweep away. (15.) What! shall the truth that is in 
thee and the justice and the temperance be ex- 
tinguished ere thou art, whereas the light of a lamp 
shines forth and keeps its radiance until the flame 
be quenched ? 

16. Another has given thee cause to think that 
he has done wrong: But how do I know that it is a 
wrong?®. And even if he be guilty, suppose that his 

1 viii. 11; xii. 18; 29. oe | 20M} 3 vii. 22 etc. 
4 Epict. Man. 5. 5 xii. 1. 6 vii. 29; ix. 38. 
329 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


ovTwS Guotov TOUTO TO KaTadpUTTEW THY éaUTOD 
over. 

“Ort 0 pn OérXov Tov hadrov auaptavew motos 
TO pn OédNovte Thy cuKHY OoToV ev Tois aUKOLS 
hépew kal ta Bpédn kravOuvpiferOar nal Tov 
immov xpeperifew Kal boa ara dvaryxaia. Th 
yap maby Thy &Ew éxov toravTnv; et odv yopyos 
ei, TAUTHY Geparevaov. 

we. Ei EM Kanne, Ha mpaéns él pa ann bes 
€OTL, [9p ELTENS. v) yap opun cou éoTo <ént coi>. 

Rue Eis 76. wav ded opav, TL ear avTo €KELVO 
TO THY parvtaciav go To.oov, «al dvan Tvs cel, 
Searpobvra els TO aitvov, eis TO UALKOV, Els TH 
dvahopay, eis TOV KpOvoY, évTOS Ov TeTTADTAAL ATO 
dence. 

0’. Aic@ou Tote, OTL Kpetr Tov TL KQL Sarpovie- 
TEpov éyers ev cavTd TOV TA TAOH TOLOUVT@D 
Kal cabanat TOV veupoomTaaTouvToV oe. Th pou 
vov éoTw 7 Sidvora; 1) poBos; a) vrowpia; Va) 
émiOupia; py ado Te TOLOUTOV ; 

K. I pérov, 70, pi elky} pnde a aivev avaopas. 
devrepor, TO pn) er AXXO TL } el TO KOLVWYLKOV 
Téhos THY avaryoy ny Toteto Bar. 

ka’. “Ort pet ov mrord ovdels obSapod éon, 
ovdé ToOUTMY TL, & vov Bré€rrEeLs, OVSE TOUTMY TIS 
Tov viv Biovvtov. dmravtTa yap petaBadrew 
Kal TpémerOau Kat pOcipecOar wépuxer, iva érepa 
epeEns yivntat. 

KB. “Ort wavta bTornWis: Kai adn éri col. 





aay. 6. 
2 xii. 10. Or, application, 


33° 


BOOK XII 


own heart has condemned him, and so he is as one 
who wounds his own face? 

Note that he who would not have the wicked do 
wrong is as one who would not have the fig-tree 
secrete acrid juice! in its fruit, would not have 
babies cry, or the horse neigh, or have any other 
things be that must be. Why, what else can be 
expected from such a disposition? If then it chafes 
thee, cure the disposition. 

17. If not meet, do it not: if not true, say it not. 
For let thine impulse be in thy own power. 

18. Ever look to the whole of a thing, what 
exactly that is which produces the impression on 
thee, and unfold it, analyzing it into its causes, its 
matter, its objective,? and into its life-span within 
which it must needs cease to be. 

19. Become conscious at last that thou hast in 
thyself something better and more god-like than: 
that which causes the bodily passions and turns thee 
into a mere marionette.2 What is my mind now 
occupied with*? Fear? Suspicion? Concupis- 
cence®? Some other like thing? 

20. Firstly, eschew action that is aimless and has 
no objective. Secondly, take as the only goal of 
conduct what is to the common interest.® 

21. Bethink thee that thou wilt very soon be no 
one and nowhere, and so with all that thou now 
seest and all who are now living. For by Nature's 
law’ all things must change, be transformed, and 
perish, that other things may in their turn come into 
being.” 

22. Remember that all is but as thy opinion 

3 ii, 2 ete. ty. 1h > ii, 16; ix. 40. 
6 v.16; xi. 21, 7 ix,.28, 32. 


331 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


2 / a 
apov ody, 6te OéXevs, THY BTOANWIV, Kal Borep 
KapwpavTt THY aKpav, yahnvn, otabepa tavTa 
\ , 
Kal KOATrOS aKUpov. 
U / \ ¢ fol > BEF 2 \ ‘ 
Ky. Mia cal Aticovy évépyera Kata Kaltpov 
/ \ \ > A / 
Tavoapevn ovdev KaKov Tacxel, KA 6 TéTAVTAL 
Or’ CC \ a , ’ 
ovdé 0 mpdéas tiv mpakw tavtTnvy Kat avTo 
nr > 
tovto, KaQ’ 6 wémavTal, KaKkov TL TeéTrovOen. 
e 7, \ a rn i 
Omoi@s ov TO ex TacaV TOV Tpakewy TUCTHLA, 
ig > \ € / \ fal 
otrep €oTlv o Bios, éav ev Kaip@ Tavontat, ovdéev 
KaKOV TAdOXEL KAT AUTO TODTO, KAO’ oO TéravTaL 
Ae \ \ a 
ovde 6 KaTaTravcas év KaLp® TOV eippov TODTOV 
kax@s S1eTéOn. Tov dé Karpov Kal Tov 6pov 
/ e 7 \ \ 4 e 2O7 7 > 
didwow 7 dvots, ToTé pev Kal 7H idia, Stav év 
ynpa, twavtws 5é » TOV drov, hs TOV pEpav 
4 v ‘ \ > lal e , = 
peTaBarXovTwv veapos del Kat akpatos 0 ovpTas 
' , ‘ a ei a 
Koo mos Stapéver. Kadov S€ del Tay Kal wpaiov 
\ an rn 
TO cupdépov TO 6AM. 1% ODV KaTAaTaVaLs Tod Biov 
Ul 
éxdoT@ ov Kakov pév, Ste OvdSE aiaxXpor, Eitrep Kal 
ampoaipetov Kal ovK aKkowewvntov: ayadov 8é, 
” na 4 \ , \ , 
elTrep T@ OW KaLpLOV Kal GUppPEpoY Kal TUppepo- 
4 e , 
pevov. ovT@ yap Kal Oeohopntos o epopevos 
n \ nA 
Kata TavTa Oe Kal émi tai’Ta TH yroun 
ld 
pepopevos. 
/ , rn al , ” eee 
Kd. Tpia tadta Set mpoyerpa éxew eri 
\ -. lal > , > A / - KR e x 
HEV WV TOLELS, EL NTE ELKN MNTE AAA@S 7 @S aV 
e bt ; oe. tee 2 be a ” 0 
» Sixkn adtn éevynpynoev: éml b€ tov éEwbev cup- 
4 x 
Bawovtov, btt row Kat énmituxiay Kata 





1 ij. 15 ete. 2 ep. Lucian, Scyth. ad fin. * ix, 2). 
4 vii. 25. $i; £P°5'1¥.3 5. vii. 2. 6 ii. 3; iii. 4. 


332 


BOOK XII 


of it,’ and that is in thy power. Efface thy opinion 
then, as thou mayest do at will, and lo, a great 
calm! Like a mariner that has turned the head- 
land thou findest all at set-fair and a halcyon sea.? 

23. Any single form of activity, be it what 
it may, ceasing in its own due season, suffers no 
ill because it hath ceased, nor does the agent 
suffer in that it hath ceased to act.? Similarly 
then if life, that sum total of all our acts, cease in its 
own good time, it suffers no ill from this very fact, 
nor is he in an ill plight who has brought this chain 
of acts to an end in its own due time. The due 
season and the terminus are fixed by Nature, at times 
even by our individual nature, as when in old age, but 
in any case by the Universal Nature, the constant 
change of whose parts keeps the whole Universe 
ever youthful* and in its prime. All that is ad- 
vantageous to the Whole is ever fair and in its 
bloom. The ending of life then is not only no 
evil to the individual—for it brings him no disgrace,® 
if in fact it be both outside our choice and not 
inimical to the general weal—but a good, since it is 
timely for the Universe, bears its share in it and is 
borne along with it.6 For then is he, who is borne 
along on the same path as God, and borne in his 
judgment towards the same things, indeed a man 
god-borne.’ 

24. Thou must have these three rules ready for 
use. Firstly, not to do anything, that thou doest, 
aimlessly,’ or otherwise than as Justice herself would 
have acted; and to realize that all that befalls thee 
from without is due either to Chance or to Providence, 


7 Epict. ii. 16, § 42: mpds rdv Oedy dvaBAdpas eimeiv, dpuo- 
yVwuove cot. 8 iv. 2; viii. 17; ix, 28. 


333 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


mpovovav’ obre 8¢ rh émituxla pepmrréov ovTEe TH 
™povoia eyeRajréor. SevTepov TO" Omrotoy ExagTov 
aro omépyaros | péXpt Woyecews Kal amo 
puxoceas péxpt TOD THY vox amodobvat, Kal 
& olwv 2 ovyKpiots kal eis ola 1) NUOLS. TpiToV, 

advo per Ew pos éEapbels KaTacKeyparo Ta 
Ce ents Kal THY ToAUTpoTiav, OTL KaTa- 
ppovncers ouvidov dua Kxal doov TO Tmeproroby 
évaepiov kal évaDepiov- Kal ort, ocadKis av 
eEapOis, TavTa ower, TO Omoeloés, TO GAUYOYpoviov. 
él TovToLs 0 Tos. 

ke. Barge ew rHv bToAnWiw céowoa. Tis 
ovv 0 K@AVaV exBanreiv ; 

ks’. “Otay Sve hopijs emi TwWt, émehabov TOD, 
OTL mavra kata THY TOV dav pvow yiverau, kal 
Tov, 6TL TO GuapTavopevoy adAOTPLOV, Kal éml 
TOUTOLS Tob, ort Tav 70 revo mevov oUTws ael 
éyiveto Kal yernoeta Kal vov mavtaxod yiverau: 
Tov, don 1) cuyyevera avOpwmou m pos mav TO 
av0 parr evov ryévos* ov yap aipatiou 7) omeppation, 
ada vod Kowovia. émedOov bé Kal TOD, OTe 0 
éxdotouv vods Beds Kal éxeiev éppune: 70D, ort 
ovdev idtov ovdevds, AAA Kal TO TeKviov Kal TO 


1 orephuaros PA: omépuaros Gat.: ornplyywaros Schenk]: 
possibly orepeduaros (solidification). 





1 The living soul was supposed by the Stoics to be received 
at birth, see Plut. de Placit. Phil. v.15, and Stoic. Contr. 38 ; 
and for a reputed conversation on this subject between 
Marcus and the rabbi Jehuda, see Talmud, Sanh. 91 b 
(Jewish Encycl. Funk & Wagnalls, 1902). 

2 vii. 48; ix. 30. 

* cp. Lucian, Charon (throughout). What. Marcus means 
by évaépio: and éva:Bépios (or the neuters of these) is not 


334 





BOOK XII 


nor hast thou any call to blame Chance or to impeach 
Providence. Secondly this: to think what each crea- 
ture is from conception till it receives a living soul, 
and from its reception of a living soul till its giving 
back of the same,! and out of what it is built up and 
into what it is dissolved.- Thirdly, that if carried 
suddenly into mid-heaven thou shouldest look down 
upon human affairs? and. their infinite diversity, 
thou wilt indeed despise them,’ seeing at the same 
time in one view how great is the host that peoples 
the air and the aether around thee ; ,and that, however 
often thou wert lifted up on high, thou wouldst 
see the same sights, everything identical in kind, 
everything fleeting. Besides, the vanity of it all! 

* 25. Overboard with opinion+ and thou art safe 
ashore. And who is there prevents thee from 
throwing it overboard? 

26. In taking umbrage at anything, thou forgettest 
this, that everything happens in accordance with the 
Universal Nature ® ; and this, that the wrong-doing is 
another’s®; and this furthermore that all that happens, 
always did happen,’ and will happen so, and is at 
this moment happening everywhere. And _ thou 
forgettest how strong is the kinship between man 
and mankind, for it is a community not of corpuscles, 
of seed or blood, but of intelligence.6 And thou 
forgettest this too, that each man’s intelligence is 
God ® and has emanated from Him; and this, that 
nothing is a man’s very own, but that his babe, his 
clear. But cp. Apul. de deo Socr., circa med., and his disqui- 
sition on dafuoves ; and the interesting parallel 2 Kings vi. 17. 

4°iv. 7 3. vii. 17, 29\3 viii. 293, ix..7 ; xii. 22. 

5 v. 8, 10. ® ix. 38. w ovine E. pas ee | 

9 cp. Eur. Frag. 1007, 5 voids yap quay éorw ev Exdore 
Geds: Cic. Z'usc, i. 26, § 65. 


335 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


owparrov Kal avTO TO puxdprov éxeiBev édaj vO ev: 
Tob, bre rave bmodmpes: Tov, Tt TO TapoY povov 
éxaotos 6H Kal TodTO amroBannet. 

Ke. Loveys dvaTroneiv Tous emt Tw Mav 
.WyAvaKTnTAVvTas, TOUS év peylorais dofars i) 
cuppopais 0 ExOpaus ) ©OTrotatcobv TUxaLS 
akpdaoavras’ elra epio rave" “Tod vov mavra 
éxeiva ;” Kamvos Kat otrodos Kal pd0os 4 ovde 
HvO0s. cuptpoomiTTétw Sé Kal TO TOLOUTO Tar, 
olov PaBios KatovAdivos én’ aypod, cal Aovetos 
Aodtos ! év tois*kntos, cal Yreptivos év Baiais, 
kat TiBépios év Kampiass, cat Odnros “Poddos,? 
kal GrAws 1) pos OTLodY eT oincews Siapopa: 
Kal @s evTedkes Tay TO KaTEVTELVOMEVvOY" Kal 
b0@ pirtocopetepov ro él ths Sobeions tANs 
éavrov dixasov, cappova, Ocois Emopevov aderas 
mapexerv. O yap vmo atudia topos Tupopevos 
TavT@V Kaden @rarTos. 

xn. Ilpds rods émifnrodvtas, “ [lod yap idov 
TOUS Geovds y] obey KATEANPOS, ore eloty, ovTH 
oéBers;” Tp@Tov pev kal Brper 0 oparot clot" émerta 
pévrot ovde Tay yuxny THY énavtod édpaka, Kal 
bus TLULO. obs obv Kal Tovs Beovs, & ov THS 
Suvdpews avT@v éxdoToTE TeLpapae, éx TOUTaD, 
671 Te eiol, KaTadapBavw Kal aidodpuat. 


1 Aoboios Aotwos PA. Perhaps we should read Lucius 
Lucullus, who would be a typical instance. 
2 év ObnAla Barberini. 





1 ii. 3. 2? xii. 8, 22 etc. 2 14s xis % 
4 vi. 47; viii. 25; x. 31. 
5 ep. Pers. v. 132: cinis et manes et fabula fies. 


336 





BOOK XII 


body, his very soul came forth from Him!; and 
this, that everything is but opinion? ; and this, 
that it is only the present moment that a man 
lives and the present moment only that he loses.® 

27. Let thy mind dwell continually on those who 
have shewn unmeasured resentment at things, who 
have been conspicuous above others for honours or 
disasters or enmities or any sort of special lot. Then 
consider, Where is all that now?* Smoke and dust 
and a legend or not a legend even.> Take any 
instance of the kind—Fabius Catullinus in the 
country, Lusius Lupus in his gardens, Stertinius 
at Baiae, Tiberius in Capreae, and Velius Rufus—in 
fact a craze for any thing whatever arrogantly ® 
indulged. How worthless is everything so in- 
ordinately desired! How much more worthy of a 
philosopher is it for a man without any artifice to 
shew himself in the sphere assigned to him just, 
temperate, and a follower of the Gods. For the 
conceit that is conceited of its freedom from conceit 
_is the most insufferable of all.” 
28. If any ask, Where hast thou seen the Gods or 
how hast thou satisfied thyself. of their existence that 
thou art so devout a worshipper?*® I answer: In the 
first place, they are even visible tothe eyes? In 
the next, I have not seen my own soul either, yet I 
honour it.1° So then from the continual proofs of 
their power I am assured that Gods also exist and I 
reverence them. 

6 For otnots see Epict. i. 8, § 6. 

7 See the story of Plato and Diogenes, Diog. Laert. vi. 2, § 4. 

8 ep. Dio 71.-34 § 2. 

® The stars were Gods in the Stoic view. cp. above viii. 


19, and Sen. de Bene/f. iv. 8. 
10 Theoph. Ad Autol, i. 2 and 5. 


337 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


«0. Lwrnpia Biov exactov & bdov avro 
rae Ss t oA 4 \ ? ee TES f s eo 
Ti éotw opav, ti ev adtod TO brLKOY, Ti dé TO 
> lal > 4 n n \ / o 
aiti@des: €& OAS THs Wuyhs Ta Sixava troveiv 
\ > n / , \ x > 4 fal 
Kal TarHOF réyerv. Th AoLTrOY 7) ATroNAVELY TOD 
thy cuvdrrovta adXo én GAM ayalorv, BaTE 
\ \ 4 / > / 
pndé 70 Bpaxyvtatov Sudotnpa atronetTrewy; 
a / 

r’. “Ev $s HArlov, xdv Suelpyntar totyors, 
dpecwv, ards pupiows. pba ovolta Kon, Kav 
Sueipyntar idiws owis copace pupiow. pba 
wuxn, Kav diceot Sieipynrar pupias Kai idiars 
Teprypapais. pia voepa uy, Kav diaxexpicOat 
Soxh. Ta pev ody AdAdra pépn TOV Eipnuévor, 

7 
olov mvevpata, Kal wroKxeipeva avaicOnta Kal 
> a # > 4 / > lal yy na 5 
GVOLKELMTA ANANAOLS* KALTOL KAKELVA TO VOOVY 
ouvéxer Kal TO él Ta ai’Ta Bpidov. Sidvora Sé 
207 eo. X \ e / / / 
idiws émt TO opopvroyv Treivetar Kal cvvictatat 
Kal ov dueipyeTat TO KoLWwviKoY Talos. 

ra’. Ti éwifntets; 7O StayiverOar;” adra TO 

> / » Vans a \ bY \ 4 
aicOavecOat; TO oppav; TO avEecPat; TO AHnyew 

5 \ a n X\ a , 
avOis; TO hovn yphoOar; 7d SvavocicPa; ti 

| hae. / ” al ? \ 4 
tovTwy mo00ov cor aévov Soxei; ei Sé Exacta 

, al 
evkatagppovnta, mpootG. éi tedevtaioy TO 
érecOat TO Oyo Kal TO Ded. AAA payxeTaL 
TO Thay TADTA, TO AYOEcOaL, ci Sia TOD TEOVNKEVAL 
oTEepnoeTal TLs AVTOD. 


1 +d évodv Rend. : 7d voodv Gat.: tov vody PA. 
2 SiamvetcOa Leopold. 


1 xii, 10, 18 ete. 2v. 6; ix. 23. 





3 viii, 57. 


338 ; 











BOOK XII 


29. Salvation in life depends on our seeing every- 
thing in its entirety and and its reality, in its Matter 
and its Cause!: on our doing what is just and 
speaking what is true with all our soul. What 
remains but to get delight of life by dovetailing 
one good act? on to another so as not to leave the 
smallest gap between ? 

30. There is one Light of the Sun, even though 
its continuity be broken by walls, mountains,’ and 
countless other things. There is one common 
Substance, even though it be broken up _ into 
countless bodies individually characterized. There is 
one Soul, though it be broken up among countless 
natures and by individual limitations. There is 
one Intelligent Soul, though it seem to be divided. 
Of the things mentioned, however, all the other 
parts, such as Breath, are the material Substratum of 
things,t devoid of sensation and the ties of mutual 
affimity—yet even they are knit together by the 
faculty of intelligence and the gravitation which 
draws them together. But the mind is peculiarly 
impelled towards what is akin to it, and coalesces 
with it, and there is no break in the feeling of social 
fellowship. 

31. What dost thou ask for? Continued existence ? 
But what of sensation? Of desire? Of growth? 
Of the use of speech? The exercise of thought? 
Which of these, thinkest thou, is a thing to long 
for? But if these things are each and all of no 
account, address thyself to a final endeavour to 
follow Reason and to follow God.® But it militates 
against this to prize such things, and to grieve if 
death comes to deprive us of them. 

4 With an alteration of stops these words may mean such 


as Breath and Matter, wre devoid of sensation. 
5 vii, 31; xii. 27. 339 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


AB’. Ulderov pépos tod ameipou cat axyavods 
aidvos amopeuépicta, éExdot@; TaxXLoTa yap 
> 7 an > d / \ n e 
evadavitetar TH aidi@. mwoortov bé THs Gdns 


ovcias; mootov Se Ths 6Ans Wuyts; év wooT@ Oe. 


Bodapiw tis dAns ys Epres; wavta tavta 
> 4, \ / / EI / ¢ \ € 
évOupovpevos pndév peya pavrdtov 7) 70, @s pev 7) 
on pvow ayer, Tov, mdoxew Sé, dS 7 KoLV?) 
dhvars hépet. 
ef U Ila e lel a \ ¢e / A > 
y. lds éavtd yphrar To ayepovixdv; év 
yap ToUT@ TOTaY éoTL. TAaOdEe NOLTA t) TpOaipeTa 
éoTi 1) ampoaipeta, vexpa Kal KaTrvos. 
ro’. Ilpds Oavadtov xatadpovnow éyeptixo- 
Tatov, STL Kal of tiv Hdovnv ayaBdov Kal Tov 
movov Kakov xKpivovtes Sums TovTOV KaTedppor- 
noav. 
U e \ BA / ’ \ \ e \ 
Ne. “Ou TO evKatpov povoy ayabov Kai @_TO 
, \ ‘ Bb] \ i 2 na an 
mXelous KaTa Noyov opGdv mpdkEeas atrododvat TO 
odrywrépas év iow éoti, Kal @ Tov Kdcpov Oewphoar 
/ x 4 / > / 4 
mrelove 7) eXdocow xXpovm ov Siapéper, TovT@ 
> € / / 
ovde 0 Odvatos hoBepov. 
, ” > 7 > a 4 7 
Ao’. "“AvOpwrre, érodtevow ev TH meyady TaVTH 
/ 4 / 8 PF, > / y x ¢ / 1 
moneu Ti cor Suadéper, et TévTE ETETL <i) ExaTOV> ; 
TO yap KaTa Tovs vopous loov éExdoT@. Ti odv 
Secvov, ei THS TONEWS ATOTéWTEL GE OV TYPAVVOS 
>QO\ \ y > oLe 4 ¢€ > n 
ovde dixactis ddiK0s, GAN 1 hvats } ciaayayovca; 


1 <i tpiol> Reiske: I have preferred éxatdv. 





1 iv. 50; v. 24. 
2 Epict. i. 12 § 26: od« 2 re NAtkov mépos dl mpos Ta byTa; 
3 iii. 4. tiv. Lisl xaBe aay 


340 


a 


= rT) 








BOOK XII 


32. How tiny a tragment of the boundless abyss 
of Time has been appointed to each man!! For 
in a moment it is lost in eternity. And how tiny 
a part of the Universal Substance !? How tiny of 
the Universal Soul! And on how tiny a clod of 
the whole Earth dost thou crawl! Keeping all 
these things in mind, think nothing of moment 
save to do what thy nature leads thee to do, 
and to bear what the Universal Nature brings 
thee.’ 

33. How does the ruling Reason treat itself ?+ 
That is the gist of the whole matter. All else, 
be it in thy choice or not, is but as dust and 
smoke.® 

34. Most efficacious in instilling a contempt for 
death is the fact that those who count pleasure a 
good and pain an evil have nevertheless contemned 
ed 

35. Not even death can bring terror to him who 
regards that alone as good which comes in due 
season,’ and to whom it is all one whether his acts 
in obedience to right reason are few or many, and 
a matter of indifference whether he look upon the 
world for a longer or a shorter time.® 

36. Man, thou hast been a citizen in this World- 
City,? what matters it to thee if for five years or 
a hundred? For under its laws equal treatment 
is meted out to all. What hardship then is there in 
being banished from the city, not by a tyrant or an 
unjust judge but by Nature who settled thee in it? 

6 e.g. Otho, Petronius, and Epicurus, for whose famous 
syllogism on death see Aul. Gell. ii. 8; Diog. Laert. Epic. 
xxxi. § 2, and cp. Bacon’s Essay ‘‘ On Death.” 

7 x. 20; xii, 23. 8 iii. 7; xii. 36. 

Lai 16; iii. 11; iv. 4. 

. 341 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


> \ > 4 lol fol e \ 

olov et Kapmdov aTroAvoL THS oKNVAS 0 TaparaBwv 
otpatnyos. “’AXX’ ov« elroy Ta TévTE mépN, AAAA 
Ta Tpla. Karas eltras: év pévTor TH Biw TA Tpia 
cA \ lal iat \ UA > lal ow 
dXov TO papa éotiv. TO yap TéreELOV Exetvos opiter 
0 TOTE pev THS cvyKploews, viv bé THs dsarvcews 

wv \ \ > , > / »” ic 
aitios' av Oé avaitios auhotépwv. amide odv 
ix \ \ s > 7 ¢/- 1 
tAkews* Kal yap 0 aToAvVMY trEws. 


1 Here follow in A the verses translated in the Introduc- 
tion. 


342 








BOOK XII 


So might a praetor who commissions a comic actor, 
dismiss him from the stage. But I have not played 
my five acts, but only three. Very possibly, but in 
life three acts count as a full play.! For he, that 
is responsible for thy composition originally and thy 
dissolution now, decides when it is complete. 
But thou art responsible for neither. Depart then 
with a good grace, for he that dismisses thee is 
gracious. 
1 iii. 8; xi. 1; Epict. Man 17. 


343 


THE SPEECHES OF MARCUS 


THE SPEECHES OF MARCUS 


INTRODUCTION 


Marcus learnt from Rusticus to “ eschew rhetoric and 
fine language”! and thanked the Gods that ‘‘ he had not 
made more progress in his rhetorical studies,” ? but the 
Greek in which he clothed his Thoughts shews that he had 
made some progress in them, and Dio says he was 
‘* practised in the principles of rhetoric.” ® 

Only three speeches, purporting to be by Marcus, have 
come downto us. It is not certain how far we can accept 
them as authentic. The first is reported by Dio Cassius, 
who was twenty at the time of its delivery, and as he 
lived at Rome, and afterwards held high office in the 
state, he had ample sources of information. He ex- 
pressly states that Marcus read this address to the 
soldiers on the rebellion of Cassius, and being written it 
was more likely to have been preserved verbatim. It 
cannot be denied that the speech has touches character- 
istic of Marcus, but of course these might have been 
purposely introduced by a skilful forger. On the other 
hand the style is rather rhetorical and artificial and more 
in keeping with Dio’s known proclivities. Still there is a 
dignity and restraint, not altogether unworthy of the 
occasion, noticeable throughout. Unfortunately it only 
comes to us in the epitome of Xiphilinus, and we do not 
know how far he has curtailed it, and it certainly seems 





1 See above, i. 7; Fronto, De Hog. 3. 
2 See above, i. 17, § 4. 3 Dio, 71. 35, §1. 


346 


ee  —eeEEeEEOEeEEeEEeEeEeEeEeEeEEeeaeEeEeEeEeEeEOeee 








THE SPEECHES OF MARCUS 


too short for such an occasion. In any case it must have 
been delivered in Latin. 

The last remark applies also to the dying speech of 
Marcus as given by Herodian, another contemporary 
authority, but one who was fond of composing suitable 
speeches for his characters when what they had actually 
said was not recoverable. The shortness of this speech 
may be said to be in its favour, as the Emperor was in 
the last stages of his illness. The opening words are 
perhaps too plaintive and personal, but the remainder is 
natural and appropriate. The last few words of such a 
ruler and friend must have impressed his hearers and 
may well have been taken down at the time. Still it is 
strange that there is no hint of this speech in the 
description of the last scene given by Capitolinus.! 

The third speech, from the ‘‘ Life of Avidius Cassius ” 
by Gallicanus, is much less likely to be genuine. That 
particular piece of work is full of suspected material, and 
Marius Maximus, from whom this speech is probably 
taken, though a contemporary, is not a trustworthy 
authority, while the diction and absurd rhetoric of the 
missive, for it was a speech sent to the Senate and not 
delivered in it, are decidedly against its genuineness. 





1 Who here uses as his authority ‘‘ The last great historian 
of Rome”; see Das Kaiserhaus der Antonine und der Letzte 
Historiker Roms, Otto Th. Schulz, p. 128, who thinks the 
anonymous writer may have been Lollius Urbicus. See 
Lampr. Vit. Diadum. ix. 2. 


347 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


‘O 8€ 8) Mdpxos mapa tod Oinpov! rot trys Kammatoxias 
apxovros ri emavdotacw avrod paddy Téws pev ouvéxpuTrev 
avrd, éret 8€ of orpariata rH te Hyun loxupas Tapdocovro 

s , 4 , > A SF. O75 , 
kal éAoyorroiouy ToAd, guvexddecev avrovs Kai avéyva Todde: 


“Ovdx ayavaxtnoay, & avotpari@ta, 7) ddupovpevos trap- 
eAndvOa. yxadreraive pev yap ri dei mpds rd Satpdnor, & 
, »” > 7 , 9 yy ‘ 27 
nmavra t&eotw; dropiperOa S€ tows avayxn rods adixws 
Svotuxodvras: 6 Kal éuol viv cvpBéBnxev. mwas yap ov dSewov 
Torewots Nuas éx mworeuav cuppeperOa; mas 8 ovk aromov 
kal envio cupmdaknvar; was ovK duddrepa kal Sewvdryre 

\ > , a“ 4 dé \ > > 6 / > 2 AX” 
kal dromia wka, TO pyndev miordv év avOp@rots eivat,? a 
ertBeBovrcidobat ré we td TOU HiAdrarov Kal és ay@va dkovatov 
xabioracOa pyre Te ndiknkdra pyre memAnppeAnkora;? ris 
pev yap apern aapadns, ris d€ didia Ere vopicOnoera epod 

-~ / ~ Ss > > , Xr. ‘ , 4 > , 
ravta merovOdros; mas 8 ovk dmddade pév tiatis,! drdd@de 
dé Amis dyabn; GAN et pev pdvos ey@ exwvdivevor, rap’ obdev 
ay TO mpaypa €romoduny: .ov yap mov kat aOdavaros éyevvnOnr- 
eet O€ Snuooia re dmdotaots, paddov 8€ éravdoracts, yéyove, 
kal 6 méXenos TavT@Y Spoiws Huey Gmrerat, éBovdduny, ei oldv 
Te Rv, TpooxaréoavGa tov Kdoowoy kal dixatodoynoacba 

> a ~ 
mpos avrov tap’ vpiv f mapa tH yepovoia: Kal ndéws ay ayayi 
TapeXopyoa avT@ THs Hyepovias, €i TOTO TS Kows@ ovpcpepew 
edoxe?. Umép Tov Kotvod yap Kat Tovey Kai kwwduvevov Siaredd, 
a + 2 - , 4 a 2 , s a» 
Tocovrov Te évravboi xpdvov €&@ tis “Iradias meroinka, avOpo- 





1 7.e. Martius Verus, see below. 
2 He forgot his own precepts ; see Medit. ix. 42, unless, as 
is possible, the speech came first. 
Dio 71. 34, § 3, oBre Exdv obre tnwv erAnupéret. cp. 
Aristides, Orat. ad Regem, § 106 (Jebb). 
4 cp. Medit. v. 33. 


348 





; 


THE SPEECHES OF MARCUS 


Speech to the Army on the news of the Reepolt of Cassius, 
175 A.D. 


Marcus, learning of the revolt from Verus, the Gover- 
nor of Cappadocia, kept the news secret for a time, but 
as the soldiers were both greatly perturbed by the rumour 
and were freely discussing it, he called them together and 
read the following speech : 


‘“Tt is not, O fellow soldiers, to give way to resentment 
or lamentations that 1 am come before you. For what 
avails it to be wroth with the Divinity that can do what- 
ever pleaseth Him? Still, perhaps, they that are un- 
deservedly unfortunate cannot but bewail their lot ; and 
that is the case with me now. For it is surely a terrible 
thing for us to be engaged in wars upon wars; surely 
it is shocking to be involved even in civil strife, and 
surely it is more than terrible and more than shocking 
that there is no faith to be found among men, and that 
I have been plotted against by one whom I held most 
dear and, although I had done no wrong and com- 
mitted no transgression, have been forced into a conflict 
against my will. For what rectitude shall be held safe, 
what friendship be any longer deemed secure, seeing that 
this has befallen me? Has not Faith utterly perished, 
and good Hope perished with it? Yet I had counted it a 
slight thing, had the danger been mine alone—for assuredly 
I was not born immortal—but now that there has been a 
defection, or rather a revolt, in the state, and the war 
comes home to all of us equally, I would gladly, had it 
been possible, have invited Cassius to argue the question 
out before you or before the Senate, and willingly with- 
out a contest have made way for him in the supreme 
power, had that seemed expedient for the common weal. 
For it is only in the public interest that I continue to 
incur toil and danger, and have spent so much time here 
beyond the bounds of Italy, an old man as I now am 


349 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


mos Kai yépov 78}! Kat dadevys” Kal otre tpodiny GduTov ov 
A o 
Umvov apportw haBeiv duvdpevos. 
> > ° “a 
‘“°Eret 8 ovk dy more ovyxabewwa €s rodto 6 Kagows €bedn- 
cee, Tas yap av moredoee pot, amicTos oUT@ TeEpi eye 
yeyernpévos ; ipas ye, & ovotparidrat, xpi) Oappeiv. ov yap 
/ / ‘ / Sd ~ ‘ > "A 
mov Kpeirrous Kiduxes kat Zvpot Kat “lovdatoe kai Aiydmrior 
tpav ovre éyévovTd mote ovre Exovrat, ovd dv pupidkts meiovs 
vpav, dom viv édarrovs eiciv, abpacbdcw. ov piv ov 
> 
aitos 6 Kdootos, €i kal ra pddiora Kal otparnytKds eivat 
kai TOAAG KatwpOaxévat Soxei, Adyou Tiwds GEvos viv dy pavein: 
»* \ > \ n x ‘ , ~ € , 2 , 
ovre ‘yap aerds KoAutav 7) Kal Aéov veBp@v Hynodpevos aétd- 
praxos yiverat, kal Tov ’ApaBixdy rév Te TlapOixdv exeivoy mé- 
Aepov ot Kdootos add’ ipeis katetpydoacbe. Gros Te, i 
kal exeivos ex Tav mpos [ldpOovs mpaxOevray evddxipos eorw, 
» x ¢ co 2a 3 a WY e IAG ‘ arr > cot 
éxere Kal tpeis Odnpor,® ds ovdév Hrrov GAAa Kal paddov adrod 
4 
kal eviknoe TEi@ Kal KaTEKTNOUTO. 
> a 
“AA raya peév kal 78 peravevdnke, COvTa pe pepabnkos: 
ne ”~ 
ov yap mov kai G\Aws 7) @s TeTeMeuTHKOTUS pov Toir’ érroincer. 
‘ Lal ‘ , 
av 8€ Kai emi mreioy dvricxn, adN brav ye Kai mpociovras 
c a , cal 
npas rvOnra, mavTas yvoowaxnoet, kal bas PoBnOels kai eye 
> > alte , > a , 
aideoOeis. eya yodv év pdvov bédotka, & cvoTpati@ra, eipnoerat 
a n~ , 
yap maca mpos duas 7 adnGera, pr) ifroe avTos EavTov amroxTeivy, 
> . > ‘ c , was > - aA , or 
aiaxuvbets és Tv nuerépay dy EAOciv, 7) Erepos paler, Gte TE 
H€@ Kal ore én’ adrov 6pp@pat, TodTo momen. peeya yap pov 
3 \ ~ , “paces * , \ eye 2D \ r 
GOXov kat Tov TrohEwov Kal THs vikns, Kai NAikov ovdels TaTOTE 
> , ” 2 U , A Gray dee 4 > U 
avOparev éhaBev, dpaipnoera. ri dé rodré eorw; adiknoavra 
” Pe ea ry , G , , - , 
@Operoy apeiva, mpos diriav trepBavta pirov peiva, riorw 
AY ov* 8 io6 is ev i vo 
katahvoartt miatov* SitayeverOar, mapddo&a pév tows tad 
cal > > > al a cal r 
tpiv cbaiverar, GAN’ ovk amtorety bas adrois Sei: od yap tov 





1 He was 54. cp. Thoughts, i. 17, § 6; ii. 2, 6. 

2 Yet five years more of this anxious and strenuous life 
were to be his. cp. Dio, 71. 22, § 3. 

3 Martius Verus. Suidas credits him with tact, slimness, 
and warlike ability. He gave Marcus the first news of 
the revolt. 4 cp. Medit. ix. 42. 


35° 


—_- >” 


eee 








THE SPEECHES OF MARCUS 


and an ailing, unable to take food without pain, or sleep 
without care. 

‘*But since Cassius would never agree to meet me for 
this purpose—for what faith could he have in me who kept 
so ill his faith to me?—you, my fellow soldiers, must in 
any case be of good cheer. For never, I take it, have 
Cilicians and Syrians and Jews and Egyptians been a 
match for you, and never will be, no, not though their 
muster was as many thousand times more numerous than 
yours as it is now less. Nor need even Cassius himself, 
ever so good a commander though he is reputed to be, and 
credited with many successful campaigns, be held of any 
great account at the present crisis. For an eagle at the 
head of daws makes no formidable foe, nor a lion at the 
“head of fawns, and as for the Arabian war and the great 
Parthian war, it was you, not Cassius, who brought them 
to a successful end. Moreover, even if he has won dis- 
tinction by his Parthian campaigns, you too have Verus, 
who has won not less but even far more victories, and 
made greater acquisitions than he. 

‘‘But perhaps even now, learning that I am alive, he 
has repented of his action ; for surely it was only because 
he believed me dead, that he acted thus. But if he still 
maintain his opposition, yet when he learns that we are 
indeed marching against him, he will doubtless take a 
different view both from dread of you and from reverence 
for me. I at any rate, fellow soldiers, have but one fear— 
for I will tell you the whole truth—that either he should 

.take his own life from very shame of coming into our 
presence, or that another should slay him, learning both 
that I shall come and that I am actually setting out against 
him. For great is the prize of war and of victory—a 
prize such as no one among men has ever won—of 
which I shall be deprived. And what is that? To forgive 
a man who has done wrong, to be still a friend to one 
who has trodden friendship underfoot, to continue faithful 
to one who has broken faith. What I say may perhaps 
seem to you incredible, but you must not disbelieve it ; 


357 


~ MARCUS AURELIUS 


kat drhds mavra ra ayaa ex Tov dvOpamev amddodev, GAN 
+ x > « ° a “ > , > a , , 
éott Kal map’ Hiv ere THs apxaias aperns eipavoy. dy Sé 
mov amtoti Tis, Kat dua TovTO pettdy €ori por Td emOvpnpa, 
? ‘ - / 4 cal wn 
iva, & pndeis Gv moredoee yeverOa Sivacba, Todro i8n ye- 
vopevov. ws eywye Toit dy pdvov ex TOV TapovT@y KakKOY 
kepddvauut, ei SvvnOeiny Karas OéoOa td mpaypa kai Setgat 
a > , cd ‘ > , a 4 > a 
maow avOpomos ore kat éepdudios modépos Eotw dpbds 


xenoacOa.”— Dio, 71. 24-26, § 4. 


Ex Oratione Marci Antonini (ad Senatum missa). 


‘* Habetis igitur p.c., pro gratulatione victoriae generum 
‘“meum consulem, Pompeianum? dico, cuius aetas olim 
remuneranda fuerat consulatu, nisi viri fortes interven- 
_ issent, quibus reddi debuit, quod a re publica debebatur. 
Nune quod ad defectionem Cassianam pertinet, vos oro 
atque obsecro, p.c., ut censura vestra deposita meam 
pietatem clementiamque servetis, immo vestram, neque 
quemquam unum senatus occidat. Nemo senatorum pun- 
iatur, nullius fundatur viri nobilis sanguis, deportati 
redeant, proscripti bona recipiant. Utinam possem mul- 
tatos etiam ab inferis excitare! Non enim umquam 
placet in imperatore vindicta sui doloris, quae si iustior 
tuerit, acrior videtur. Quare filiis Avidii Cassii et genero 
et uxori veniam dabitis. Et quid dico veniam? Cum illi 
nihil fecerint. Vivant igitur securi scientes sub Marco 
vivere. Vivant in patrimonio parentum pro parte donato,* 
auro, argento, vestibus fruantur, sint securi, sint vagi et 





1 cp. Medit. vi. 2. 

2 Incorrect. This Pompeianus was‘consul in 173. In 176 
Claud. Pompeianus Quintianus, who married the daughter of 
Verus and Lucilla (see Dio 72. 4, § 4), was cons. suff. As for 
the victory, there had been no battle, but Cassius after ‘‘a 
three months’ dream, of empire” was assassinated by one of 
his own soldiers. 


352 











THE SPEECHES OF MARCUS 


for, I take it, all that is good has not vanished utterly 
from among men, but there still remains among us a vestige 
of pristine virtue. But if any be incredulous, the greater 
even on that account is my desire that he should with his 
own eyes see actually done that which no man would 
believe could be done. For this would be the only gain 
I could get from my present troubles, if I were able to 
bring the matter to an honourable conclusion, and show 
to all the world that even civil war can be dealt with on 
right principles.” ! 


From a Speech of Marcus Antoninus (sent to the Senate). 


‘In return, then, for your congratulations on our 
victory, Conscript Fathers, you have as consul my son- 
in-law Pompeianus, whose mature years should long ago 
have been rewarded with a consulship had not other 
brave men had prior claims for recognition from the state. 
Now with regard to the rebellion of Cassius, I beg and 
beseech you, Conscript Fathers, to lay aside all thoughts 
of severity and safeguard my or rather your humanity 
and clemency, and let no single person be put to death 
by the Senate. Let no Senator be punished, the blood 
of no man of noble birth be spilt ; let the exiles return, 
the proscribed recover their goods. Would that I could 
recall the condemned also from the Shades! For revenge 
for his own wrongs never sits well on an emperor; the 
more it is deserved, the more severe it seems. So 
you must pardon the sons of Avidius Cassius, and his 
son-in-law, and his wife. But why do I say ‘‘ pardon,” 
since they have done no wrong? Let them live, then, 
in security, knowing that they live under Marcus. Let 
them live on their patrimony proportionately divided ; 
let them enjoy their gold, their silver, their raiment ; 


1 Or, made a right use of. 





3 Capit. Vit. Marc. xxvi. 11, 12: filii Cassii et amplius 
media parte acceperunt paterni patrimonii et auro atque 
argento adiuti. 


$53 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


liberi, et per ora omnium ubique populorum circumferant 
meae, circumferant vestrae pietatis exemplum. Nec 
magna haéc est, p.c., clementia, veniam proscriptorum 
liberis et coniugibus dari: ego vero a vobis peto, ut 
conscios senatorii ordinis et equestris a caede, a pro- 
scriptione, a timore, ab infamia, ab invidia, et postremo 
ab omni vindicetis iniuria! detisque hoc meis temporibus, 
ut in causa tyrannidis qui in tumultu cecidit, probetur 
occisus. ’’—Vulceat, Vit. Avid. Cass. xii. 


7 a n lal 
Suykaéaas rovs hidovs doo Te Tapnoav Tv ovyyevOy kal 
Tov maida KaTaoTHOdpueEvos, ererdr TavTes GuYnAOOY, HovVXN TOD 
okipmodos Koudpiaas éavrov TovotTav Adywv ipEaro- 


cal > LR , 

"Ay bea bat pev dpas ep ois dparé pe Siakeipevoy, Oavpacrov 
> ‘ , ‘ 4 > 6 , -r A 2 , cal ~ 
ovdev; dioe te yap Td avOpamuwov édeewdy? ev tais Trev 

~ / > 
dpopirav oupdopais, ta re Seva bm’ byw mecdvra oiktov 
mpokadeira peifova, €pol O€ Te Kal wAéov Umdpxew Tap’ buav 

w" > ‘A > A , ‘ ¢ Led > / + 
olopat ek yap ay avros didketpar rpds buds, awotBaiay evyoray 
SM w+ a ‘ 4 » > , > ia ‘A 
eikéTws HAmika. viv S€ Katpds evKatpos enol Te aicOéaba pt 

cal , 

parny mpos pas TocovTov xpdvov Tiny Te Kal orovdnY KaTa- 

ol cw > fel if , D4 ¢ 4 a. F 
rebcio Oar, tpi te drrodovvat xdpw SeiEacw Gri brép Gv ervyxere 

> > ~ ee , A cf a > se iG 

ovK apvnuoveire. dpare dn pot Toy v1Ldy, Ov avroi aveOpéepacde, 
a Ce , ¢ Xr , 2 B , 3 ‘ 5 , et > 
aptt THs wetpakiov HArkias emtBaivoyra,® kat deduevov Somep ev 
xXetave kal CdAn tOv KvBepynodvr@v, pr mor hepopevos br” 





1 This frigid rhetoric does not savour of Marcus. 

2 Pity was scouted by the sterner Stoics; but see Medit, 
ii. 13. 

> Commodus would be nineteen, but pe:paxiov means 
a boy of fourteen or fifteen. Would dmoBalvovra, unless 


354 








THE SPEECHES OF MARCUS 


let them be unmolested, let them be free to come and go 
as they please, and let them bear witness among all 
peoples everywhere to my humanity and yours. Nor is 
this any great clemency, O Conscript Fathers, that the 
children and wives of the proscribed should be pardoned : 
but what I ask of you is that you should shield all 
accomplices of Cassius among the Senators or Knights 
from death, proscription, apprehension, degradation, 
hatred, and in fact from all injury, and grant this glory 
to my reign, that in a rebellion against the throne death 
should overtake only those who have fallen in the revolt.” 


The Last Words of Marcus. 


Calling together his friends and as many of his relations 
as were at hand, and setting his child before them, 
when all had come together, he raised himself gently 
on his pallet-bed, and began to speak as follows : 


‘*That you should be grieved at seeing me in this state 
is not surprising, for it is natural to mankind to pity the 
misfortunes of their kinsfolk, and the calamities which 
fall under our own eyes call forth greater compassion. 
But I think that something even more will be forthcoming 
from you to me; for the consciousness of my feelings 
towards you has led me to hope for a recompense of good- 
will from you. But now the time is well-timed both for 
me to learn that I have not lavished love and esteem 
upon you in vain for all these years, and for you by 
showing your gratitude to prove that you are not un- 
mindful of the benefits you have received. You see here 
my son, whose bringing-up has been in your own hands, just 
embarking upon the age of manhood and, like a ship amid 
storm and breakers, in need of those who shall guide the 
helm, lest in his want of experience of the right course 





it clashes with the metaphor that follows, meet the 
difficulty ? 


355 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


> Xr Led Fl ~ 8 , > , 1 > Ov > hy 3 
aredovs ths taév Sedvrav eurenpias! es adda émtirndedputa 
ooapayOn. yéverbe 81) obv adita@ ipeis avO Evds epod marépe 
mpocapax6y. yéveabe 81 ody adré bpei sep pes 

‘ , , ‘ OLE , » 
TWoAXol, mepterovTés TE Kai Ta Gpiota oupPBovdAevorTes. ovTE 
yap xpnpdray mAjOos ovdéy avrapxes mpds tupavvidos axpart- 
, 

iay, ore Sopvpopav hpoupa ixavy) piecOa roy apxovra, ei 
pe) Wpovmdpyet 7) Tv imnkdwy evvowa, pdadtora Se exeivor és 

> ~ a” > 80 r 2 A 4 , > > , 
apxis pikos axwdvves Aacav,” Soot py PdBov €& wpdrnros, 
moOov S€ tis at’tey xpnordrntos tais Téy apxopnevey yuxais 
> , > A ¢ > > , 7 > > © A 
evéota£ay. ov yap ot e& avdykns SovAevovres GAN’ of peta 
meovs imaxovovres av’montot Kai €£w Kohakeias Tpoomonrouv 
Spavres te Kal maoyovres Siaredovaw, kai ovdé wore adnnag- 
a ‘ , , @& SESS -~ a ‘ ‘ 
ovow, iy pu) Bia Kat VBpe exi rodtro ayOwor. yxaderoy Se 

co , 

perpidoa te Kal Opoy embeivae emiOvpias imnperovons €&- 
ovaias. totadra 5) cvpBovdevortes ait@, kal Sv dkover Tapav 
bropynckorvres, div Te adrois Kai wacivy apioroy arrodei€ere 
Baoéa, TH TE ep prin xapteiobe Ta péeyiota, ovT@ TE 
poves aidtov® adriy rojoa duvnoec be.” —Herodian, i. 4, § 2. 





! Dio (72. 1. 1) says Commodus was by nature &xakos, but 
from too great awAdrys (cp. 71. 22. 3) and cowardice easily 
influenced by his entourage, and was thus by ignorance led 
into bad ways. See also Julian, Conviv. 429. 14. 

* cp. Vule. Gall. Vit. Cass. viii. 3. 


356 





THE SPEECHES OF MARCUS 


he should be dashed upon the rock of evil habits. Be ye 
therefore to him many fathers in the place of me, his one 
father, taking care of him and giving him the best counsel. 
For neither can any wealth, however abundant, suffice 
for the incontinence of a tyranny, nor a bodyguard be 
strong enough to protect the ruler, unless he has first of 
all the good-will of ‘the governed. For those rulers 
complete a long course of sovranty without danger 
who instil into the hearts of their subjects not fear by 
their cruelty, but love by their goodness. For it is not 
those who serve as slaves under compulsion, but those 
who are obedient from persuasion, that are above suspicion, 
and continue doing and being done by without any cloak 
of flattery, and never show restiveness unless driven to it 
by violence and outrage. And it is difficult to check and 
put a just limit to our desires when Power is their minister. 
By giving my son then such advice, and bringing to his 
memory what he now hears with his own ears, you will 
render him both for yourselves and all mankind the best 
of kings, and you will do my memory the greatest of 
services, and thus alone be enabled to make it immortal.” 

3 This aspiration does not tally with the repeated denuncia- 
tions of fame in the Meditations iii. 10; iv. 19, 33, ri de 
Kal €oriv bAws Td Keluvnortov; bAov KeEvdv. 





357 









S: 2 pan Re 
i ee: weit Hone 
Eee Paiain Bae or, 
‘dant ae 












Hh WieoKe puck 
CA le ivhls, Hie 
: eae. = 


7 y I 

x Silat cs 
i ine errs sche Fe 
See TED til 




















7 De; ti 





1 : ies re 
oun f Ee STON end Adie tet hy aS PSE 

; z Vr ede. > ey ¢ — ee cS 

: ise fo 1S nce hers eho ; Fite sage 

ge ‘ ae H ~ . lig — 
So wees Sigs Oo aten Oba baie 





Puen! Ape aane PY Aiea yo) easel herve oR 

Heat: ' t31F ayy nute, at f rat, bith A 1! Fy O EBs ie *. igh 

te oe ewaees 7 Redehibee ee BASY cine po raga t SEF s sponte LS i 
r ‘ey 1 fs 

Bae odie Ve eet, ae a5 5: sks Fe 


Rasticn ASHE E VED D stort eS: ze 
ea hak availa rapa shy hee ston Godt ane 














Ye 3 Tei bas ia, ; hab 
oS , fend qe} t Pht ts thes 
eo BY S oS ae OF a a, Oss 3 
tapi Mai or | ety bigs “once 





at Fete awd) [a eigen Mere 
WTS wis Af. orgs Lien kat 
(un ashiteaadacs bet AS- etut das 





THE SAYINGS OF MARCUS 


INTRODUCTION 


Noruine lets us into the secret of a man’s character 
better than little anecdotes about him, and even seemingly 
trivial sayings uttered by him without any thoughts of a 
listening posterity. Unfortunately few such reminiscences 
of Marcus are extant, but the little that remains will be 
found to throw some light on a character which it has 
become too much the fashion to accuse of feebleness, 
criminal complaisance and inefficiency on the one hand, 
and on the other of harshness and cruelty. No support 
is given here to either of these mutually destructive 
views of a personality that was a striking combination of 

‘sweetness and gravity,’! of mildness and tenacity, of 
justice and mercy. We see a truly religious man who 
lived up to his creed,? a tempered Stoicism. 





1 Medit. i. 15. 
? Dio 71. 30, § 2; Phil. Vet. Soph. ii. 11 ae 242 Kayser) ; 
C.I.L. ii. 6278 = Eph. Epigr. vii. 385, 


359 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


(1) Capit. iv. 7. 

Post hoc patrimonium paternum sorori! totum con- 
cessit, cum eum ad divisionem mater vocaret, respondit- 
que ‘‘ avi bonis se esse contentum,” addens ‘‘ ut et mater, 
si vellet, in sororem suum patrimonium conferret, ne 
inferior esset soror marito.” ? 


(2) Capit. v. 3, 4. 

Ubi autem comperit se ab Hadriano * adoptatum, magis 
est deterritus quam laetatus, iussusque in Hadriani priv- 
atam domum migrare invitus de maternis hortis‘* recessit. 
Cumque ab eo domestici quaererent, cur tristis in adopt- 


ionem regiam transiret, disputavit ‘‘quae mala in se_ 


contineret imperium.” 


(3) Capit. xxvii. 7. 
Sententia Platonis > semper in ore illius fuit, ‘‘ Florere 
civitates, si aut philosophi imperarent aut imperantes 
philosopharentur.” 


(4) Dio 71. 34, § 4 = Suidas sub voce Mdpkos. 
Ei pev tis xpnoroy Tt emparrev, emyver Kal Expyro és exeivo 
ait@,® rav de érépwy od mpoceroreiro, héywv Gre “ roujoar pev 





1 His only sister Cornificia. |? Ummidius Quadratus. 

3 Schulz supplies Antonino auctore before Hadriano. 

4 These ‘‘ Gardens,” that is, Lucilla’s private residence in 
its own private grounds, were probably on the Caelian hill. 

5 Plato, Rep. 473 p, quoted also by Cicero in his letter to 
his brother Quintus, de provincia administranda.. 

6 A lesson learnt from Pius; see above, i. 16, § 6. 


360 


——— 


eS 


THE SAYINGS OF MARCUS 


(1) 

Arter this! he gave up to his sister all that he had in- 
herited from his father, though his mother invited him to 
share it equally, and replied that he was content with being 
his grandfather’s heir, adding that his mother too, if she 

were willing, should bestow her property upon his sister, 
that his sister might be on an equality with her husband. 


(2) 

When however he learnt that he had been adopted 
by Hadrian, he was more abashed than pleased, and 
when bidden to migrate to Hadrian’s private house, he 
left his mother’s mansion with regret. And when the 
household asked him why he took his adoption into the 
royal house so sadly, he enlarged upon the evils insepar- 
able from sovran power. 





(3) 
The sentence of Plato was for ever on his lips: Well 


was tt for states, if either philosophers were rulers or rulers 
philosophers.” 


(4) 
If anyone did anything excellent, he praised him and 
utilized him for that, but did not expect other things 
from him, saying, It is impussible to make men exactly as 





1 About 136 4.p., when Marcus was 15. 

? Aur. Victor (De Caes. xv. 3) applies the saying to Pius. 
Justin was well advised therefore in his Apology (i. 3), 
addressed to Pius and Marcus, in quoting the similar 
aphorism : én mov kal Tis Tov madatwv: by wh of Epxovres pido- 
copnaowor Kat of apxduevor, ov by efn Tas THAELS EvDALMOVRCAL. 


361 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


> 6 U c 4 nN ay 180 , > 1 - be 
TWLt aGVUp@TOoVs O7TFOLOUS Bod €Tal EXELY AOUVATOY EOTL, TOLS VE 
' 3 A 3 cid » > aA -~ ~ , 
67 ovat mpoonKel, €s O TL Gv Tis a’TaY T@ KoWWG xpHoLpos 
> - » 
i, xpijo Oat. 


(5) Capit. wait. 3, 4. 

Semper cum optimatibus non solum bellicas res sed 
etiam civiles, priusquam faceret aliquid, contulit. Deni- 
que sententia illius praecipua semper haec fuit: ‘‘ Aequius 
est, ut ego tot talium amicorum ? consilium sequar, quam 
ut tot tales amici meam unius yoluntatem sequantur.” 


(6) Dio, 71. 29, § 3. 
7 , 4 / ¢ a ‘ , , 
Ovrw ye moppw tavros povov KaberotnKes ote Kat AedvTa 
s > , > , oA ‘ > ~ 

tiva Sedidaypevoy avOpmmovs éeabiew exéhevoe pev Emax Onvat 
> , a U »” ee eee 3 a» A , 
aitnoauévov tov Snov, ovre b€ éxeivoy eidev ove Tov diddoKa- 
Rov abrov nrevOépace, kaitep emi modd Tov advOpaTar éyxel- 
pévov of, GAAG kai KnpvxOjva mpoo'éragkev Gru “ 
aN 6 , , »3 
eAevbepias memoinkev. 


(7) Capit. xix. 8. 
De qua (sc. Faustina) cum diceretur Antonino Marco, 
ut eam repudiaret, si non occideret, dixisse fertur : ‘‘ Si 





1 See above, ix. 42, and cp. vii. 7. 

2 Amici was a usual name for the Concilium, or Privy 
Council, of the Emperor, a body of advisers first organized 
by Hadrian, and they may be meant here. Of a difficult 
case, where his own interests were involved, Marcus says to 
Fronto (Ad Caes. i. 17): ‘‘ Duas res animo meo carissimas 
secutus sum, rationem veram et sententiam tuam. Di velint, 
ut semper quod agam, secundo iudicio tuo agam.” 

3 The jurist Paulus (Dig. xl. 9. 17) tells us that Marcus 
‘*prohibuit ex acclamatione populi manumittere”; cp. 
Cod. vii. 11.3. Fronto (Ad Caes. i. 8) seems to imply that 
Pius was more indulgent in this matter, 


362 





ed 


4 


a 2st her ee he 


| 


ovdev a&étov — 





THE SAYINGS OF MARCUS 


one wishes them to be, but it is our duty to utilize them, 
such as they are, for any service in which they can be useful 
to the common weal. 


3 
Not only in military but also in civil affairs, before 
doing anything, he always consulted the chief men of 
the State. In fact this was ever a favourite saying of 
his: It is fairer that I should follow the advice of Friends 
so many and so wise, than that Friends so wise and so 
many should follow my single will! 


(6) 

So averse from all bloodshed was his disposition that, 
though at the people’s request he allowed a lion trained 
to devour men to be introduced into the arena, yet he 
not only refused to look at it himself or to enfranchize its 
trainer, in spite of a persistent demonstration of the 
audience against him, but even had it proclaimed that 
the man had done nothing to deserve freedom.” 


(7) 
When it was said to Marcus Antoninus of his wife, 
that he should divorce her, if he did not slay her, he is 
reported to have said, If we dismiss the wife, let us also 





1 cp. Capit. xi. 10, where we are told that Marcus 
consulted his praefecti (i.e. praetorio) and relied esp- 
ecially on the jurist Scaevola. In the Digest he calls 
Rusticus, Volusius Maecianus and Salvius Julianus amici. 
A maxim of his was Blush not to be helped (Medit. vii. 7); 
cp. also Fronto, Ad Caes. i. 17, ‘‘ post consultationem 
amicorum.” 

2 Yet his bias towards the enfranchisement of slaves was 
notorious. See Digest, xxxviii. 4. 3: ‘‘ quod videlicet favore 
constituit libertatis.” 


363 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


uxorem dimittimus, reddamus et dotem.”! Dos aute | 
quid habebatur nisi imperium, quod ille ab soce 
volente Hadriano adoptatus acceperat. 


(8) Digest iv. 2. 13 = alviii. 7. 7 (Callistratus). 

Cum Marcianus diceret, ‘‘ Vim nullam feci,” Caesar 
dixit, ‘‘ Tu vim putas solum si homines vulnerentur? Vis | 
est et tunc quotiens quis id, quod deberi putat, non per | 
iudicem reposcit. Non puto autem nec verecundiae nec | 
dignitati nec pietati tuae convenire quicquam non iure 





-facere.” 


(9) Galen, xiv. 658 (Kiihn). 

To@ d€ MetOodd@? eirev “‘iarpov yew Eva Kai rovrov édevb- | 

» / , , 2 aye 2. 6604 ee a | 
epov, mavu duerédet Te wepi Ewov Aéywv adel ‘*rdv pev iatpav | 
mparov <p> eivat trav 8é giroadgpav pédvov.” 


(10) Dio, 71. 3. 3 = Fragm. Dind. v. p. 206. | 
=Zonaras xii. 2. : 

Kairot 8€ icxvpotdrov dya@vos Kal Aaumpas vikns yeyern- 

pevns, Gu@s 6 av’roxpdtwp airnOels mapa TOY oTpaTi@Tay OvK 

edaxe xpnuara, avro Todro eimay Ort ‘‘ da@ dv meiov mapa TO 

kabeornkds \aBaot, TodTo €k TOU aipatos TaY TE yovéewy hav 

kal Tav ovyyevav éomenpaketa’ TEpt yap To. THs avrapxias 6 





1 The same thing had been said long before by Burrhus to 
Nero of his wife Octavia, and in that case was applicable, 
but it was not so in this, and besides Marcus was devoted to 
his wife to the last. See above, i. 17, § 7; Capit. xxvi. 4 ff. ; 
Dio, 71. 30, § 1. 

2 One of the court physicians, who had been utterly wrong | 
in their diagnosis of the illness of Marcus, while Galen had 
accurately divined it by merely feeling the patient’s pulse. 


364 











THE SAYINGS OF MARCUS 


surrender the dowry. But what was meant by the dowry 
if not the Empire, which he had received when adopted 
by his father-in-law at Hadrian’s wish ?! 


- (8) 

When Marcianus said, ‘‘I have done no violence,” 
Caesar said, Do you think that violence is shewn only if 
men are wounded ? There is violence then also, whenever a 
man demands back what he thinks due to him otherwise 
than by judicial process. But I do not think it consistent 
with either your modesty or your dignity or your loyalty to 
the state that you should do anything except legally. 


(9) 

And he said to Peitholaus that he had but one physician 
and he was a free man, and he went on to say repeatedly 
about me that I was the first of physicians and the only 
philosopher.” 


(10) 


And yet, though a most stubborn contest had been 
followed by a brilliant victory, nevertheless, when peti- 
tioned by the soldiers, the Emperor refused to give them 
a largess, saying only this, that the more they received 
beyond their fixed pay, the more would be wrung from the 
life-blood of their parents and kinsfolk; for in the matter 





1 Marcus did not receive the Empire through Pius, but by 
Hadrian’s direct nomination. The latter arranged for Marcus 
to marry Fabia, the sister of Lucius Commodus, but Piusbroke 
this arrangement in favour of his own daughter Faustina. 
She inherited an immense patrimoniwm from her father for 
Marcus. 

- 2 Galen was one of the most remarkable men of ancient 
times. 


365 


MARCUS AURELIUS : 


Geds pdvov kpivery Sdvara,” } 


col ~ > 

@s avrav hpxev Hote, xaimep ev Towovrows Kal tydtKovTots 
mohépos ov, pndev é£@ tod mpoonKovros pnt’ ek Kodakeias 
eimeiy pnt ek PoBov troujoa.” 


(11) Philostratus, Vit. Soph: ii. 1, p. 242, Kayser. 


‘YO rovrov 61 Tod mabous exdpav 6 “Hpadns €yévero kal 


3 ore Evvous Kat Gavarov 


mapi Ger es rd Bacidetov StxaoTiproy 
7 A ‘ 4 , > \ a > 7 
epav. tmapedOav yap xabiotaro és StaBodas Tod av’roxpdropos 
ovde oynpaticas Tov Noyor, ws cikds jy dydpa yeyvpvacpevoy 
ths towode ideas petayepioacba tiv éavtod xodjy, GAN 
drnykavicpern TH YAw@TTy Kat yupvy dvereivero Néeyor “radra 
¢ , , a / 4 ef , ’ 
prot 7 Aovkiou Eevia, Ov ov pot ereprwas: GOev Siders, yuvarxi 
pe kal tpiete? madim KataxapiCopevos.” Bagaaiov dé Tov 
, ‘ , , > Lod ¢ teu , 
mercateupevov TO Eihos Oavarov aire pyoavros 6 “Hpwodns 
**& Adore,” En, “yep@v Gdiya poBeira.” 6 pEev odv amnOe 


o \ / ay 2 4 
OUT@ Kal c@ppdves Kai eyepara 





~ ’ ° UJ ~~ 3 , , ‘ 
tov Suaortnpiov eimav tavra kal peréwpov Katadeiyas todd 
tov vdaros,' nueis dé trav éemidnros TH Mdpxm prrocodn- 
Oévrwy kal ra, epi thy Sixny ravrynv yyopeba: od yap Evviyaye 





1 The other version has: 7d 3& xpdtos Tis ad’rapxlas obK év 
TOis OTpaTi@Tais GAN ev TE Oe@ xeirar. 


2 op. Aristides (Ad Reg. § 116, Jebb.): wal why 7a uty xpds 


moAeutous dvSpelois moAAots bwipke yeveaOat, bd Oe TAY OpETepwy — 


otpatiwray a’tovs UpxecOat <paddrov> h xpareiv: 5 5é obtw 
padlws expdtnge kal narerthioato, Sore woAAa@v wey Kal arelpwr 
bvtwy Ttav Sedouévwv aitois, xarerav Se kal poBepav ef wh 
tocavTa AapuBavew, ove emndénoe (MS érnite) ras emiOuulas 
avT@v K.T.A. 

3 The trial took place at Sirmium in Pannonia about 
170 a.p., Herodes being accused of cruel and illegal conduct 
at Athens. He had been accused by the same persons of 
similar malpractices nearly thirty years before (see Fronto, 
Ad Caes. iii. 2-6). This Haseties was an Athenian famous 


for his riches, his generosity, and his oratory. He had been ~ 


the teacher of Marcus in Greek rhetoric. 
4 The water-clock that timed the speakers in a trial. 


366 











THE SAYINGS OF MARCUS 


indeed of his sovranty God alone could be judge. With 
such wisdom and self-command did he rule them that, 
though engaged inso many and such great wars, he never 
swerved from what was right so as either to say anything 
from flattery or do anything from fear.! 


(11) 

Herodes was driven frantic by this calamity * and came 
up to the Emperor’s seat of judgment no longer in his 
right mind and in love with death. For coming forward 
he set himself to rail at the Emperor, and without 
measuring his words or keeping his anger in hand, as 
might have been expected from one who was practised in 
speaking, but in defiant and unbridled language he gave 
vent to his passion, saying ‘‘ This is all that comes of my 
friendship with Lucius,* whom you sent to me, that in 
judging me you gratify your wife and three-year old 
child.”’* But when Bassaeus,® who had been invested 
with the power of capital punisliment, threatened him 
with death, Herodes said, ‘‘ My fine fellow, an old man 
has little more to fear.” Saying this he left the court 
without availing himself of his full time for speaking. 
But in our opinion the conduct of Marcus at this trial too 
was signally in keeping with his philosophical tenets ; for 





1 This incident recorded by Dio belongs to the earlier stage 
of the Marcomannic war, when the Emperor was in great 
straits for money. 

2 The calamity was the death by lightning of his adopted 
daughters, the children of Alcimedon. 

3 Lucius Verus, the colleague of Marcus, who had died 
jabout a year before. He stayed with Herodes on his way to 
the East in 162 

4 Vibia Sabina, the last child of Marcus, who with 
Faustina, hence called Mater Castrorum, was with him at 
Sirmium. 

5 Bassaeus Rufus, praetorian prefect 168-177. 


367 




















MARCUS AURELIUS 


Tas opis, obd€ ErpeWe Td dupa, 6 Kav Staernrns rus emabev 
GN emorpéewas éavroy és rods ’AOnvaiovs ‘‘ dmodoyeiabe, 
épn, “© *AOnvaion, ei kal pi Evyxe@pet “Hpodys.” k 
> , > ’ ae - ‘ > a ow 

axovoy amohoyoupevwy emt mroddois pev apavas iAynoev 
dvayryvackopéevns 8€ ait@ xai ’A@nvaiwy éxkdnoias,! ev 
eaivovro Kabanrépevot tov ‘Hpwdov, as Tods apxovras TH 
‘ 7% G , ~ a ’ , ‘ 

EdAdbos trrorrotovpévov TOAAG TH péAert, Kai tov Kai BeBon 


“ce 


, ~ ”~ 
kotes ‘*& mixpod peAttos” Kai madu ‘‘ waxdprot of ev TH Hor 


aroOmexovtes,” ovtras éceicbn tiv kapdiav id’ Sy Heovoev, o 
es Saxpva havepa iraxOnva. ths d€ trav ’AOnvaiwy drohoyia 
exovons Katyyopiay Tov te “Hpwdouv Kal trav amehevOépwy TI 
> ‘4 c , > ‘ > , + , ’ 
épyiv 6 Mdpxos és Tods amedevOépous erpewe kohdoe xpnod 
2 a 
pevos @s oioy eretkel, OUT yup ad’rds xapaxtypiCer Thy EauT 
iow, pov@ dé "Adkyped Vv iav éravnkev ‘* a ® 
Kpiow, pore kyedovre THY Tiwpiav éravnKkev ‘* arroxp 
> © U (7 28 ~ ’ yap ~ 
car eiva of” dyoas ‘‘rhv émt rois réxvots auphopar.” rtadr 
pev 81 Bde eprrocodeiro tS Madpko. 


(12) Themistius, Orat. 15. 191b. 


’Avt@vive TO ‘Popaiwy adtoKpdtopt, @ TOVT@ avTO emavup 
o, e eh t 
‘ce > ‘i 2. w a ‘ © \ , > A 
6 Evoe8ns” jy,2 tod orparedipatos ind Sipous [aire 
, , 4 - ‘ 
meCopévor,, avarxav Ta xelpe 6 Bactdeds mpds Tov ovpay 
“ , 97 “ -~ . > , \ | ee 
ravtn” edn “tH xeEwpl mportpeauny oe Kal irérevoa Tr 
Cais Soripa, 7 anv odk adeopny.” kal otra xarjdere 7 
bedv TH Edy Gore €& aidpias HKov vepeda bdpodhopodioa to 


‘ 


oTpati@tats. 





) Perhaps éyxAjoews. 
2 This was the peculiar cognomen of Pius, but Mare 
sometimes receives it even in inscriptions. 


368 





THE SAYINGS OF MARCUS 


‘he did not frown, or so much as turn his eyes, as even an 


arbitrator might have done, but turning to the Athenians 
said: Make your plea, men of Athens, even though Herodes 
is not for allowing you to do so. And as he listened to 
their case, at many points he was secretly grieved, but 


-when the complaint of the Athenian Assembly was 


being read to him, in which they openly attacked 
Herodes for trying to win over the Governors of Greece 
with many honeyed words, and somewhere or other even 
cried out, ‘‘O bitter honey!” and again, ‘‘ Happy they 
that perish in the pestilence!” he was so deeply moved 
by what he heard, that he was brought to tears in the 
sight of all. But as the case of the Athenians comprised 


‘an accusation against his freedmen as well as against 


Herodes, Marcus diverted his anger on to the freedmen, 
punishing them however as leniently as possible—for 
that is how he himself characterizes his sentence,—but 
to Alcimedon alone he remitted the punishment, alleging 
that his calamity in respect of his children was punishment 
enough.! In a way then thus worthy of a philosopher 
did Marcus act on this occasion. 


(12) 


When the army of Antoninus the Roman Emperor, 
who also had the cognomen of Pius, was perishing of 
thirst,? the king, raising both his hands to heaven, 
said, With this hand, wherewith I have taken away no 
life, have I implored Thee and besought the Giver of life. 
And he so prevailed with God by his prayer that upon 
a clear sky there came up clouds bringing rain to his 
soldiers. 





1 ep. his words in the Digest, i. 18. 14: his madness is in 
itself punishment enough. 
2 At the time of the so-called ‘‘ miraculous victory ” over 


| the Quadi in 174 ; see Dio, 71. 8. 


369 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


(13) Ammianus Mareellinus, xxii. 5. 


Cum Palaestinam transiret Aegyptum petens Judae- 
orum foetentium et tumultuantium saepe taedio percitus 
dolenter dicitur exclamasse, ‘‘O Marcomanni, O Quadi, 
O Sarmatae, tandem alios vobis inertiores! inveni.” ‘ 


(14) Dio, Fragm. Dind. v. p. 206. 


“Ort mapackevalouevov tod Mdpkov? eis tov kata Kaociouv 
modepov ovdeuiay BapBapixny ocuppayiay edéaTo kairot 
col , a“ a Lal 
TOAKGV GuvOpaporvtToy aiT@, héywv ‘‘yI) xpHvat Tois Bap- 

Bdpos eidévar Ta pera&d ‘Papaioy kwovpeva Kaka.” 


(15) Vule. Gallicanus, Vit. Cass. viit. 


Caput eius ad Antoninum cum delatum esset, ille non 
exultavit, non elatus est, sed etiam doluit ‘‘ ereptam sibi 
esse occasionem misericordiae,” cum diceret ‘‘se vivum 
illum voluisse capere, ut illa exprobraret beneficia sua 
eumque servaret.”” Denique cum quidam diceret repre- 
hendendum Antoninum, quod tam mitis esset in hostem 
suum eiusque liberos et adfectus atque omnes, quos 
conscios tyrannidis repperisset, addente illo qui repre- 
hendebat ‘‘Quid si ille vicisset ?” dixisse dicitur: ‘‘ Non 
sic deos coluimus nec sic vivimus, ut ille nos vinceret.” 
Enumeravit deinde ‘‘ omnes principes, qui occisi essent, 
habuisse causas quibus mererentur occidi nec quemquam 
facile bonum vel victum a tyranno vel occisum, dicens 





1 This word is doubtful, another reading being ietiores. 
Sug ested emendations are inquietiores, ineptiores. 
his should be in the nominative case. 


37° 











THE SAYINGS OF MARCUS 


(13) 


When he was crossing Palestine on his way to Egypt, 
constantly moved with disgust at the unsavoury and 
turbulent Jews, he is said to have cried out, O Marco- 
manni, O Quadi, O Sarmatians, at length have I fownd 
others more useless than you.! 


(14) 


When Marcus was making preparations for the war 
against Cassius he would not accept any aid from bar- 
barians, though many offered him their services, saying 
that the barbarians must not know the troubles that were 
being stirred wp between Romans.” 


(15) 


When the head of Cassius was brought to him, Anton- 
inus shewed no exultation or pride, but even lamented 
that he had been robbed of an opportunity for compussion, 
for he had wished to take him alive, he said, that he might 
reproach him with the benefits he had done him, and then 
spare his life. Lastly when one said that Antoninus was 
to blame for his clemency toward his enemy and his 
enemy’s children and relations and all whom he had 
found to be accomplices in the usurpation, the man who 
had imputed the blame going on to say, ‘‘ What if he had 


_ been successful ?”’ Marcus is said to have answered, M’ 
» ay 


worship of the Gods has not been such, my life is not such, 
that he could be successful. He then, enumerating all the 
Emperors who had been killed, pointed out that they had 
deserved their fate, and that no good Emperor had easily 
been overcome by a usurper or slain, adding that Nero had 


1 The date would be 176. 

2 So in the Boer War, in view of the native question in 
South Africa, England refused to employ her Indian and 
Maori troops. 





371 


BB 2 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


meruisse Neronem, debuisse Caligulam, Othonem et 
Vitellium non imperare voluisse.”! Etiam de Galba 
paria sentiebat, cum diceret ‘‘in imperatore avaritiam 
esse acerbissimum malum. Denique non Augustum, non 
Traianum, non Hadrianum, non patrem suum a rebellibus 
potuisse superari, cum et multi fuerint et ipsis vel invitis 
vel insciis exstincti.” Ipse autem Antoninus a senatu 
petiit, ‘‘ne graviter in conscios defectionis animadverte- 
retur,” eo ipso tempore, quo rogavit, ‘‘ne quis senator 
temporibus suis capitali supplicio adficeretur,” quod illi 
maximum amorem conciliavit. 


(16) Philostratus, Vit. Soph. i. 9, p. 252, Kays. 


Oixarny S€ kai rov “Apioreidny ris Spvpyns elev ovK 


addfov erawos adda Stxatorarés Te Kal dAnOéoraros. Thy yap. 


, 4 > Lal pee Y ~ ‘ , 
mod TavTny apavicbeioay ind cetcpav TE Kal XxaopdTov 
a > uA 4 4, c = 4 , 
oUT@ TL @oppato mpbs Tov Mapkov, ws TH pev GAn povodia 

4 8 D \ : 2s gs ~A GORE s > 4 
Oapa éemiorevaéa tov Baorréa, emi de r@ ‘* Céhupor S€ epjuny 
xararvéovor” kai Sdxpva TO BiBrip* emiara€a tov Baordea, 
, col , > ~ ~ > , > , 3 
Evvotkiav te Th mode ex Tav Tob "Apioteidov évdocivev 
vevoa. erdyxave S€ kai Evyyeyovas 7dn To Mdpxw 6 Apto- 
teidns é€v “lwvia, as yap Tov “Edeciov Aapsavod fKovor, 
> 0 ed te § , + a , ® ie 4 
emednpet pev 6 adtoxpatap 7on TH Syvpvy tpitny nuepay, Tov 
2? , cA ’ EZ ‘ , \ 3 
d€ "Apioreidny otw yryvooKov ipero tods. Kuyridious py ev 


e > 


TO Tay aonaope TAN w@papévos ait@ 6 anyjp eu 
6 Toy dorafopevor Suik@ mapewpapyéevos ad’t@ 6 avyp ein, 





1 Should be debuisse or meruisse. 

2 We have the letter, addressed to Marcus and Commodus, 
in the works of Aristides (Jebb, § 209). Its date would be 
177-180. 

% Lit. to the tune set by Aristides. 


372 








THE SAYINGS OF MARCUS 


deserved, Caligula had earned his death, Otho and Vitellius 
ought never to have reigned. His opinion of Galba was 
similar, for he remarked that in an Emperor avarice ! was 
the most hateful of faults. In a word, rebels had never 
been able to overcome either Augustus or Trajan or HadPian 
or his own father, for many as they were, they had been 
crushed against the wish or without the knowledge of the 
reigning Emperor. Antoninus himself, however, besought 
the Senate not to proceed with severity against accom- 
plices in the rebellion, asking at the same time that no 
Senator should in his reign be punished with death; and 
this won for him the love of all. 


(16) 


‘It is no flatterer’s praise but the truest and most just 
to call Aristides the founder of Smyrna. For he made so 
moving a lament to Marcus over the utter destruction of 
this city by earthquakes and openings in the ground, that 
over the rest of the mournful tale the Emperor sighed 
repeatedly, but at the ‘‘ breezes blowing over a: city of 
desolation ” he even let tears fall upon the writing, and 
granted the restoration of the city in accordance with the 
suggestions of Aristides. It chanced also that Aristides 
had already made the acquaintance of Marcus in Ionia, 
for when they were attending the lectures of the Athenian 
Damianus, the Emperor who had already been three days 
in Smyrna, not yet knowing Aristides personally, re- 
quested the Quintilii ? to see that the man should not be 
passed over unnoticed in the imperial levée. They said 





1 cp. Capit. xxix. 5: Nihil magis et timuit et deprecatus 
est quam avaritiae famam de qua se multis epistulis purgat. 
Dio, after speaking of his liberality and public benefactions, 
says (71. 32, § 3): ag’ obtep Kal viv Oavudlw Tay aitiwpévwv 
auToyv @s ov peyadbdpova vyevopmevor. 

2 Two brothers, famed for their character, ability, and 
fraternal affection. They exercised conjointly the governor- 
ship of Achaia, and later a military command in Pannonia. 
They also shared an unjust death at the hands of Commodus. 


373 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


c ‘ > * > ‘4 yy © ‘ > / 2 4 ~ ; 
oi 8€ ovd€ adroit epacav éwpakévat airov, ob yap mapeivar 
<dv> 16 py od Evotioa, Kai adixovto ris barepaias Tov 

»” a : 
"Aptoteidnv dudw Sopvpopovvres, mpoceimav d€ avrov 6 avro- 
kparop ‘dari ce” en “ Bpadéws etSopuev;” kat 6 Aptoreldns 
> cal > Cal ~ 

‘“Oewpnua,” en, ‘& Baorded, noxorel, your S€ Sewpotca 

we ’ 6 ho - 99 c 6 ‘ de © > , 

Bn amokpepavvicbw ob (nrei.” tmepnobeis d€ 6 adtoxpdrwp 

- HO > 8 A c c SY * , ‘ , (73 , ” 
T@ 70e ravdpds ws Gmoikwrdrw Te Kai axodKwrTaT@ ‘‘ wdTE 
én ‘‘axpodaopai gov;” Kat 6 Apioteidns “ thyepov” etrey 
6é ’ 4 wa > a > a > ‘ al. 9 ’ > A 

mpoBare kat avpiov axpo®: ov yap éopev Tov euovvTwv ada 
Tav akpiBovvtav. e&éatw dé, & Bacided, kal rods yvepipous 
mapeivar TH axpodoe.” ‘* eEearw,” 4} 5 6 Mapxos, ‘* dnyort- 

/ ”~ - 
kov yap.” eizovros 8€ tov ’Apioteidov, *‘ didd08@ S€ avrois, 
& Bache, kai Boav kai kporeiv, Grocov ddvayra,” pediudoas 
” 


6 av’rokpatwp ‘‘tovro” edn ‘ émi cot Ketra.” 


(17) Dio, 71. 32, § 1 = Fragm. Dind. »v. p. 207. 
"ENOav 8€ és rv ‘Popnv kai mpds Tov Sjpov Siadeyopevos, 
ered) peragv eyovtos abrod ta te adda kal Gre modXois 


» 


éreow arrodednunkos fv, aveBdnoav ‘‘dxTw,” Kal TovTO Kat 
tais xepoiv, iva 8 Kai xpvoodis toaovtous és 7d Seimvov! 
AdBoot, mpocevedei~avro, Steperdiave kat en Kai avros 
“*6xr@,” Kat pera tavta ava diaxocias Spaxpas avrois kar- 
eveev, Soov ovrw mpdrepor eihnpecar. 


(18) Dio, 71. 33, § 2. 
‘O 8€ Mdpxos kal xpypata ex tov Snyociov? Frnoe THY 
BovAnpy ody Gre pi) exewrto ent tH Tov. Kparodyros eEovaia, aA’ 





‘1 The congiarium was originally a distribution of food by 
measure. The largess to soldiers was called donativum. 

2 i.e. the aerarium. The Emperor’s privy purse was called 
Jiscus. 


374 








THE SAYINGS OF MARCUS 


they had not seen him themselves, for they would not 
have failed to introduce him ; and on the next day they 
both arrived acting as body-guard to Aristides, and the 
Emperor addressing him said, Wiy have you been so slow 
in letting me see you ? And Aristides said, ‘‘ A professional 
problem, O King, occupied me, and the mind, when so 
engaged, anust not be detached from the prosecution of its 
enquiry.” The Emperor, charmed by the man’s character, 
his extreme naiveté and studiousness, said, When shall I 
hear you? And Aristides replied, “ Suggest a subject 
to-day and hear me to-morrow ; for I am not of those 
who ‘throw up’ what is in their minds but of those who 
speak with precision. But grant, O King, that my pupils 
also may be present at the hearing.” Certainly, said 
Marcus, they may, for it is free to all. And on Aristides 
saying, ‘‘ Permit them, O King, to cheer and applaud as 
loud as they can,” the Emperor smiling said, That depends 
on yourself. 


(17) 


On his return to Rome, when, in addressing the people, 
he mentioned among other things that he had been 
absent many years, they shouted “ Hight,’ ! and signified 
this besides with their fingers, of course that they might get 
so many pieces of gold for a congiarium. The Emperor 
smiled, and himself said, Yes, eight, and afterwards dis- 
tributed 200 drachmas 2 apiece, a larger sum than “ead 
had ever received before. 


(18) 4 


Marcus even begged of the Senate money from the 
public treasury, not that it was not in the ruler’s 





1 From 169 to 176 A.p. 
2 Seven or eight pounds, the denarius aureus being 
= 25 silver denarii, 


375 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


6rt 6 Mdpxos mavra ris BovAijs Kat tou Snpov kai aita Kai 
?: a 

radda edeyev ecivatr- ‘‘hpeis yap,” e€pyn mpds tHv Bovdny 

éyor,' “otras ovdev idiov Exopev Hore Kai ev TH iperépa 

oikia oikovper.” 


(19) Philostratus, Vit. Soph. 11. 9, p, 240 Kays. 


’ - gd , > i ‘ © > 

Aovkiov tovrouv kakeivo Oavpdowoyv. éomovdate pev 6 avro- 
kpdtwp Mdpkos mepi Xefrov tov €x Bowrias gidrdcodor, 
Gapifwv aird xai otrav emi Ovpas, apts S€ ior es Thy 
« , c , ‘ > , , ~ / 
Paopnv 6 AovK.os Hpeto Tov a’TroKpdrepa mpodvra, Trot Badigos 
kat ed’ 6 tt, kal 6 Mapxos ‘‘ xaddv” ey “ Kai ynpdoxorre Td 
pavOavew cis 57) mpos SeErov rov Piridcodoy pabnaodpevos, 
a» 9 ” ee a , by A ‘ - 2 5 > ‘ 
& ovrw oida.” Kai 6 Aovkos eEdpas thy xeipa és Tov ovpavor, 

> ~ 
‘°° Zev,” en, “6 “Papaiwy Bacireds ynpackey dn déArov 
eLaapevos és Sidacxddov ord, 6 dé €uds Baowdeds ’Adé~av- 
dpos dv0 Kai rptdxovra érav amebaver.”? 


(20) Capit. xaviit. 


Cum aegrotare coepisset, filium* advocavit atque ab 
eo primum petiit ut belli reliquias non contemneret, ne 





' The date would be in 178, just before the Emperor’s last 
departure for the war. 
For this anecdote cp. Dio, 71.1, §2: Aéyera: nal adro- 
Kpatwp &y wh aideiobar és didacKdAov gpoiray, GAAG Kal Seéirp 
mpootevat TG ex Bowwray pirocddy kai és axpdaciv Tov pyTopiKar 
Eppoyévous Adywv wh oxvima mapayevéoda. The date is most 
likely 177-8, before the last departure to the war. At this 


more weak than vicious. As a matter of fact Pompeianus 
and the other amici of Marcus persuaded Commodus to 
remain for six months, 


376 





duittineiies 








THE SAYINGS OF MARCUS 


power to demand it, but because Marcus said that every- 
thing, both money and all else, belonged to the Senate 
and the people ; for We, he said, speaking to the Senate 
so far from having anything of our own, even live in a 
house that is yours.! 


(19) 


Of this Lucius? another surprising story is told. The 
Emperor Marcus was an eager disciple of Sextus the 
Boeotian philosopher,® being often in his company and 
frequenting his house. Lucius, who had just comé to 
Rome, asked the Emperor, whom he met on his way, 
where he was going to and on what errand, and Marcus 
answered, It is good even for an old man to learn;* 
I am now on my way to Sextus the philosopher to learn 
what I do not yet know. And Lucius, raising his hand 
to heaven, said, ‘‘ O Zeus, the king of the Romans in his 
old age takes up his tablets and goes to school. But my 
king Alexander died before he was thirty-two.” 


(20) 


When he began to sicken, he sent for his son, and at 
first besought him not to neglect the relics of the war,® 





1 The Emperor, if he said these words, can hardly be 
acquitted of some affectation, as he had a very large fortune 
in his own right, inherited from his mother and also through 
Faustina. 2 A philosopher friend of Herodes Atticus. 

3 Sextus was grandson of Plutarch and a teacher of 
Marcus ; see Capit. iii. 2, and Marcus himself (i. 9 and note), 
from which we see what he learnt ‘in his old age.” He also 
‘* shewed off” his philosophy before Sextus; see Themistius, 
Orat. xi, 1456. , 

4 In this he was in the good company of our own great 
Alfred. cp. also Seneca, Hp. 76: tamdiu discendum est, 
quamdiu nescias ; Solon, Fragm. 8. Bergk, ynpdoxnov & aie 
TOAAG SidacKduevos. 

® The parallel with our Edward II, is very close. 


377 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


videretur rem publicam prodere. Et cum filius ei 
respondisset cupere se primum sanitatem, ut vellet per- 
misit petens tamen ut exspectaret paucos dies, haud 
simul proficisceretur. Deinde abstinuit victu potuque 
mori cupiens auxitque morbum. Sexta die vocatis 
amicis et ridens res humanas, mortem autem contemnens 
ad amicos dixit, “Quid de me fletis et non magis de 
pestilentia et communi morte cogitatis?” Et cum illi 
vellent recedere, ingemiscens ait, ‘‘Si iam me dimit- 
titis, vale vobis dico vos praecedens.” Et cum ab eo 
quaereretur, cui filium commendaret, ille respondit : 
‘* Vobis, si dignus fuerit, et dis immortalibus.” Septimo 
die gravatus est et solum filium admisit. Quem statim 
dimisit, ne in eum morbus transiret. Dimisso filio caput 
operuit quasi volens dormire sed nocte animam efflavit. 


(21*) Dio Fragm. Dind. v. p. 206. 
*Evoonae aoddpa 6 Mapxos, Sore ddiyas émidas emi tis 
getnpias €xew: Kat modddkis ev TH voow enehover Td THs 
tpay@dias iapBetor, 


“roradra TAnpav modEnos eLepyacera.” | 


(21) Dio 71. 33, § 4. 


MedAwr ody darobvnckey Te xiAtapy@ Td ovvOnua airodvrt 
’ 
én, ‘‘ dredOe mpods Tov avarédXovta, eyo yap Sopa.” 





1 This quotation occurs again in Dio, 71. 22, but with a 
different application, as a sarcasm against the rise of Pertinax, 
a man of humble birth, to the consulship. 


378 











THE SAYINGS OF MARCUS 


lest he should seem to betray the State. But when his 
son answered that his first care was for health, he let 
him do as he would, begging him however to wait a few 
days and not take his departure at once. Then he 
abstained from food and drink,! wishing to die, and 
aggravated the disease. On the sixth day he called for 
his friends, and mocking earthly things, but setting 
death at naught, he said to.tthem, Why weep for me and 
not rather think on the pestilence and the death that awaits 
all? And when they made as though to retire he said, 
sighing, If you now give me my dismissal, I give you my 
farewell and lead the way for you. And when it was 
asked of him to whom he commended his son, he 
answered, To you, if he be worthy, and to the immortal 
Gods. On the seventh day he grew worse, and allowed 
only his son to be admitted, but dismissed him at once 
that he might not take the infection. After parting from 
his son he veiled his head as if he would sleep, but in the 
night he breathed his last. 


(21°) 


When Marcus was seriously ill, so as to have little 
hope of recovery, he would often cry out in his illness 
this verse from the tragedy, 


Such is war’s disastrous work. 


(21°) 
When near his death, being asked by the tribune for 


the watchword, he said, Go to the rising sun, for I am 
setting. 





1 The latter is not likely. He had long been unable to 
take solid food ; see Dio (71. 6, §4), who says positively that 
he was poisoned by order of Commodus. Others say he died 
of the pestilence. 

2 Pius in the delirium of his last fever nihil aliud quam 
de re publica et de regibus, quibus trascebatur, locutus est - 
(Capit. Vit. Pi, xii. 8). Napoleon’s last words were téte 
Varmée. 


379 








NOTE ON THE ATTITUDE OF MARCUS 
TOWARDS THE CHRISTIANS 


WITH 


HIS EDICT ADDRESSED TO THE COMMON 
ASSEMBLY OF ASIA 


Marcus and the Christians. 
(i. 6, iii. 16, vii. 68, viii. 48. 51, xi. 3.) 


Norarne has done the good name of Marcus so much 
harm as his supposed uncompromising attitude towards 
the Christians, and in this connexion great emphasis has 
been laid upon a passage in the present book where the 
Christians, according to our accepted text, are mentioned. 
It will be worth while to examine this and certain other 
passages in the book and see if they throw any light on 
Marcus’ real sentiments towards the Christians. 

Taking xi. 3 first, we note that maparaéis, which is per- 
sistently translated obstinacy to bring it into line with 
Pliny’s obstinatio, does not mean obstinacy at all, but 
opposition.! This is clear from the use of the word and 
its verb elsewhere by Marcus. In iii. 3 it is used in its 

rimary sense of armies opposite one another on the 
field of battle. The only passage where the verb occurs 
(viii. 48) is very instructive. ‘‘ Remember,” he says, 
“*that the ruling Reason shows itself unconquerable 
when, concentrated in itself, it is content with itself, so 





1 Since this was written I find that M. A. P. Lemercier 
(Les Pensées de Marc-Auréle, Introd. p. viii. note 2) quotes 
with approval E. Havet’s similar interpretation. Suidas 
glosses mapdratis with méAcuos éumapdorevos. 


381 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


it do nothing that it doth not will, even if it refuse from 
mere unreasoning opposition (kav addyes mapardénrat).” 
Here the word is used in exactly the same connexion as 
in xi. 3, and by no means in a sense entirely condemnat- 
ory. It seems to me quite possible that the Emperor 
may have had the Christians in mind here as well as 
in xi. 3. Conduct such as that of the Christians was pre- 
cisely what Marcus is never tired of recommending, viz., 
not under any compulsion to transgress the demands of 
the ruling Reason,! and if it were found impossible to 
act up to the standard of right set by the conscience (rd 
evdov iSpvpevoy) owing to external causes, then to depart 
cheerfully from life. It appears to me that Marcus in 
both these passages is really approving of the resistance. 
Again the actual mention of the Christians here re- 
quires to be considered. The word itself was taboo with 
the pagan stylists as a barbarism. Even when they are 
apparently alluding to Christians, such writers as Epic- 
tetus, Dio Chrysostom, Plutarch, Aristides, Apuleius, 
Dio Cassius, Philostratus, do not use the term—much 
as an Arnold or a Pater would hesitate to use the word 
‘*Salvationist.” We do not find it in Fronto’s extant 
works nor Galen’s. Lucian, however, employed it in the 
Alexander and the Peregrinus, if (which some deny) these 
works are by him. Marcus would no doubt have used 
the word, as Trajan, Pliny and Hadrian did, in rescripts 
and ofticial documents, but it is a question whether his 
‘literary purism and the example of his favourite Epictetus 
would have allowed him to employ it in a Greek philo- 
sophical treatise. When we look at the clause, os oi 
Xptortavoi, as here inserted, we see that it is outside the 
construction, and in fact ungrammatical. It is in the 
very form of a marginal note,? and has every appear- 
ance of being a gloss foisted into the text. But even if 
the words be omitted, Marcus may still have had the 





1 He says (viii, 41) that ‘nothing can overbear this Reason, 
not steel, nor tyrant, nor obloquy.’ 
2 T see Lemercier holds the same view. 


382 








NOTE ON CHRISTIANS 


Christians in mind when he wrote the passage, which 
only condemns an eagerness to meet death without real 
justification and without due dignity.! 

There are other expressions in this book which seem to 
glance at a body of men who must have been often in 
Marcus’s thoughts. For instance, when he speaks (vii. 68) 
of those who ‘can live out their lives in the utmost 
peace of mind, even though all the world ery out against 
them what they choose, and the beasts tear them limb from 
limb,” he cannot be thinking of criminals in the ordinary 
sense of the word, for it is evident that innocent people 
are meant, and if so, what innoceht people received such 
treatment ? It is not at all atmo think it highly 
probable—-that Marcus looked upon the Christians as 
misguided enthusiasts, who had to be punished as the 
law then stood,? but whom he no more than Hadrian and 
Pius*® wished to punish. Again (vii..51) he quotes the 
indignant cry of whom but the Christians? They kill us, 
they cut us limb from limb, they execrate us! Adding the 
comment: How does that prevent you from being pure, 
sane, sober, just? In yet another place (iii. 16), in words 
that point still more conclusively to the Christians, he 
acknowledges that to own the Intelligence as ruler and 


- guide to what is a clear duty is found also among ‘‘ those 


who do not believe in Gods, and those who will not stand by 





1 This is not much more than what Clem. Alex. says, 
Stromata, iv. 4, There were some egregious cases of voluntary 
martyrdom in Spain under the Moslems (see the present 


_ writer’s Christianity and Islam in Spain, pp. 37 ff.). See 


also the conduct of Callistus, afterwards Bishop of Rome. 
Hippolytus, Refut. Haer. ix. 12. Nor were philosophers 
exempt from the reproach of dying tactationis causa (see 
Digest, xxvii. 3. 6. 7). 

* This was the view of Rusticus, his ‘domestic philo- 
sopher.’ (See Acts of Justin Martyr.) 

* This is clear from the joint letter of Marcus and Pius to 
the Larissaeans, Thessalonicans, Athenians, and all the Greeks 
against mob-violence towards the Christians ; ; see Melito i in 
Eusebius, iv. 26, § 10). 


383 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


their country, and those who do their (evil) work behind 
closed doors.” 


Now all these three were the stock charges © 


against Christians, and who can doubt they are hinted at © 
here? Lastly there is the reference to exorcism (i. 6),! in | 


which Marcus says that Diognetus taught him to dis- 
believe. 

As a matter of fact, Marcus has been condemned as a 
persecutor of the Christians on purely circumstantial and 
quite insufficient grounds. The general testimony of con- 


temporary Christian writers is against the supposition. — 


So is the known character of Marcus. His distinguishing 
characteristic, in which he excelled all recorded rulers, 
was humanity. His @iAavOperia is mentioned by Galen, 
Dio, Philostratus, Athenagoras (twice), Melito, and Aris- 
tides (eleven times) ; and his hwmanitas by the eminent 
jurist Callistratus.? As soon could Alexander have turned 
his back in the day of battle as Marcus shown cruelty to 
his subjects, however lowly. ‘‘ Never,” says Marcus in 
the eighth book of his self-communings, ‘‘have I willingly 
injured another,” and Themistius (Orat. 15) records how, 
when penned in by his enemies in a new Caudine Forks, 
he raised his hands to Heaven and cried, ‘‘ With this hand 
wherewith I have shed no blood, I appeal to Thee and 
beseech the Giver of life.” 

He had a passion for justice, and was most scrupulous 
in his observance of law, as Papinian, the greatest of 
jurists, has told us. That he should have encouraged 
mob-violence against unoffending persons, ordered the 
torture of ‘innocent women and boys, and violated the 
rights of citizenship in his insensate fury, is as incon- 
ceivable as that St. Louis should have broken the Christian 
law or become a Mohammedan. That some Christians 
suffered for their religion in the reign of Marcus is most 





1 On which see note above, and cp. Lucian, Philops. § 16 
(of Christ). 

? Marcus himself in his laws repeatedly appeals to this 
principle. Capit. says he was noted for the mildness of his 
punishments, and see p. 369. 


384 








NOTE ON CHRISTIANS 


probable, though there is perhaps no single martyrdom at- 
tributed to this period of which the date! is certain beyond 
cavil. That there was in any sense a general persecution 
of the Christians at this time is contrary to all the facts. 
There were numbers of them in Rome itself, with a Bishop 
at their head. There were actually Christians in the Em- 
peror’s household and probably (e.g. Apollonius) in the 
Senate itself. Of all these Roman Christians we only 
hear of Justin and his six companions being martyred, 
one of them being a slave of the Emperor. Other 
Christian slaves in the royal household survived him. If 
he wished to put down Christianity, why did he not 
begin with his own palace and with Rome ?? 

So far from persecuting them, we know that as sub- 
ordinate ruler with Pius* he was responsible for the letter 
to the Greek cities forbidding outrages against the 
Christians. The letter to the Common Assembly of 
Asia, given below, if authentic, emanated from him in 
conjunction with Pius or from him alone. Its genuine- 
ness in the main has been upheld by Harnack, and is 
certainly capable of defence. 





1 Dr. Abbott has given plausible reasons for doubting the 
date of the Lyons martyrdom, aud some (e.g. Havet) deny 
the authenticity of the letter in Eusebius. . 

2 The famous caricature of the Christian religion found 
in the pages’ quarters in the Palatine (see Lanciani, Ancient 
Rome 122) dates from this reign. 

3 Melito says distinctly cod 7a cuumdvra pubestares ave, 
Euseb. iv. 26. 10 (? rdvra ovvd:0tKodvTos). 


385 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


*Avta@vivov mpos Td Kowdy ris ’Aoias émuoroAr (epi tov 
kad’ nas Néyov). 
(Eusebius, iv. 13=Nicephorus iii. 28 ; cp. Justin. 
Apol. i. ad fin.) 

Avroxpdtap Kaioap Mdpxos Avpnduos *Avtwvivos S<Baords 
PAppenos] dpyrepeds péyiortos, Snpapyixis e€ovoias 7d méumrov 
kat 70 d€ékarov, Uraros TO rpitov, T@ Kow@ ths Acias xalpeww.) 

"Ey® pev oda? drt kai Tois Oeois emuedés eore pt) AavOavew 





Tovs TotovTous. moAd yap paddov éxeivor Kkokacaey® dy Tods 





\ ‘ > \ - er ead a > \ 
pn Bovdopevous avtovs mpookuveiy 7) tpeis. ods eis Tapaxny 





euBaddere, BeBaodvres riy yvouny adirav iyrep Exovcew, os 





idé a 4 a > #8 > , c ‘ \ Py > 
aVE@V KaTNHYOPOUYTES. €l?) 6 av KaK€e.vots aipeTov TO OOKELY 





0 , ~ FY ~ aE a > 6 ~5 
KaTnyopoupevots TeOydvat paddov 7} (nv bmép Tov oikeiov Geod. 





a ‘ cal , 4 ec cal 4 Ls , 
dOev Kal vixk@ot, mpoteuevor Tas EavTav uyds, rep rwewOdpevor 
- fF A Ud n a“ lol 
ois agiovre mparrew avrovs. mepi b€ trav cetopav TOV ‘ye- 





4 ~ ”~ a~ 
yoveray Kat yiwopéevey ovK GroTroy bpas iropynoat, dOvpodvvras 








pev Otav tep Sot, wapaBdddovras b€® ra Huérepa mpos Ta 
1s 


1 The version in Justin at the end of Aol. i. has the fol- 
lowing heading: Airox. Kaic. Tiros AtAtos ’Adpiayds ’Avrav. 
eB. EioeBhs, apx. péy., Snuap. e&., bwaros 7d 25, warhp 
matplOos To xa’ x.7.A. The dates are out of place and ob- 
viously absurd ; 73’=84 and xa’=2]. Altered to «i and 3’ 
respectively and placed after éfovotas and #raros they would 
give the date 161. 2 @unv Justin. 

3 éxelvous koAdgotey, elmep SbvavTo J. 

4 ofs rapaxhy éuB., kal rhv....Katnyopeire <xal érepd twa 
euBarrAete, ria ov Suvvdpeda Grodettar> J. 

5 These last seven words omitted J. 

8 obk eixds trouvfjoa buas G0., OT. wm. Sot, TapaBaddAovras Ta 
bu. «.7T.A. dD 





1 An unusual form for ’Appevakds, a title not given till 163. 
2 Marcus was consul for the third time and renewed his 


386 





NOTE ON CHRISTIANS 


Letter of Antoninus lo the Common Assembly of Asia 
(about our religion). 


The Emperor Caesar Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Au- 
gustus [Armenius!] Pontifex Maximus, in the tifteenth 
year of his Tribunate, Consul for the third time,? to the 
Common Assembly of Asia greeting. 

I am confident * that the Gods also look to it that such 
persons should not escape detection. For it is much more 
their concern than yours to punish those who refuse to 
worship them. But you harass these men,* and harden 
them in their conviction, to which they hold fast, by 
accusing them of being atheists. For indeed they would 
rather be thought to be accused and die for their own 
God than live. Consequently they even come off vic- 
torious, giving up their lives rather than comply with 
yourdemands. And with respect to the past and present 
earthquakes ® it is not amiss to remind you of them, 
despondent as you are whenever they occur and yet for 
ever contrasting your belief and conduct with theirs. 





Trib. pot. for the fifteenth time in 161, in which year he 
became emperor on 7 March and within a few days associated 
Lucius Verus in the empire with himeelf. 

3 The beginning of the rescript is apparently lost. cp. for 
the opening words the deorum iniuriae dis curae of Tacitus. 

* The Justin text says ‘‘ charge them with disorder,” and 
adds ‘‘and bring other charges against them which we cannot 
prove.” 

> There were several earthquakes in Asia Minor between 
138 and 180, Rhodes, Smyrna, and Cyzicus being destroyed, 
but the dates are not accurately settled. There was certainly 
one at Smyrna about 177, but that is too late. There was 
one at least in the reign of Pius, and the one here mentioned 
is supposed by some to have occurred about 152, but I think 
it may possibly be identified with one by which Cyzicus was 
chiefly affected ; see Fronto, Ad Ant. 2 (a.p. 162). 


387 
cc 2 


MARCUS AURELIUS 


exeivav. ol pev ovv ev’mappnotagTorepa yivovrat mpds Tov 
Gedv, ipeis 5é! mapa wavra Tov xpdvov Kab’ bv ayvoeiv Soxeire, 





Tav Te Gedy (kal) rdv GAA@v awedeire, Kal THs Opynokeias Tis 








\ \ > , a AY ‘ \ Lf 
mepi tov aOdvarov, bv 8) Tos Xpioriavods Oonokevovtas 
Pies! om ys hg bel el bs A aecilel 
éhavvere kal Sudkere Ews Oavdrov?. 





‘Yrép S€ ray rowwvrev, dn Kal modXol® ray wept Tis emapxias 





© , ‘ es 6 , con x af 2 voy. ‘ 

nyenovev kal TO Oevordt@ Hhuav eypayay rrarpt: ois Kal avré- 
be 2 r - . ¢ >? \ Uy , .4 

ypawe pndev evoxdeiv rots Totovrots, ei py PaivowrTo Te TeEpt 


A an c / c / > “~ ‘ > \ 4 + 
THY Tv ‘Popai@y nyeuoviay éyxeipovvTes. Kai eyo de rept 











n Gd . a e \ ‘ > ad 
T@v ToLovT@y TrohAol eonpavay, ois 87) Kal dvréypaa Kara- 





kokovOav TH Tov Tatpds youn. et SE Tis émipevor TWA TOV 





A a“ >. al 
TowvTey eis Tpayyara Péepwv ws 57 Towidror,® exeivos 6 KaTa- 





epdpevos amodckvob@ Tod éykAnpatos kal éeay caivynra 





a > 
Totovtos @y, 6 dé Katadépav evoyos eorat Sixns.® 





, > > , > ~ re ”~ > , 
mpoeréOn év “Edéow €v t@ Kow@ ris *Acias. 


1 Here Harnack supplies tu. 

2 grt ebmap. tuav yiv. tov mpds Oedv. Kal duets pev ay. 
doxeire map exeivoy T. xp. Tovs Beovs, Kal Ta iepOr au., Opnok. 
dé thy w. Tov Gedy od emloracbe. Oey Kad Tods OpneKevoyTas 
eChrwoare xa) didn. ews 0. J. 

3 wad &AAot Twes without H5n J. 4 én) J. 

© ei dé Tis Exe: Teds TIVa THY ToL. Tpdyua KaTapépey J. 

6 The parts underlined are those which Harnack (Texte 
und Untersuch. z. Gesch. der Alt-Christ. Liter. xiii.) con- 
siders portions of the genuine edict. Eusebius places it 
under the reign of Pius, though he gives the superscription 
as above. The version in Justin seems to be an ‘‘ improved ” 
form of the text, making it clearer and more emphatic. 
It is not known whether the rescript was originally in Greek 
or Latin, but almost certainly it was in the former. 


388 





NOTE ON CHRISTIANS 


They indeed show the more outspoken confidence in 
their God, while you during the whole time of your 
apparent ignorance both neglect all the other Gods and 
the worship of the Ever-living One,! whose worshippers, 
the Christians, you in fact harass and persecute to the 
death. 

And on behalf of such persons many Governors also of 
provinces’ have before now both written to our deified 
father, whose answer in fact was not to molest such 
persons unless they were shewn to be making some 
attempt in respect to the Roman Government,” and to 
me also many? have given information about such men, 
to whom indeed I also replied in accordance with my 
father’s view. And if any one persist in bringing any 
such person into trouble for being what he is, let him, 
against whom the charge is brought, be acquitted even if 
the charge be made out, but let him who brings the 
charge be called to account.* 


Published at Ephesus in the Common Assembly of 
Asia. 





1 Harnack thinks Alfa should be supplied and for the fol- 
lowing five words substitutes éxeivos 5é. 

2 If this edict is by Pius, we should expect to find some 
such injunction in his ‘‘ deified father” Hadrian’s edict about 
the Christians (see Euseb. iv. 9), but there is none. On the 
other hand it may have been in the edict of Pius ‘‘to all the 
Greeks ” mentioned by Melito (useb. iv. 10). 

3 This is the one word in the document which does not 
seem consistent with the date 161, when Marcus had only 
just become emperor. 

4 This portion of the edict seems too favourable to the 
Christians for even Marcus to have promulgated. 


389 





paatee 








INDEXES 


Cae 





cuteness (Spymvtys), V. 55 VI. 47 

im, or objective, or goal 7 life 

oR q.v.), HW. 16; vin. 1, 17; 
37; XII. 20, 24 

iniesnioss, Il. 5, 7, 16, 17; lil. 4, 


al hitheatre, and games, I. 5; VI. 
46; x. 8; XII. 9 
alysis of things, essential, 111. 11; 
wi. S33 Vil. 29; VII. 113 XI, 2: 
x1. 10, 18 
nger, I. 9,§3; U. 1, 10, 16; at 
what happens, vil. 38*; Vil. ‘17; 
XI. 18, §§ 3, 8, 10 
ea eaten) of Stoics, x1. 18, 
cp Li ta 
rehitect, VI. 
tethas, a Cappadocian bishop 
about 900 A.D.; quotes Marcus, 
on Lucian, Pisce. 26. (=VI. 47 
Mévirmos) ; De Salt. 63, AnuiTprov 
tov Kuvixoy (=VIII. 25 pai Mian 
6 IAatwrixds); Pro Imagg. 1 (VI. 
37, Ildv@eca); on Dio Chrysostom, 
Orat. xx. 8 (=IV. 8 eis éavrév ava- 
Xepetv) 5 Orat. xxxii. 15 (=. 3 
Tayra ExelOev pet 


t) 
Erides, 873, quoted on flyleaf, 


etc. 

rt, XI. 10; cherish thine own, 
Iv. 31; love of, V 1, § 2; object of, 
VI. 16; lower than ‘Nature, XI. 10 
istonishment at what happens is 
ridiculous, Vill. 15; XII. 1, § 2, 13 
strologers (Chaldaeans), "iM. 33 


Iv. 48 
‘ttraction or affinity (cvurdbea), 
| Iv. 27; V. 26; Ix. 9, §.3 


MARC. AUREL, 








IL.—INDEX OF 


MATTERS 


ferences are to Book and Section of the “‘ Thoughts,’’ and to pages in the 
rest of the book. 


penance God, Iv. 3, § 25 ise 31,50: 


He VII. 17; Ix. 28, 39; x. 6 : xr. 18, 
Avarice, 373 
Avoidance not aversion, VI. 20 
Axioms, principles, postulates, 


maxims (Séypara), Iv. 16; Vil. 2; 
Vill. 1, 143; Ix. 29; holy, X. 9, 34 


Barbarian auxiliaries, 371 
Bassaeus Rufus, praef. praet., 367 
Bathing, I, 16, § 73. VL 
‘Bear and Forbear ” (avéxov 
améxov), V. 33; ep. IV. 3, § 2 (for- 
bearance a part of justice); 


voi. 

Beautiful, the, m. 1 

Beauty in a 3 things, I. 1; 
in youth, mm. 2 

Benetianus, see Posstianin 

Black character, a, IV. 18, 28 

Blessings, Ey: for, VII. 27 

Boar, d, mi. 2, § 1; x. 10 

Body, vessel or sheath of soul, 
il. S $ BsU IV 41s Uses Xe 8S. 
XII. 1, 2,3; the inferior partner, 
pe 18 

Bodies of dead, how room for, Iv. 21 
Bodily donizes, Vil. 55, § 2, e 

Books, O. 2 ; reading or writing 
of, L vs ra: VI. 8; XI. 29 

Bread, senile from, Il. 2, s + 

Breath (see reduc, avevpériov), 2: 

vit. 25, 56; XI. 3; xm. 20 

Brea hrou the arteries 
(6camvetoOar), an ancient medical 
notion, I. 1; VI. 16 


393 


INDEX OF MATTERS 


B andage, X. 10; x1. 18,§ 7 
Bi in bodies of animals, Iv. 21 


Cassius, Avidius, 348 ff., 371 
* Cae cation,” VI. 30 
Cause (aitia, aircoy, To aitimdes), the 
Final, Formal, or Efficient, v. 8 ; 
vit. 10; 1X. 25, 37; in man, VU. 7: 
= 31; BL x. 26; in ‘God or ‘Nature, 


Causal "and material, Iv. 21, §3; 
v.13; Vil. 293 VIII. 11; Ix. 25. 
37; XI. 10, 18, 29 

Causation, xi. 8 

Chance, I. 17 ad. fin.; U. 3, 17 ; M1. 
11; rx. 28; xm. 14, 24 

Change, a fi Iv. 3, 36; i 36; 
vil. 18, 255 Vil. 6; 19, 
28 ; oP er “4i, 18; pr “21: 
cycles of, v. 13; x. 7, $2; xI. 1, 
§ 2; of mind, IV. 123 

Chaos. (see Mediey), 1v. a7: VI. 10; 
Ix. 39; xm. 14 

Character, the perfect, vil. 69; 
portrayed, I. 16; vi. 30, § 2: 


cp. I. 15 
Charity (see Love of neighbour), 
Me $35 VI. 47; IX. 42; x. 36, § 2; 


Cheeifulness, I, 15, 16, § 25 I. 5; 


Children, vil. 41* ; VII. 49 ; toed? 5 
xX. 34, "35; XI. 34*; loss of Is 
note ; illness of, VIII. 49; safety Ay 
x. 35; Marcus’ own, L. 17, § 4; 
his fondness for, I. 13 

Christians, I. 6; UI. 16; VII. 68; 
vin. 48, 51, §2; XI. 3 (here only 
mentioned and this proneney a 

See pp. 381 

Circus, I. 5; X. 38 

Cities destroyed by peruse disas- 
ters, Iv. 48; pp. 373, 

Coazaehees Ay Stoicus, ale habet 

dhe v1. 13; vil. 


5 xX. 

Colloquiatin, in the mason’s trade, 
v. 8, § 1; a ‘visitation from 
Heaven,” V. 8, § 1; loves = is 
wont, X. 21; use of pomBos, ul. 17 

Commodus, 354 ff. 

Concilium ot Em ror, 362 

Concubine (of Verus or Hadrian) 
1. 17, § 2; of Lucius Verus, VIII. 37 


394 


Conditional action, Iv. 1; 


VI. 

Congiaria, I. 16, §7, p 

Contentment, Im. 4,§ 
v. ’ ? 3 VI}; 
46; 51,6, 1,28; ise 
§ 2; xt 1,3 

Cosmopolitanism, a Stoic doctrin | 
see World-city 

Country retreats, Li 8; X.15; Xia 

Court cue, . 16, §2 

oe ars § 2; Iv. 3; v. 16} 

VI. 12; 


Craze or ‘unbs, Wis Stes 
Customs’ officer, I. 17 
Cycles, see Regeneration 


v. 2 


6, oa 
3 ‘Iv. 2 } 





Daemon (see Saiuwv, and Genius. | 
Dendng.¥. 13.vVit..6L; x1. 1,2 
Death, 0. 2, 17; Ii. 3" oy Iv. 5, | 
32, 48, 50; Vv. 33; 28, 4€ 
's ; va. 25, Si, "8 x} 
Wea eee Ie RR "evil, 
23; to be despised, XI. 31, aif 
a process of Nature, i 
1X 830% BB; Ace our ‘deal 
desired, x. 36; the leveller, ¥ 
24; a Avats TaY oToL etwv, I. 17 
Dead, generations of the, VI. 47 j 
Dependence of gs on one ai 


other, Vv. 16, 30 
Destiny 6, 8, 11, § 3; Iv. 26, 3: i 
V. 8, 24; xu. 14 | 
Diaiectics, 17, §8; vu. 67; 7 | 


Dio Chrysostom, see Arethas ; Di | 
Cassius, see notes 1. 5, 6, 7; TI. 2 | 
IV. a Vil. 7; 1x. 42, §2; x. 
xI. 

Dinzontent, piaEOUEANG, rebellio 


against our lot, I. 3, ir 16 
Iv. 3, 32; VI. 49; Taba 37 | 
X.id$) Rds 2 


Dispersion, vi. 4, 10; vu. 32, 50 
VIII. 25; Ix. 39; x X. 7, § 25 x 
Dissolution, Ul. 17 ad. a Iv. 21 
WIE, 505: IX... 825. K. 73 XI. 20 | 
XI. 36 

Divine, the, in man, see wee 
Doctors, Ul. 3, 138; 48 | 
553; VII. gn *xesculapiy 
as prescriber, V. , 
Dotage, lr. 1 
Drama, the, II. 8; VII. 3; IX. 24 
X. 27; x1.1,6; xu. 36 


INDEX OF 


] Dreams, L 17; § 8; Ix. 27 
Duty, 1. 1, 16 (of the Christians) ; 
VI. 2, 22, 26, 30 


h, smallness of, I. 10; Iv. 3, 
§3; Vil. 21; xm. 32 

«Economy ” (otxovoyia, @.v.), IV. 
19, 51; x1. 18, §5 

lements the, Iv. 4, 46; Vu. 31; 
Ix.9; X. 7, §§ 2,3 

merald, Iv. 20; VII. 15 

mperor, a private person, I. 17, 
§ 3; fire carried before him, 
I. 17, § 3, p. 367 

nfranchisement of slaves, 360, 363 
vil, not recognized as such, I. 1, 
13 ; inevitable, Iv. 6; v. 17; and 
God, 0. 11; What is evil to a 
man, I. 11; falls on all alike, 
Ir. 11; not interminable, Ix. 35; 
surprise at, Ix. 42, § 4, etc. 
volution, IV. 45; Ix. 2 

xcerpts from books, Ui. 14 
xorcism, I. 6 

xternal things, cannot harm us, 
I. 11; Iv. 3 ad. fin., 8, 39, 495 
vir. 64; vill. 1 ad. fin., 51; 1X. 313 
to be despised, vI. 16, § 3 
xtinction of soul, Vv. 33; VI. 32; 
Vil. 25; 1X.3; xu. 5 




















ailure, VI. 11; x. 12; not to be 

taken to heart, v. 9 

aith, V. 33, pp. 349, 351 

alernian wine, VI. 13 

‘ame, II. 17; Il. 10; Iv. 3, § 3, 19, 

33; V. 33; VI. 16, § 2, 185 VIL. 6, 

34; VII. 1, 21, 37, 44; Ix. 30, etc.; 

wh. CP: 356 : 

i ate, see Destiny 

‘| Fellowship of men (kowvwria, etc.), 
I. 1; mt. 4, § 3, 11; Iv. 4, 333 Vv. 

A 16; VI. 7, 14, 28, 395 vir. 5, 13, 

55, § 1; vil. 12, 26, 59; Ix. 1, 

} 23, 31, 42, § 5; X. 36; xu. 20. 

See also Love of neighbour 

Il Pigs, U1 2; Iv 6; VI. 14; Vu. 15; 

X. 8; xi. 16; not to be looked for 

r in winter, XI. 33 

Fine writing, I. 7; Ul. 5 

i] Wire, v. 1; Vill. 41; IX. 9; x. 31, 33 

Flesh, the, 0.2; v.26; VI. 28; VII. 

66; VIII. 56; Ix. 41*; x. 8, 24; 


XH. 14 
Flux of things (sce also under 





MATTERS 


Heraclitus), 11.17; Iv. 3 ad. fin. 

36; v. 10,§2; vi.15; vil. 19 
Forbearance, IV. 3, § 23° V. 33 
ay lr. 3; good, Iv. 49, § 2; 


v. 36, 

Friends, I. 17, § 1; favours from, 
I. 8; consideration for, I. 9; 
love of, I. 14; virtues of, VI. 48; 

62, 363 


6, 7,8; m1. 14, §2; v.1, 5, 6, 
-§15 VI. 39, 46; VII. 22; VIII. 30, 48 


Galen, 360 

Games, see Spectacles 

Gardeners, saying of, XI. 8 

Generation and growth, xX. 26 

Genius (Saiuwv), divine in man, I, 
10, 13, 17; mm. 3, § 2; 6, 7, 12, 
16, § 23 v.27; vil. 45; x. 138 

Getting up in the morning, U. 1; 
v. 13 vi. 12 

Gladiators, I. 5; XII. 9 

Glory, see Fame 

Goal in life, see Aim 

God or Gods, I. 17, §§ 1, 5; m1. 4, 53 
existence of, Il. 11; XI. 28; 
priest of, m1. 4, § 3; and Chance, 
ir. 11, § 2; and Atoms, VII. 
17; Ix. 28, 39; follow God, 
im. .9;. 16, Di x Ko) Uda Bl 
27, 31; do they take thought for 
man ? VI. 44; Ix. 40; One, VII. 
9; art of, vil 68; in Nature, 
Ix. 1; immanent in all things, 
vil. 9; vit. 54; in us, I. 1, 43 
In. 5, 6, § 2; XI. 19; XL. 1, § 2, 2, 
26; walk with, v. 27; reverence, 
Vv. 333; VI. 30: call on, VI. 23, 30, 
§ 1; impartial, vit. 70; Sun and 
all the Gods, vill. 19 ; not power- 
less, Ix. 40; likeness with, X. 8, 
§ 2; service of, MI. 4; XI. 20, 
§ 2; allows the good to perish, 
xm. 5; reasoning with, xm. 5; 
do no wrong, XII. 12; men God- 
borne, XII. 23 ; all from God, XI. 
26; man, fellow citizen of, X. 1; 
omnipotent, 349; judge of - 
sovranty, 366 

Good, the, v. 15; fountain of, in 
us, VII. 59 

Good and evil, vi. 41 

Good man, a, Iv. 10,17, 25; xX. 8, 
16, 32; vocation, to be, xI. 5 


395 


INDEX OF 


Good men, perish at death, “gt - 
Goodness betrays itself, XI 
Growth, x.‘7,§ 3 


eee zeal of, v. 1, § 2; 


35 

Biepaiieda, v. 9, 34; vu. 17, 67; 
Vill. 1; X. 33 

Harmony of wi} vi. 11 

Headache, I. 16, § 7 

Help to be welcomed, vu. 5, 7, 12 

Herodes, 366 

* Heroics,” I. 16, § 2; IX. 29; x1. 3 

History of ancient times, TL . 14 

Horse-racing, I. 5 

Hosts of Heaven, XI. 27 

Hypocrisy, li. 16 


Ill-omened words, XI. 
tetus) 

Imagination or opinion or impres- 
sions (vmdAnWis, pavtacia), I. 15, 


34 (Epic- 


vii. 

§ 2; xi. 1, 8, 22, 
25, 26 

Immortality (see Extinction), xi 
31. Marcus has no clear view 
of the future of the soul, whether 
there is another life or (he 
merely puts the alternative) 
unconsciousness, Ill. 3, or @ 
different sort of consciousness, 
vill. 58; or extinction, VI. 32 ; 
or a change of abode, surviv: 
for a time, and finally re-absorp- 
tion into the seminal principles of 
the eis Iv. 21; v.33. But 
he ‘paee aleve. in it, see 


XII. 
Impiety 
Terneemeone’ Pane net 2, 16, 36; 
36; VI. 29; vu. 29, 47, 


1 ad. fin.; 
Iv. 39; VI. 32, 41; Ix. 1, § 4; XI, 
cag joven man is “ indifferent,’ 


Inpratitude, az; red § 4 

Hea omernrnge Ah 

Injustice, Ix. 1, Pig 

Instruction, x1. 29; education, VI. 


396 





MATTERS | 
bi 
ee the, Iv. 4; v. 27), 
&83,'$ 33 xm. 14; ioe) Iv} it 
40; Nature =God, . 54 ph 
XII. 26 ; of Universe, V. a 
Interdependence of all thing, 1. 3 pili 
9; Iv. 29; v.8, ead ge 38, 42, 43 {lin 


elas a aads fin. 5 Vili. 7; 1X,/h 


ie & 1 
Intereate of whole and part identi: i 
cal, IV. 23; V. 8; 44, 45, 54; 
xX. 6, 20, 33; XII. 23 
Tatsitenes VI. 27 


\ 
|. 
Jews, 351, 371 
Justice, v. 34, etc.; foundation of — 
virtue, x1. 10 xi. 1, 3, 24; and iy 
truth, xi. , 29 I 
J _ in Mart, remarkable parallels | ; 
th passages in his Apologi { 

Apel f. 18, 57 = Il. 3,§ 2; Apol. || 
57=vul. 58; Apol. I. 46=VII. 

ef. Apol. I. 19= Xx. 26 i 

| 
Kindness irresistible, x1. 18, § 9 1, 
Knowledge, the true, V v. 32 i 


Lamiae, lit. Vampires or Ghouls. Is, | 
used by Socrates in the sense of 
Ms i. ” (uopwoduxeta, Epict.), 
XI. 


Latinisms, iv’ ovrws cimw, IV. 483 
ba ery vil. 3; 1.5, tloaevardetl 
étc.; I. 16, § 4, obepvaxdos 

Law, *x 25, 33, ad fin. ; xI, $25 

ay. 1% ‘one, vu. 93 tai’ b 
law,” pol = same for God ann 
man. 3; equality of, I. 14. 

Left haa i let ae ‘know what right 
hand does, v. 6, § 2 

Letter-writing, 1 ; 1.7, i3 

Liar, XI. 2 

Life, : ed Tl ll. 17; ephemeral, 

4,17; Ur. 10,14; Iv. 17, 35, 
48, §2, 50; VI. 18, 36,56 Ix. 32: } 
x. 31, ; . 18, § SECTS 
the same, long or short, a a: 
xt. 36; what r vit. 
always the same, IV. 32; ite i 
past ages, Iv. 32, N38 : VI. 36 ; ; 
vil. 49; Ix. 14; xI. 1,§ 2; variety 
of, XII. 24; only in present, Il. / 


14; mm. 10; page Sty ose 
ing, 1. 12,'17; . 433 V. 235 










—— 





INDEX OF MATTERS 
base love of, yr 50; a drama, XI. 6; Ix. 39; «x. 1; does not reject 
2. 6:3. SaiB0 5 "goal or aim of, I. pity, | ne 13; at Carnuntum, 
16; Vit. cop hig tt Oe eee 31; ad. fin.; on the Gran, 


the new life, vil. 2, § 2; Ky S$ 
as a whole, vil. 36; another 
life, 11. 3; how to enjoy, XI. 29 
imb dismembered, Vm. 34 

jon, Il. 2,§ 1; vi. 36, § 2 

llius Urbicus, 847 
ve of neighbour, — 22, OL 3 3kx. 


an, tripartite (body, soul, mind), 
Il. 2; m1.°16; vi. 32; xm. 33 
intolerable, V. 10; VII. 24; his 
work, VIII. 26 : his relationships 
(oxécets), vill. 27; what like, 
xX. 19; be one, XI. is, § 10; true 
interest of, I. 7; Treason of= 
God, xm. 26 
any things, do not, Iv. 24 (Demo- 
critus) 
arcus, simple life, 1. 3,6; taught 
at home, Kents dislike of the 
i age a I. 53 ; not supersti- 
tious, I. 6; a devout ae Sard 
XII. 28; writes dialogues, I. 6; 
learns humility, 1 I. 7; eschews 
‘age f rhetoric, and fine writing 
+ Bpkl 5, CD. , 346; reads Epic- 
learns toleration, 
love of his 
children, I. 17; + reads 
Stoic writers, I. 1435 


chastity of, I. 17, § 23. 1 
mother, I. i7, § 6; of his wife, I. 
17, § o Spits blood and has 
vertigo, I. 17, § 8; bodily weak- 
ness of, I. 7, §6, p. 351; amatory 
passions of, I. 17, § 6; benefac- 
Pond of, hy i, § 7; . eschews dia- 


lectics, Li 8; B nes skilled in 
them, VII. s 1; and 
bn hes i, in, g 8; a tok Skilled 

hem, VII. 67 ; grows old, Il. 


6; V. 31; seep. 349; thirst for 
ooks, 1. 33 address to soul, Il. 


5 tae ad. fin. ; ‘a Roman, U1. 53 
Im. 5; vi. 44; a ruler, I. 5; 
bull over the herd, XI. 18, § 4" 
his memoranda, II. 14 ; excerpts 
from books, Il. 143 (?) history 
of ancient Greeks and Romans, 
Ti. 3 longing ay country 
retreats, IV. 3, cp. X. 1; dislikes 
rising in the Tt v. 1; voi. 
12; not sharp-witted, v. 5: vil. 
67: hardly able to endure him- 
self, v. 10; his service ended, v. 
31; the court his stepmother, 
vi. 12; his name Antoninus, VI. 
26, § 4; not eegryae VI. 30; 
conscious of failure, 11 6; V. 
9, X. 8; still far from Shinoeaey. 
Vill. 1; life at court against it, 
vin. 1, 9, but ep. XI. 7; no time 
for study, vin. 8; death of his 
- mother, I. 17, § 7; VItl. 25; has 
never injured anyone, vio. 42; 
? birth of a child, Ix. 3; 7 his 
child ill, vor. 49, Tx. 40; weary 
of life and seems to wish for death, 
Ix. 3; recalls his past life, Ix. 21: 
playing the philosopher, Ix. 29; 
contemns ingratitude, Ix. 42, 
§45; captures Sarmatians, X. 10 ; 
feels that his death is desired, 


X. 86; condemns Christian 
martyrdoms, xI. 3; _ his oe 
demands philosophy. XI. ; 


wonders why men value otheve! 
good opinion more than_ their 
own, XII. 4; gruesome sights in 
war, VIII. 34; pestilence, Ix. 2; 
Marcus a man intensely eager 
for the common weal, XI. 13; 
his patrimony, 360 ; regret at 
adoption by ian, 360; e€ 

of sovranty, 360 ; resists popular 
clamour, 362 ; firmness of, 364; 
weeps, 368, ; 
philosophy, 368 ; 
ree from bloodguiltiness, 368 ; 
detested avarice, 373; goes to 
ora of Sextus, 377; death, 


6 ff 
Material and causal, see Causal 


Medley of things (ved, uppés), 
IV. 27, vi. 10; XI. 


397 


INDEX OF 


Members, all are, of the whole body, 
Vil. 13; XI. 8 

Meteorology, I. 17, § 8 

Mind, a citadel, VIII. 48 

Minister of the Gods, I. 4, § 3 

Miracles, I. 6 

Misfortune, no evil, Iv. 49, § 2, 


etc. 
Mouse, fable of, XI. 22 
Mountain, live as on a, X. 15, 23 
wah the, xI. 18, § 11; leader of, 
id. 


ry La according to, I. ah rf 
§5; 1 ; Iv. 39, 48, 51; 
vt. 40. ‘s Vill. 1; of ine Unt. 
verse, II 4 Be IV. 9; vi. 75; 
vin. 6, 50: Ix. 1, § 43 x. 20: 
xm. 23; 26; Ai | of, 0.17; what 
it sends, V 8, § 2; grumbling is 
contrary to, tl. 16; source of 
Sver see, v. 18; of plants and 
man, VIII. ; =Trut h, x. 1,§ 2; 
of living ual of rational creatures, 
X. 2; only sends what we can 
bear, V. 18; VIII. 46; X. 3; resig- 
nation to, x. 14; above art, tt 


10; its products beautiful, 111. 
2; VI. 86; has no waste, VIII. 
50; the most venerable of 


deities, 5 og I 
Natural pore gr wanting in the 
er ng Bes ea | 
Necessity, Il. XII. 14, see Destiny 
Neighbours Fallowshig, with (see 
Fellowship), 1. 1; mI. 4; v. 16: 
conduct towards, v. 3i; Tx '3;4 2, 
27; love of, x 36 §2 oe Love 
of neighbour); kindliness towards, 
XI. 18, § 9; “duty to, I. 11, § 3 


Objective (see Aim), xII. 8, 10, 18, 


20 

Objective or external things do not 
touch us, IV. 3, ete. 

Obsolete ret and gah ot Iv. 33 

Olives, MI. 2, ; VI. 

Opinion mee ies Imagination, 
Impressions), nothing We but, 
II. 15; I. 9; Iv. 3, § 4, 7; vI. 52; 


Vil. 14; Vill. 40, 0, 49 3 X; 3: XI. 18, 
§7; Xt. 1, 8, 22 » 255 rests 
only on, Iv. 3 58 43 vit. 14, 29; 


398 


MATTERS 


IX. 7; away with it, xm. 25. 
of the many, XI. 23 


Oe a 14; and chaos, Iv. 27) 


Others’ thoughts, Ii. 4; Iv. 18 
Organic and inorganic unity, Vi. 1 


Out of sight, out of mind, Iv. 33 4 


Paiderasty, I. 16, § 1; 11.16; v.10 
1; vi. 34 

Pain, Il. 16; Vil. 33, 643; VIII. 28 

Pancratium, ps By xm. 9. See a 
wrestlin, 

Parmularius (from parma, a sma 
Thracian target or shield), ony 
of a class of gladiators, I. 5 j 

ira aon want natural affection 





I. 
Peitholaus, a physician, 362 
Pessimism blamed, v. 10, 33; VI 
12; VIII. 24;°1X. 3, § 2; IX. 35) 


XI. 36 

Pestilence, Ix. Z 

Philosophy, 1. 6, 17, § 8; 11. 17; Iv) 
$0.;.- YE. 12;° VIil. 1; 1X. 29) 
ats xa FS ehS one thing. 
Il. 17; as schoolmaster, Vv. 9; 


heads of, XI. 18 ; philosopher, Vv 
30; the true ones, I. 16, § 5 
Physics, vu. a vill. 13: 1x. 41 
(Epicurus); X. 9, 31, § 2 
Pity, 0. 18, see p. xiii. 
Ehette, V. 1,9; and pain, I. 16) 


Plot ‘of Sroune, a man’s own=his 
inner self, Iv. X: 
ie ad person), used generi- 


cally, XI 
‘posay: 1.17,§4 
Pompeianus, 352 
‘ee ae appianee (see Fame) I. 16, 


posterity (see tame), vi. 18 
Praise, Iv. 20; from what sort of 
men, Ul. 4, §4; Vil. 62; Vill. 53; 

1x. 18, 27, 34; x. 13; x. 18, § 4 
Prayer, vi. 44; Ix. 40; of the 


the: or 
Present Time Pets ours, I. 14: I. 
10; xn. 1, 3, 26. See Time 


Principles, see Axioms 
Proverbs, “ his destiny no man can: 
escape ”’ ra 8 pa from 
Plato), VII vil. 46; “‘ to th the sweating, 
state,’ a 9 16, §9; “the last of his 


= 2e 


Beat 


SRE ES tran etre 


oe Ses 


race,’ VIII. 31; ‘‘to be of one 
bush but not of one mind,” 
(? gardener ’s proverb), xI. 8; “the 
second best course,” Ix. 2 


| cherriee Il. 3; Iv. 3,§ 2, 40; vI 


10, 44; Ix. 28; xII. 14, 24 
fuppets or marionettes, men like, 
II. 2; 11.16; vi. 16; 28; vu. 29, 
xi. 19; in’ con sense, x. 38 


puails 
i) hintilii, ns 373 


i 

iRadiation of light, viII. 57 
heading—see Books 

meron, tt the ee ite Me Sie tee 


ms IV... 35,05 

8; vit, 16 17 38, $97 VIII. 43, 
48, Gi es 15, 22 ; "xi. 14; 

emanates from God; Thy ok: 4: 
We OES EROS XI. 36, 80; the 
reason, Iv. 4, 13; vil. 9; Fx, 10"; 
X. 243 to follow, I. 8; the semi- 
nal or generative, IV. 14, 21; 

"24; reverence for, ye 16; 

tivie, Iv. 29; art of, Vv. : VII. 
40 ; shared with the Gods, ¥ VII. 53 ; 

stands aloof, v. 26; of others, 
vu. 55; right reason, XI. 35: 
master in its own house, VIII. 56; 
our noblest part, Vv. 21; VI. 16; x. 
13; how used by us, V.11; x. 24; 
xl. 33; to be safeguarded, xI. 
19; of bh gas mm. 3, v. 8,§ 53 
VI. 86, § 2; VIL. 10, Xit, tei 
all rational things akin, mr. 4, §4 


Regeneration of things, periodic 


(mwadvyyeveoia), VIL. 19; Ix. 1, §4, 
IR A atin 3 EE Te 2: ‘See’ also 
Heraclitus 


Repentance and i ig vy. 9, 36; 


Vill. 10, 47 ; 

Reservation, under, or conditionally 
ag ia VI. 50; car 37 
Revenge, olthe best, VI 

thetoric, Net schts ve Pataddlin’s 
lectures Dp. "375 

River of change, see also Heraclitus 


} ipman, to think as, 11. 5; act as, 


mr. 5 , ancient Romans, IIT. 14 
toyal conduct, Vil. 36 
tunaway slaves, xX. 25 


salvation, how gained, x1. 29 
sameness in life and world, Ir. 14; 





INDEX OF 


MATTERS 


uh 32, 33; VII. 1, 49; Vill. 6; 
SS ea 24 
sanctity (oovéTys), V. 9; XI. 20, $2; 


Schools, public, I. 4 
Scowling face, VII. 24 
Scutarius, a a gladiator ipa a large 
Samnite shield (seutwm), I. 5 - 
Self, retirement into, Iv. 3, § 1,4; 
vil. 28, 33, 59.; Vill. 48 
Senate, VIII. 30; see also p. 353; 
deference to, 376 
Serene face, VI. 30; vil. 60 
Sensation, bodily, v. 26, ete 
Sexual intercourse, VI. 13; VI. 21 
(MS); x. 1 
Similes, hands, feet, teeth, 11. 1; 
VI. 33; signal of battle, 1. 5; 
storming a breach, VI. 7 ; drama, 
Til. 8; Xil. 36; doctors, Il. 13; 
vi. 35, 55; vil. 15; fire, Iv. 1: 
X. 31, § 2; incense, IV. 15; head- 
land of rock, Iv. 49 ; bread, figs 
olives, ears of corn, lion, ” wild 
boar, Tl. 2; spider, v. Ls x. 10; 
bee, v. 1; vi. 543 X.8; XI. 18; 
vine, V. 6, § 1, ete ; masons, y. 
8: sore eyes, V. §; ; children’s 
quarrels, Vv. 33; Ix. 24; flow of 
river, V. 23; vil. 19; Ix. 29 (see 
Heraclitus) ; snapping terriers, V. 
33; pet dogs, VII faye fish-ponds 
vul. 3; ants, v. 1; vil. 3; mice, 
VI. 3, xr. 22 ; strong smell, v. 28 : 
xI. 15; harmony, VI. 11; ball- 
play, VI. 57; vVml. 20; bubble, 
VIII. 20 ; sphere, viii. 41; cobbler 
and carpenter, vin. 50; foun- 
tain, VI. 51 § 23 "am hi- 
theatre, x: 8; pancratiast, 
KI, As Sih, Os plot of ground, 
TR eee bene a ae ae 
Six 28’; digestion, X. 31, 
353 cylinder, >. 33, § 38; ‘head 
eye, X. 35; shuttle, per whip, 
x. 38 desertion, XI. 9, 
riding, XII. 6; heihiont: xi. 
ight, xi. 15; sands of the 
sea, VI. 34; mill, x. 35 
Simplicity, IV. 26, 37; VH. S15 -Ix, 
37; x. 9, §°2 
Singing, xi. 2 
Sleep, Il. 1; Iv. 46; v.15; v1. 42 
Smo. ‘e, V. 29; all thin hings ‘are as, X. 
31; xn. 27, 83. See also flyleaf 


399 


INDEX OF MATTERS 


Smyrna, earthquake, 373, 387 

Social acts, see Fellowship 

Soul, (wuxh), one, XII. Bo; when 
given, XI. 24; : sphere, XI. 12; 
of animals, Ix. 9, § 2; transfer- 
ence after death, Vv. 33; 3; extin- 
guished, VII. 32; VII. 5, 25; xI. 
a taken up into the’ primary 

21; VI. 24; xX. 7, § 2; 

scattered into the atoms, vu. 
323 K.7,$ 23 XI. Ps its proper 
sphere, VI. 4; 
34; an exhalation ‘tots blood, 
v. 33; VI. 15;=ruling reason, 
her own master, v. 19, 20; ex- 
istence ~ after death, IV. 21% ce 
3; xi.5; i rite i. 6; . 
attributes of, XI 

Speaking, in ‘aati v. 36; Vil. 
5, 30; truthful, m1. 12, 16, S 2); 
superfluous, IT. b; clear, val. 51; 
freedom of * speech, VI. 30 

Spectacles, public, I. 16, § 7 
Sparta, x1. 24. Seealso p. tise 


Sphere, VII. 41; XI. 12; xu. 3 
$ , VI. 43 5 XI. 27 
Study, vir 


Substance, as a river, v. 23 (see 
also Heraclitus) ; ; one, an 30; 
the Universal, Vi. 1; 9, 19 

Suicide (e£aywyj—not sed td 
Marcus), I. 1; v. 29; 47; 
1X, 2 sx. 2 § 2, 8, § 2 (see note), 32) 
The Stoics permitted suicide on 
the grounds of patriotism or 
philanthropy, poverty, incurable 

ess, senile decay, or when the 
true life could not otherwise be 
maintained, but Marcus only 
admitted the last 

Suidas (circa 900) quotes Marcus 
29 times, and most probably 
refers to him without name on 
30 other occasions. Half of the 
quotations are from the first two 

ks, and three-quarters under 
the first five letters of the alpha- 


bet 
Superstition, I. 6, 16, § 3; VI. 30 
Suspense of judgment Gxoxi), I. 16, 
9; XI. 11; cp. xI. 
Tact, I. 10 
Talkers, Bed 
Tension (révos), VI. 38 


400 


Things, indifferent, 1. 11; seed de 
other things, Iv. 36: transitor 
v. 10, sh ete. 5 repeat. th y 
selves, Iv. 44, 45; vil. 6; tral)! 


Thoughts, mould character, v. 1€ Mer 
VII. 3; ones to all, xi. 4; te 
others, mI. 4,§ 1; our own, ‘Nin 





4, 
Time, lost for ever, Il. 4; beg in 
nee Vir 
¥. 
2 
1 


»§3; 50; Ix. 32; 


4 
Tombs (or urns) watched | 
mourners, VIII. 37 \ 
Tradition, Iv. 46 : 
Tragedy (see Drama), I. 6, 
lL 3 *V..205 Ix. 205; xs. ‘ 
xu. 36 ie 
Transformation » ar” ab IV. 21 
v.18; vI. 15; 
Trials good for eg x. 7 33, § a 
Truth, learn to hear the, I. 1 
note ; and error, VI. 21; “ heroic! ii 
truth in every word, Til. 425 
“fled to Olympus,” Vv. 33; 
one, VU. 9; soul deprived of | 
involuntarily, vu. 63, 
Nae with Nature, Ix. 1 
§ 2; from the heart, x1. 19 
Tutor’ (tpodevs), I. 5, 17, $43 ae : 
ees, 1.113 Iv. 31; vi. 3 


p. 357 
Taeties ‘(about 1150) quotes cal | 
Chil. vl. 804=Iv. 21; Chil. Vit 
803, VOI. 223=v. 33, vI. 15 
Chil, vu. 800, VIII. 224= VI. 13 
Ix. 


ee VI. 10; 1x. 9, § 2 
Universe, a state or city, I. 16 
Be - ils) ta 3; , 25 
xu. “a all things from it ang 

li Mr being ‘tv. 40 

the *Dalvernt Nature, tH. 16 
Der benefits it, benefits all 
. 6, 33; harmony of, V.8; VL 

P ti; bound up with every par 
Vv. g, § 3; mystery of, ae 
one, Vil. 9; what i¢ is, Var bg 

Unkindness to others; Il. 16, vit. 3 
thwarting one another, it. 1 
io (Plato’s), Ix. 29; im 
sible, Vv. 17; Ix. 42 













Value (aéia), due, set on things; 
Ill. 1143 IV. 32; XI. 37 (Epictetus) 

Venetianus, a partizan of the Blue 
Faction in the Circus, I. 5 

Verus, Martius, 348 f., 351 

Vice, Vv. 35; VIL. i ete. 

ictory, miraculous, 369 

ine, Y. 6, gi VI. 14, 16; VIII. 19, 


lolenes eaned. 364 
dag virtues, II. 6, § 1, 11, § 2; 
9, 125 Ix. 42; x1. i, §2, 
he own reward, v.63 vil. 73, 
ii: IX. 42, § 53 Xn. 4; fled to 
Olympus, v. 33; its motion, VI. 

17; what it is, VI. 50 
ortex, or rotation, the external 
circumambient (éivy), XIL 3; 
soul a vortex ( pouBos), Il. 17 


alking barefoot, v. 8 

ar, success in, Iv. 48; a 10; 
distaste for, mir. 3; vill. file a $ 
eb of Fate, Il. 3; Ul. 4, § 3, 11, 16; 
IV. 26, 34, 40; Vv. 8,§3; Vil. 67: 


x. 5 
ickedness must exist, Ix. 42, §3; 
3 XII. 16, § 2 





2 .Shb Sac bol ease > 


MARC, AUREL 





INDEX OF MATTERS 


Wit, acuteness of, V. 5; VI. 47 

Words, deeds, ‘thoughts, super- 
fluous, Iv. 24 

World, the, a city (see Universe), 
I. 16; I. 11;-Iv. 3, § 2, 4, 29: 
X16, X0. ne *pird’ s-eye view of, 
VII. 3, 48; 30 

Worth, (see Value), to be taken into 
account, XI. 37; XII. 

Worthlessness of Sa aeetana things, 
II 

Wrestling, vil. 52, 61; see also 
ancratium= boxing and wrest- 


ng 
Wrong-doing, due to lust and 
anger, If. 10; rests with the 
doer, V. 25; Vil. 29; 1x. 20, 38; 
Pe i harms himself, 
. 4, 38; involuntary, 
Iv 3 82: Vil. 22, 63 (Pla 
XI. 18, §§ 2, 3; done by Sal 
VII. 22: VIII. 5B; IX. 42; er 
to be kindly admonished, x. 
our own, X. 303; XI. 18, $4 


Zeus, V. 7, 8, §§ 2,27; XI. 8; city 
of, IV. 23=vopnos 


Zonaras (circa 1100) following 


Suidas, quotes Marcus three 
bet each time from the first 
ook. 


401 


IL—INDEX OF PROPER NAMES AND 


QUOTATIONS IN THE “THOUGHTS” 


(For other names see Index I.) 
Aescula ong prescribes to his Archimedes, named among acut 
vo v. 8; definite sphere of wits, VI. 47 
work, a ‘B Areius, ‘domestic penis: t 
Aesop, "fable of, XI. 22, possibly Augustus, VIII. 
taken from Horace Aristophanes, a i 
Agrippa, war minister of Augustus, (=Ach. 


VI. 
aig (? the Sophist and writer 
of fictitious new comedy letters), 
named as recently alive, x. 31 
Alexander, the Grammarian of 
tiaeum, tree? and tutor of 
Marcus, I. the Platonist 
c= Chay ’Plato 33 Greek secretary 
to Marcus in 174, A.D., I. 12; the 
rope Il. 3; VI. "24; VIL. 3; Ix. 


anal *Gornificia, sister of ein 
(see Introd. p. XIV.), I. 17, § 1 

Anonymous quotations, from 
unknown tragic writer, ana- 
paestic chorus, Vi. 51; (?) sen- 
arius from unknown poet, es 


fin.; Tl. 7 ep. Fragm 
516 Nauck; XI. 10, 30; 
(2?) vom. 415; (?) aye Some 


top, v. 36; lines of SeerToa| 
cast, Iv. 34, 49; xX. 16 § 2 line 5; 
XII. 8; running straight for the 
goal, Iv. 18: sharp sight, vil. 


38 
Antisthenes, the Cynic philosopher, 
quoted, VII. 36 (see Diog. Laert., 


vi. 3) 
Antoninus Pius, I. 16, 17, § 3; 
a. 2s a 80; Vil. 25; Ix. 21; 


ine Btae philosopher of 
Chalcedon, I. 8; 17, § 5 


402 


61), 66 (= Svubos 36 

Iv. 23 Ga Frag.) 

Asia, a corner of the world, vi. 36 

Athenians, prayer of, Vv. 

Athenodotus, disciple of Musonius 
and teacher of Fronto, I. 13 

ries 


Pe A, oye of of Gopmtted, grand 


eur, IV. 
sister and ig ale wag of” alludes 
to, vill. 31 


Baccheius, an unknown philosophe1 


i 
Baiae, health resort on the coast 0 | 


Campania, XI. 27 
Benedicta, an a ee 
probably Hadrian’s, I. 17, § 6 
ee (= Vonctbanassi se 
naex 
Brutus, named with Thrasea, ee 
etc., I. 14 
| 


é 


Cadicianus, unknown long-livei 
Iv. 50. Possibly corrupt fo 
Caecilianus, as Gataker ~ 

Caieta, I. 17, § 8. The suppose} 
scene of Faustina’s debauc eries 
Capit. xIx. 7 

Caesar, Gaius, i.e. Julius Caesar 
I. 3; vil. 3; Caesars, xX. 31) 

Caeso, or Kaeso, IV. 33. B 


| 
| 
’ 


’ 


clod of the Universe, vi | 





ome om - 


} 


} 





INDEX OF PROPER NAMES, ETC. 


Fabius Vibulanus killed with 
nearly the whole Fabian Gens 
at the Cremera, in 479 
Camillus, founder of the New 
Rome, Iv. 33 
Capreae, an island off Campania 
27. The supposed scene of 
Tiberius debaucheries (Taci- 
us 
Carnuntum, 0. 17 ad. fin. The 
headquarters of Marcus in the 
page war (171-3, A.D., Eutrop. 
18) near Vienna, now 
Hadubaer 
a ponns, the Fruit-bearer,, 7.¢., 
the Earth (or Demeter), VI. 43 
Catullinus, Fabius, xm. 27. Perhaps 
the consul of 130 A.D. 
greats Cinna, a Stoic philosopher, 


Cato, of Utica, 1. 14; (?) the 
Censor, Iv. 33, cp. Fronto, ad 
Caes., 11. 18; Uni M. Porcio 
me dedicavi atque despondi atque 
delegavi (Marcus aged 2 23) 

Cecrops, city of, (Athens) Tee: 
tion from ‘Aristophanes, IV 23 
Celer, Caninius, a Greek rhetorician 
nd Hadrian’s secretary, VII. 25 ; 
and one of the i of Marcus, 

see Capit., I. 
Chabrias, a a or favourite 
of Hadrian, VIII. 37 

Chaldaeans (astrologers), I 

Charax, own, Mentioned for 
his acuteness, VIII. 25 

Christians, XI. "3. See Index I. 

Chrysippus, establisher of Stoicism, 
named with Socrates and Epic- 
tetus, VII. 19 ; pa the function of 
ribald lines a play, VI. 42 
of syn with diseeneraiy simile 

ae (Aul. Gell., vir. 2, 1), 


3,§ 2 
Cithaceos (Soph. Oed. Rex, 1390), 
probably quoted from Epictetus, 
xi. 


Cleanthes, a possible reference to 
his great hymn to Zeus, xX. 28 
Clotho. the eonver of the Web of 
Fate, Iv. 34 

Crates, a Theban Cynic, of caustic 
wit, quoted for a remark on 
Xenocrates (perhaps on rid¢os), 
VI. 133; ep. under Monimus 


Crito, friend of Socrates and 
Xenophon, xX. 31 

bs ae type of departed grandeur, 
x. 


Demetrius, the Platonist (for 
whom, and not to his credit, see 
Lucian, Calumn. 16), VIII. on 
But Arethas refers to this 
in a note on Lucian, De alt. 63, 
where the Demetrius spoken of 
is the Cynic, the friend of 
Thrasea (ep. also, Lucian, Demon. 

3; Adv. I . Consequently 
6 TAarwunss would seem to 
an error for Kuvixds ; of Phalerum, 
the distinguished orator, states- 
man, and philosopher of Athens, 
circa 300, Ix. 29, but Schenk! 
obelizes 6 badnpevs 

Democrates, a Pythagorean philo- 
sopher, from whom is taken 
(so Prof. Schenkl in loc.) the 


quotation, ‘“‘The Universe is 
transformation, and Life is 
opinion,” 


lice, 3; “do not many 
things,” Iv. 24; “all things by 
law,” Vil. 31; atoms, VI. 3 


Warstie to Fem t 

Dion, I. 14, generally taken to be 
the Syracusan Dion. But Dion 
of Prusa was a truer philosopher 
and better man, and he matches 
better with Thrasea and Hel- 
vidius. Moreover, Arethas (?) 
twice quotes Marcus in notes to 
Dio (see under “ Arethas,” 
Index I.) 

Diotimus, a freedman or favourite 
of Hadrian, Vill. 25, 37 

Domitius (Dometius), I. 13. The 
Domitii were maternal (adoptive) 
ancestors of Marcus 


403 
pp 2 


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES, 


Empedocles, quoted, “‘ the sphere,” 

a 3; (?) VIII. 413 dAAotwars, IV. 
15's Exo 18, 28 

Epictetus, mentioned, vit. 19; his 
a Memorabilia,” is "; a little 
soul bearing a corpse’ 
Frag. 26), Iv. 41; IX. 243 
‘words of ill-omen ” A ict. II. 
24, 88, 89), XI. 34; ng for 
impossibilities Ciplct. OTL. 24, 

87), XI. 33; no man can 

pa us of our free will” (Epict. 
II. 22, 105), XI. 36; ‘‘ O Cithae- 
ron’ * (from Soph. Oed. Rex 1390, 
Epict. I. 24, 16), x1. 6; “the 
house is smoky and I quit it” 
pparat’, Epict. I. 25, 18), v. 29; 
**a soul deprived of truth only 
against its will.” (Epict. I. 28, 4; 
Ti, 22, 37 3vep: he egg Ul. 41 2); 
vil. 63; XI. 18, § 3; Socrates 
called the Sakae of the any 
Lamiae ee popmoAvketa, Epict. 
i. 1, 15) 23's change, illus- 
trated or: the grape (Hpict. 
mm. 24, 91-3), XI. 35; “’tis 
royal to do good and be abused ” 
(Antisthenes, Epict. Iv. 20), 
vil. 36; rules of life Clopict’ 
Frag. 27), Ors eps va: Z 
ad. init. ; “‘ the question is about 
being mad or sane” (Kpict. 
Frag. 28), XI. 38; elenchus on 
quarrelling (Socrates, (?) from 
re oe icy ce ae "ae a drama, 
(Epict. xm. 
Marcus cake Odes Epictetizes 
(Schol. to Codex D.), is 
ep. also V. 27 

Epicurus, on intolerable pain, 
Vil. 33, 64 5 Mate 79 of his illness, 
Ix. 41; atoms (see also Demo- 
critus), VI. 10 (so Schol. to Codex 
Di s* VTT,* Soe Tk, “to 
think on great men,’ XI. 26 
(by emendation Ss et for 
*Edeciwv) 

Epitynchanus possibly one of 
Hadrian’s clientéle, vil. 25 

Eudaemon, unknown, though 
named for ability, vil. 25. 
Vitruvius (but the reading is not 
above suspicion) mentions a 
celebrated astrologer of this 
name 


404 


ETC. 


Eudoxus, mentioned with Hippar- | 
chus and Archimedes, VI. 47. He ' 


was renowned as astronomer, 

physician and geometer 
Euphrates, mentioned as recently 

alive, x. 31. A Stoic philosopher 


much praised by Pliny (Ep. I. 10) : 


who held that a philosopher 
should be a man of affairs, an 
administrator, and judge. 
Hadrian allowed him to commit 
suicide by drinking hemlock 
(Dio. 69, 8, § 2) in 118 





Euripides, quotations from, Belle- | 


rophon (Frag. 289 Dind.) VII. 
38; XI. 6; Hynetbyie (Frag. 


; Antiope 


-) 

Chrysippus (Frag. 
vil. 50; Supplices (1. 1110), vil. 
5is unknown plays (Frag. 
890, 1007, Dind.), xX. 215 vil. 
42 or Aristophanes q.v. Xu. 26 

age a corner of the Universe, 
VI 


-Eutyches, an unknown philosopher, 


of previous times, X. 31 
Eutychion, an unknown philosopher 
of previous times, X. 31 


Fabius, an unknown_long-liver, 
Iv. 50; Fabius Catullinus, a lover 
of the country, XII. 27. See also 
Caeso 

Father, and grandfather of Marcus, 
see Verus 

bia wife of Marcus, I. 17, § 
re 315. (2). IX, 35, 966 also 

pp. 362. 365, 367 

Faustina, wife of Pius, VII. 25 


[Gnomologia], anecdote of Socrates 
and Perdiccas (Archelaus) from 
(?), XI. 25 

Granua, I. 17 ad. fin. The river 
Gran, near Buda-Pesth 


Hadrian, as a type of departed 
grandeur, IV. 33; VII. 5, 25, 37; 
X. 27. See also under Bene- 
dicta, and p. 360 

Helvidius (Priscus), an upright but 


impracticable Stoic, who drove 
Vespasian to banish and put 
him to death, I 
Helice, a city of “Achaia, eure 
by the sea 373 B.O., 
Hellenes, the Ancient ee mr. 14 
Heraclitus, about 500 B.c. The 
Stoics borrowed their ideas of 
Physics largely from him. Men- 
tioned with Pythagoras, octane, 
and Diogenes, VI. 47; 
manner of death, II. 3; Vanaaes 
of periodic conflagrations of the 
pada Il. 3; X. 7; cycles of 
change, V 13; TX, 2Sis Been 2's 
flux of things, ll. 17; Iv. 3 ad. 


ashe Gs 2, Vo wks AUS. LV Een $ 
Bac ek 4 Sabie ee EO ads 
simile of river, 11. 17; Iv. 43; 


motion above 

and below, vI. 17; [vu. 1]; 

interchange of ele- 
ments, Iv. 46; the man that 
forgets his way, Iv. 46; even 
sleepers seem to act and speak, 
TV¥.”°.46 VI. 42; “children 
from parents’? or “what our 
fathers have told us,” Iv. 46; 
the soul “an exhalation from 
blood,”’ v. 338; vi. 15; men 
at variance with the Reason of 
the Universe, Iv. 46; what they 
“encounter” every day, they 
deem strange, Iv. 46; 
on great men” (? from Heracl.), 
XI. 

Herculaneum Berane), des- 

troyed 79 A.D., 4 

Hesiod, goatee (opp. 186), XI. 32; 
(ibid. 197), v. 33 

Hipparchus, a great mathematician 
and astronomer about 150 B.C., 
here mentioned with Archimedes 
and ae tger Vi... 47—° Aur. 
Victor has a curious story 
(De Odes, XLI. 20) of Marcus 
punishing the people of Nicaea 
(in Bithynia) for not knowing 
(the text here is doubted) that 
ek osha ly, was born there 

Hi ates (about 450 B.O.) TI. 

1 Galen the nae= of oa 
time physicians. A tree under 
which he is said to have taught 
still exists at Cos, his birthplace 





INDEX OF PROPER 


“to think - 


NAMES, ETC. 


Homer, quoted (Zi. vi. ASTD) > se 
34; (wid., vil. 99), VI. ae: 
(Od., I. 243), Iv, 33; (ibid., 

3. (ibid, ,Ix. 413), 
XI. 31; (? The Nexua, Od. xi. 
but see Menippus,) Ix. 24 

Hymen, an Mapruels philosopher of 

a previous age, X. 31 


Julianus, an unknown long-liver, 
Iv. 50 ; 


Lacedaemonians, sce Spartans 

Lanuvium, on the Appian Way, 
where Pius Ne born, and had a 
villa, I. 16, § 8 

Leonnatus, Iv. 33. One of Alexan- 
der’s Generals, and quite out of 
place among Roman worthies, 
see Dentatus 

Lepidus, a lover of long-life, Iv. 50. 

ossibly the triumvir 

Lorium, a villa of Pius on the Via 
Aurelia, where he died 7 March, 
161, I. 16, § 8 
Lucilla, Domitia (Calvilla, Ca; it.), 
mother of Marcus, I. 17, 
Wa 4s hos Ne lessons learnt 
from her, I letter of Rusticus 
0, To 7 5 yay death of,-I. 17, 
§ 6; vol. 25; life with, Ix. 21. 
See ‘also p. 360 2 

Lucian, possibly referred to in 
‘s ratte and others like him,” 
vi. 4 

Lupus, Lusius, unknown, possibly 
a mistake for L. Licinius Zucullus, 
the conqueror of Mithridate 
whose luxurious gardens and 
villas were well-known, XII. 27 


Maecenas, the minister of Anema 
and friend of Horace, vm. 31 

Marcianus, an unknown philoso her, 
I. . There was a _ notable 
physician of this name (Marti- 
anus) in the time of Marcus 

Maximus, Claudius, a Stoic philo- 
sopher and teacher, highly es- 
teemed by Marcus, whom he 
thanks the Gods that he knew, 
I. 17, § 10; whose character he 
draws as that of a perfect man, 
1. 15; his illness, I. 16 ad. fin. ; 


405 


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES, ETC. 


survived by his wife, vul. 25; 
possibly consul circa 145, legatus 
of Pannonia 154 and proconsul 
of Africa circa 157 ; the vir sanct- 
issimus of Apuleius 

Menander, quoted, in reference to 
the saying of Monimus, ‘ ‘all is 
vanity ”’ (Frag. 249 Kock), 
Il. 15; more luxury than com- 
fort (Frag. 491 Kock), v. 12 

Menippus, mentioned as a mocker 
of man’s life, v1. 47; his Néexua 
possibly referred to, Ix. 24. 
Cynic and satirical writer, com- 
patriot of Lucian, and often 
introduced by him into his works. 
The Scholiast (Arethas, g.v.) on 
Luc. Pise. 26, refers to this 
passage of Marcus 

Monimus, a Cynic and pupil of 
Diogenes, quoted from Menander 
(q. pe. opinion is vanity,” 
Il. 


Nero, coupled with Phalaris, m1. 16 


Origanion, unknown, lately dead, 
VI. 47 


Pantheia, the concubine of Lucius 
Verus, "and mentioned as watch- 
ing his tomb (urn). The writer 
of the dialogues Imagines and 
Pro Imaginibus (attributed to 
Lucian) speaks in very high 
terms of her beauty and 
character, VIII. 37 

Pergamus, a freedman or favourite 
of Lucius Verus, VII. 37 

Perdiccas, king of Macedonia (pro- 
bably a mistake for Archelaus) 
ct A aia with Socrates, 


Pik, the typical tyrant, 1. 16 
Phalereus, see Demetrius, Ix. 29 
Philip, of Macedonia, men- 
tioned with Alexander and Deme- 
trius of Phalerum, Ix. 29; with 
Alexander and Croesus, X. 27 
ea unknown, lately dead, 


Phodion, the great Athenian, anec- 
dote of (cp. ee Rufus, p 
55, ed. Hense), XI 


406 


iy unknown, lately dead, 


Pindar, quoted (from Plato, g.v.), 
“the secrets of Hades,” 0. 13 
Plato, his Utopia, Ix. 29 ; * quotation 

(? ‘dropped out) vu. 48: 


ED), vor. 44, 45; Pindar 
aekel by (heaet, 173 E. ), I 
wise man city like 


shepherd = hy hills (Theaet. 
174 D.), x goodness, ee 
love of life Geng. ch. 68, 512 D a 
vu. 46; death no evil, Rep. VI 
486 A., vil. 35; Socra as the 
true philosopher (Plato, Tim. 61, 
-), 1. 6. See also p. 360 
[Plutarch], perhaps caked: Iv. 163 
vil. 52; referred to, v. 1, § 2. 
See also under Sextus ; 
Pompeii, destroyed by Vesuvius, 
79 A.D., 48 


IV. 

Pompeius, named with Caesar and 
Alexander, 0. 3; vil. 3; the 
Gens Pompeia has died ” out, 
vit. 31 

Prasianus (Prasinus), a partizan 
of the Green Faction in the Circus 
I. 5; Lucius Verus, whose horse 
Flier (Volucris) was ridden under 
he Green colours, unfairly 
favoured the Greens, ‘and on one 
occasion, while presiding at the 
games with Marcus, had a hostile 
reception from the spectators, 
Capit. Vit. Ver., VI. 2 

Pythagoras, named with Heracli- 
tus and Socrates, vi. 47; tenet 
quoted, | z ort stars in their 
courses,’ apf : 


Quadi, I. 17 ad. fin. A German 
tribe of the modern Moravia, who 
with the Marcomanni were the 
chief enemies of Marcus in the 
first war, 170-174. They ‘nearly 
repeated ‘the exploit of Arminius 
in the_ so-called ‘ miraculous 





victory ” in 174 (or, as Domas- 


zewski, 171), pp. 369, 371 
Quotations from own authors, 
see Anonymous 





INDEX OF PROPER NAMES, ETC. 


Rome, VI. 44 

Rufus, see Velius 

Rusticus, Stoic philosopher, teacher 
and intimate friend of Marcus, 
who, as praefectus urbi, condemned 
Justin to martyrdom ; lessons 
learnt from him self-discipline, 
contempt of dialectics, theoric, 
rhetoric, poetry and fine writing, 
not to be a prig, to cultivate 
good taste, simplicity in letter- 
writing, sweet reasonableness, 
care in reading, suspicion of 
volubility, eae : knowledge of 
Epictetus, I. § 4; M. some- 
times attended itt, I. 17, § 6 


Salaminian, the (Leo), Socrates sent 
by the Thirty Tyrants for, vi. 


Sarmatians, these appear as enemies 
about 174, A.D., X. 10. They were 
a Slav people from the present 
Poland and _ Russia. Their 
women fought. 

Satyron, an unknown philosopher 
of recent time, xX. 31 

Scipio, Iv. 33 

Secunda, wife of Maximus, VIII. 25 

Severus, called “ brother,” I. 14; 
and so probably the father of 
Claudius Severus, who married 
one of Marcus’ daughters (? 
Fadilla). But he seems to have 
been a philosopher and is pos- 
sibly identical with the Peripat- 
etic philosopher Severus (Capit. 
Vit. Mar., U1. 8), mentioned, 
X. 31. Marcus was himself at 
one time called he Capit. 
I. 9, ep. Galen, vil. 478 K 

Severus, Catilius, maternal great- 
grandfather of Marcus, be 
a par to succeed Hadr 


Geahes of Chaeronea, a Stoic eid. 
sopher, grandson of Plutarch, 
I. 9. Marcus made him his 
assessor on the bench (so Suidas) 
and attended his lectures late 
in life (Philost. Vit. Soph., 11. 9) 

Sextus Empiricus, of date uncertain 
but probably near the end of the 
2nd_=s century. He was an 
“empiric” physician and the 


great champion of Sceptical 
Philosophy, possibly quoted 
(adv. Math. tv. 81), vi. 14; 

“all is vanity ” (from) Monimus, 
see also Menander; Sext. Emp. 
1. 1), m. 15 

Silvanus, an unknown philosopher 
of a previous age, X. 

Sinuessa, a coast town on the border 
of Latium and Campania, letter 
of Rusticus from, I. 7 

Socrates, named with Heraclitus 
and Pythagoras and Diogenes, 
vi. 473; VUl. 3, with Chrysippus 
and Epictetus, vu. 19; public 
acts and character, VIL. 66; 
conduct with Xanthippe, XI. 28; 
his self-control (? from Xenophon, 
q.v.), I. 16, ad. fin.; his 
vit. 44, 453 killed by Canians 
vermin, I. 3; quoted (irom 
Epictetus, g.v.) on the notions of 
the vulgar XI. 23; (? from Epi- 
ctetus, g.v.) on rational souls, XI. 
39; (from Plato, g.v.) on a soul 
freed from sense-impressions, III. 6 

Socraticus, an unknown philoso- 
pher of previous times, X. 31 

Bopnocle. quoted from Epictetus 


Rex, 1391), XI. 6 
Spares, courtesy to strangers, 
Stertinius of Baiae, xl. 27. Pos- 
sibly the rich physician of 


Taneee an unknown philosopher, 
I 


Telauges, son of Pythagoras and 
Theano (see a Laert. Pyth. 
XXII. 26), VII. 

Theodotus, a hes ee or minion 
of Hadrian (probably), 1.17, § 6 


ber be Sg: the successor of 
Aristo in the Peripatetic 
Philosophy, uoted from with 
approval, ‘ ge oe to lust, 


and to shar” 

Thrasea, the Robie Stoic ut to 
death’ by Nero in 63. is last 
words were addressed to Deme- 
trius the Cynic (for whom see on 
Demetrius), I. 14 


407 


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES, ETC. 


Tiberius, at Capreae, x1. 27 

hg an instance of past grandeur 
Iv. 

Tropaeon harass: unknown philoso- 
pher of a previous age, X. 31 

Teens. now Frascati, in Latium, 
I, 


Valerius, see Volesus 

Velius Rufus, unknown, XII. 27 

Verus, M. Annius, grandfather of 
Marcus, I. 1; I. 17, § 1; rx. 21 

Verus, Annius, father of Marcus, 
I. 2,V. 4, 13, 31; VO. 25; Ix. 21 

Verus, Lucius Aurelius, adopted 
brother and son-in-law of Marcus, 


408 


I. 17,§ 43; vu. 37. See also pp. 
undoubtedly i 


367, 387 
Volesus, or Volusus 
P. Valerius Volusi filius Poplicola, 


the hero of the first years of the © 


Republic, descended from the 


Sabine chief Volesus (Sil. Ital. 


Il. 8), Iv. 33 


Xanthippe, the shrewish wife of | 


Socrates, XI. 28 

Xenocrates, a Platonist philoso- 
pher from Chalcedon, VI. 
see Crates 

Xenophon, perhaps quotation from 
(Mem. 1. 3, 15), 1. 16, § 9, X. 31 





13:3) 





III.—GLOSSARY OF GREEK ‘TERMS 


adiahopa (=péoa), V. 20; VI. 32, 41, 
45; vu. 31; VI. 56; XI. "16: 
things indifferent, ie. neither 
good nor bad = (1) things abso- 
lutely indifferent, such as the 
number of pebbles on the shore; 
(2) mponynéva, things to be chosen 
as having a relative value, as 
good health; (3) amponyuéva, to 
be rejected, as of less relative 
value. cp. Fronto, De Elog. 
Nab. p. 143 
epabdes, 76, IV. 4, 21; VII. 54; 1X. 9; 
Xe 4519.2 From a comparison of 
these we get 7d otepéuvioy = 70 
yemdes (earth), To vypov Cwaeer 
TO TvevpatiKoy = TO aepwdes (X. 7 
§ 2, the spiritual or ‘pneumatic into 
airy or aerial), 76 mup@des (fire) 
= 7.70 voepov, cp. XI. 20 
aitia, TO altiov, TO aitr@bes (see Sen- 
eca, Ep. 65), the Causal, Formal, 
or Formative Principie which 
makes a thing what it is, con- 
trasted with tAy (matter), Iv. 21; 
VI. 5; Vu. 29; vit. 3,11; xi. 8, 
10, 18, 29; the Primary Cause, or 
Nature, or God, VII. 27; Ix. 29; 
the Individual Cause in Man, vim. 
7; IX. 31; xX. 26; the Quality of 
the Cause, i.e. the power it has of 
making a thing what it is, Ix. 25; 
absorbed into the Adyos” of the 
Universe, vil. 10; Destiny, the 
primal Cause and sum of all lower 
causes, V. 8 
axardAnnros, akatadnpia, impossi- 
bility of any certain conviction, 
v. 10; vil. 54. It was the main 
position of the Sceptics that 
nothing could be really known, 


f- 


but even Socrates and his suc- 
cessors said similar things. Epi- 
ctetus stoutly maintains the con- 
trary 

ak vevynTos, One who selfishly disre- 
gards the common interests and 
cuts himself adrift from his fel- 
lows, 11. 1, 2; U1. 5; vil. 34; 
xX. 6: <r 18 ad fin.; XII. 23 

dvadopa, the reference of a thing to 
its end or purpose, its relation to 
its objective, with Cause and 
Matter making bs the whole 
thing, xm. 8, 10, 

aéia, (1) the true atc’ or worth of 
things, (2) the relative value of 
bp preferential, 11. 11; VI. 3, 


amabeva, the Lose pei calm of the 
true Stoic, I. 9 (of Sextus) ; VI. 
16s ar 18 ad fin. ; cp. ara, patta. 
anak Aeyouevar, words only found (it 
seems) in Marcus are: a&KvBevTos 
I. 8; tavdpovopetcbar X. 19; av- 
6AAtop IV. 20; amadAdaxriav X. 36; 
amoxaroapiovabai VI. 30; amroppéupe 
eoOa I. 4; IV 22; am poaraTntos 
XII. 14; apeoKeuTixos I. 16; adv- 
awroyitws X. 9; axapdios IX. 3; 
yaraxtiov V. 45 yrroxpeverBa. v.55 
yAwoonua IV. 33; eupdorexveiv 
Vil. 54; févepynoetery TI. 75 €v- 
Tépiov (2) VI. 13; fedxaprevtiger Pax 
1.153 KadoiOns I. rs Brtaeahy oe) 4] 
Ik 16; puid&iov VII. 3; wvgdaprov IV. 
48; VI. 13; opodoyparety IX. 33 
xI. "8; Opobapvety XI. 8; rapacnrei 
XII. 5; mepipopos I. 15; TponTwT= 
ixos XI. 10; tpocpjocebar IV. 49; 
purragriKes I. 16; oceuvorudia IX. 
29; cuapaydiov IV. 20; orpwpatiov 


409 


GLOSSARY OF 


V. 13 cvykararyxerOor V. 15 oup- 
pypveoOo I. 11; VII. 23; cvppy- 
puots IV. 40; cupmeprpavtagecdar 
X. 38; cuumpoominrey VIL. 22; X. 
31; XI. 27; avveudhépey WI. 4; 
ovvvnbev (2) IV. 345 tpryepyvios, 
Iv. 50; wrépracis, X. 83 havTa- 
ovoTAnKTws, I, 7; xvAdprov VI. 13 

ampoaipera, things not in our chojce 
or power, XII. 3, 23, 33 

apxat, Zeno recognized @eds (rd mrou- 
ovv) and vAn (7d wécxXov) as apxat 
or Beginnings "3 

atapaéia (cp. amdbea) IX. 31, free- 
oe oe from perturbation at external 


&romor, IV. 3; VI. 24; VII. 32, 50; 
VIII. 17; IX. 28, 39; xX. 6; XI. 18. 
Indivisible atoms endowed with 
motion were, according to Demo- 
critus, and after him Epicurus 
and Lucretius, the origin of all 
things without any First Cause. 
Marcus often puts this view, but 
only to reject it 

adopuy = means. Marcus does not 
use the word in its Stoic sense of 
“‘ disinclination ” )( opuy 


eine? evil spirit, I. 6; good, xX. 


3; = evdamovia, VII. 17; the 
“genius” or “daemon” within us, 
I. 13, 17 ; 1091. 6, 7, 12, 16 ; Vim. 45; 
xu. 3; given by Zeus to us, V.27 5 
= 66s, V. 10; = vovs, I. 3 

dcaAvars, VI. 50, etc.; a breaking up 
of things into their component 
parts, and the subsequent sifting 
out of: these into the elements 

SAoif faculty of pre yagiw 
Ill. 1; = Aoy.xy Wvxy, VI. 32; no 
affected by the motions of the 
mvevpa, TV. 3 

dvarveta0ar, to breathe through the 
veins and arteries, a medical 
theory (see Gataker in loc. for il- 
pacer from Galen), Mm. 1; 
Vi. 

doypa, a postulate, axiom, or prin- 
ciple established by reason and 
experience; what the sensations 
are to the body and impulses to 
the soul, déyuara are to the intel- 
ligence, TI. 16; called ‘‘ sacred,” 
X.9. See xpiua and bewpyua 


410 


GREEK TERMS 


elSos, only used once (XI. 20) in its 
ag pe sense of “ general 
_term,” “class,” or “species” 

ciuapnevyn, n, destiny, Mm. 6; V. 8, 
etc. ; =Clotho, IV. 34 ; ra cvyKAwd- 
opeva, WI. 4, 11, 165 Iv. 263 
q Tempwmevy, I. 8; 7d cvpBaivov, |} 
Iv. 44 etc. ; 

éxxAcois, avoidance )( dpeéis (q.v.), 
vill. 7; XI. 37. The things that 
are “‘ within the man” are xpiots 
judgment, épyi; impulse, opegis 
propension towards, €xxArocs 
aversion from, a thing, VIII. 28; 
but the latter must be reserved 
only for things in our power, 
vir. 7; XI. 37 

éxmvpwors, cyclical conflagration of © 
the Universe, a doctrine of 
Heraclitus (q¢.v.), 1m. 3. Justin 
Apol. ii. 7 points out the dif- 
ference between the Stoic and 
Christian view of this conflagra- 
tion (2 St. Peter iii. 7, 10) 

évvova, conception, thought, or no- 
tion not amounting to a convic- 

ition (séyua), but Kowwh Eevvoe. = 
davtacia xatadnrrixy, a conclusive | 
conviction. See mpddAnyis : 

éfaywyy = suicide does not occur, 
but see It. 1 (¢faxréov) 

éécs, VI. 14; VI. 16; XI. 18; XI. 16. 
Lucian, Conviv. 23, says, ti dca- 
dhéper oxéars E€ews 3 andin Hermot. 
81 he laughs at the jargon of 
philosophy with its éfes and 
oxéoes, its Karadjpes and havra- 
gia. Xxéors, feature; fis, a 
simple essential form or quality 

Cepia) ; dvo.s, a forming power, 

vi. 14 


evdapovia, harmony of man’s will 
eines) with God’s = evpova Biov, 
Vil. 


edpous, evpociv (cvpora, pict. i. 4. 6), 
the calm even flow of the virtuous _ 
life = ebodciv, V. 34; X. 6; even | 
of Zeus himself, v. 8; evpovy Kai 
Geovdy Biov, I. 5 - 

évépyera, the activity of the yx } 
contrasted with zecors (g.v.) = the i 
passivity of the body, V. 20, etc. © 


nysmovexdv, Td (OF 7d Kuptedov, To 


mpoatperikov, VIII. 56), the Ruling 

















GLOSSARY OF 


Reason (9-0) or Principle (or 
Inner Sel , UO. 2; Iv.1; 
V. 26; XII. "14, etc. = Adyos, duos, 
or even TEXVY nr uk, Ve 4; VII. 7 
(cp. ux, V- Ps Sidvoue., Vil. 

, 68; vods, IX. 22; Im. 16; X. 
24: xi. 33 ioikeetane even of 
God, vil. 733 IX. 22 


Ocdpyua, a& ge pefceived in 
Science, 1. 7, § 4, 8; Iv. 2; in 
Ethics = Sdyua, a principle or con- 
viction ; ro Oewpyrixdy, the faculty 
of pure thought, x. 9; p. 375 


KaGijKov, To = officium, duty. Among 
Ta KaOjKOVTA, duty in the highest 
sense perfectly performed, is xar- 
op%wpna (not used by M.). Kxarop- 
@eoes, V. 14, are acts that are the 
outcome of right reason 

katadnwWis, VI. 30 (xaradapBdvery, 
KataAnntiKds (IX. 6), axatédnrros) ; 

an important term in. the Stoic 
philosophy meaning a “true com- 
prehension ” or “clear percep- 
tion’’ of a thing, without which 
no right conduct in life is pos- 
sible. See under cvyxatabeots 
karopOwats, see kabnKov 

kivyows, motion = change, V. 10; 
the flesh (Epicurus), (x. 41; of ‘che 
senses, VIII. 26; of the flesh 
(smooth or rough), X. 8; to anger, 
es, etc., XI. 20; of the mind, 
VII 55; of virtue, VI. 17; )( cxéars, 
vu. rt Sie tension (rovos), 


VI. 38 
xo.vds and its kindred words occur 
over eighty times, and Marcus 
apparently coins the beautiful 
word xotvovonpocvry (I. 16), which 
deserves to rank with the “ loving- 
kindness ”’ of Coverdale’s Bible. 
' See under Fellowship 
xpiza, conviction, almost = dyno, 
Iv 3, $23 judgment, v. 19; vi. 
17; XI. 11: cp. K, ape Vi. 52, etc., 
the antecedent Oppy, Vill. 16, 
28 5 of the Christians, xI. 3; 
; “eo (pavracia), XI. 16, is. 


GREEK TERMS 


Adyos (Aoycxds), reason or the reason, 
I. 8; 1. 10; Iv. 13, 16, ze 24, 30, 
33 Vv. 8,9, Jt, 28; 

16, 42: 


x. 31, 1, $2. (vous aah: right reason, 
CL itt ue, Cic. Tuse. iv. 15. 34), 
mm. 6, 12; xI. 9; xu. 35; civic 
reason, IV. 29; Ix. 125 common 
to Gods and men, vil. 53; A. of 
Nature, Iv. 29; V 32; VI. 58; vo. 
10; common to all “intelligent 
creatures, IV. 4; Vl. 9; =a man’s 
self (76 ychovexdy, q. ».), vit. 40; 
convincing reason II. 5; Iv. 24; 
oreppatixot Adyor, Of the Universe 
into which all things are taken 
back = seminal principles, Iv. 14, 
21; vI 24; = Aoyos only, vit. 10; 
xX. "": Aoyixds, applied to egov, 
nyemovikov, Téxvyn, Pvots, Wux7 


oinors, self-conceit or illusion, Iv. 
12; IX. 34; XII. 27 

oikovopia, IV. 19, 51; xr. 18, § 5; 
management, and so policy, ex: 
pediency, adaptation to circum- 
stances, ulterior end, secondary 
purpose, and even finesse. We 
keep the double sense of the word 
in our “economy of truth” 

Spetis) propension ot inclination to- 
wards a thing, of which the result 
is 6pyy and the incentive davracia, 
IX. 7: cp. VII. 28. )( Exxarors, 
VII. 7. See under ra8os 

opun = Popa fuxys emi 7 (Stob. Eel. 
li. 160), impulse of the mind to- 
wards a g (see Specs), result- 
ing in a dos j i 

oavérns = Sixavocvvyn mpos edv, piety, 
sanctity, holiness 

ovoia, Substance or Being, some- 
a Sag vAn, matter; )( wvxq, 
IV. 


méos, the “affect ” resulting through 
metavs from dpuy, the second stage 
of épeés, which depends itself on 
assent (ov Sa ae! Stobaeus 
defines it (Hel. ii. 164) as a mo- 
tion of the Soul contrary to Na- 
ture ; prone Kee 13, to study 
the 7éOn = Ethics 


41! 


GLOSSARY OF GREEK TERMS 


madcyyeveoia, XI. 1; ep. VI.19. The 
Stoic theory was that every- 
thing repeated itself in periodic 
cycles, when the world was re- 
newed again after each confiagra- 
tion (see éxmipwors and under He- 
raclitus); cp. Chrysippus, epi 
mpovoias, ‘“‘there will be another 
Socrates to live the same life 
again”; and Seneca, Ep. 36. 
10, “veniet iterum qui nos 
in lucem reponat dies.” But 
whether Marcus believed in this 
dismal theory is very doubtful, 
cp. X. 31: 

maparaéis, opposed line in battle, so 
opposition, not obstinacy (XI. 3) 
Im. 3; vu. 48. See also p. 381. 

metars  evepyeca, V. 1, a passive con- 
dition antecedent to a xivnars in 
the case of the body, correspond- 
ing to an évépyea of the mind, 
HE... 6; ¥..26;. VI. 51; Vi. 55; 


Ix. 

meptodor, V. 13, 32; X. 7. See madry- 
yeverta 

Tvevpa = avenos, I. 2; the surround- 
ing air, Ix. 2; the inferior part 
of the Wvxy as distinct from voids, 
Iv. 3; it and its motion quite 
distinct from the d:dvora, IV. 3. 
Marcus does not seem to use the 
word in the sense of Atmospheric 
Current unless xm. 30 affords an 
instance, 

rvevpara, What remains of things 
when ovgia, Wux7, and voepa Wuxi 

’ are subtracted, xi. 30 

mvevpatikov,-To, the Soul (= 70 zvev- 
pariov) of which the aveiua or 
breath element at death goes 
back into 7d aepHdes, and the vois 
into ro mup@des, IV. 4; X. 7; XI. 20 

mVvevpatiov, T6=(1) Wvyx7 (Soul) in its 
lower sense (cpa, mvevudrior, 
vows, XII. 14) 0. 2; VU. 56; Ix, 
36; XII. 3, 14; (2) Wuxi; in its 
higher sense, including the vois, 
v. 26, 83; vi. 14; Ix. 8; 34; 
XII. 30; the angitg 4 body and 
the mvevyadriov that has wn 
with its growth, xu. 3; the vital 
breath which will be quenched or 
transferred elsewhere, VIII. 25; 
the sphere of it and the body 


412 


outside our power, V. 33; unstable 
like all matter, Ix. 36; burd 
with the body, Ix. 24. See under 
Wixwots ' 

To.oTyns, TO wovov, the property, qual- 
ity, or form of a thing (almost = — 
the Cause which makes it what it 
is, IX. 25); 7d idiws rurov, separate 
individuality, vI. 3; Ix. 25; xX. 7; 
x. 30 

moditixos, mostly = xowwrixds. See 
KOLVOS 

mpoatpears, free will or choice. See 
uv am poatpeTa. 

TpoatpeTikov, T6(= To HyenoveKdy), the — 
faculty of choice, vi—II. 56 

mponyovpevov, 76, the leading or car- 
dinal thing, vi. 55; vi. 49; 


ee 41. Masces does not use the 
ic expression 7a mponypeva 
things preferential 


mpodnyis = a primary conception 
possessed by all rational beings, 
Chrysippus in Diog. Laert. vii 


53 (€vvoa dvotky tov Kad’ Gdov). 


ened | 





Perceptions (¢avragia:) resulting 
from sensation (aic@yo.s) produce 
impressions (turmoes) which re- 
peated form memory and many 
memories make experience which 
gives us conceptions (mpoAjwWers) 


okedacpos, cxopmiauos (ep. dudAvars), 
a disintegration of things into 
their component atoms (VI. 24; 
Vil. 32; Vill. 25) or elements. See 
under Dispersion and Dissolution 
oxomds (or TéAos, V. 15, 16), the end 
or objective of life, 1. 16; vu. 4; 
XI. 6, 21; to which every opuy 
and ¢avtacia should be directed, 
lu. 7. See under Aim, Objective 
oreppatikos Adyos (see under Adyos), 
FeSO 5 Vr 24: Fee fin. 
= the Generative Reason, because 
the Primary Fire or Reason con- 
tains in it the Germs of all things. 
The ovepu. Adyo. are the creative 
and forming forces in Nature 
which have produced (1) the Uni- 
verse as a whole, and (2) indi- 
vidual things individually. Jus- 
tin, Apol. ii. 8. 13, applies the 
Stoic term to Christ 





GLOSSARY OF 


groxeia, Ta, the elements, earth, 
water, air, fire, 11. 3, 17; VI. 17; 
Iv. 4; X. 7; XI. 20, ete.; almost= 
atoms, VI. 17; VII. 31 
ovykaraGears, the full mental assent 
required for a convincing impres- 
sion (davracia kataAnmrikn) before 
convictions (S6yua7ra) can be trans- 
lated into movement and action, 
but even this is liable to error, 
v.10. See under rados 
ovykpima, ovykpizdtiov, the com- 
pound—man, VII. 67 ; VIII. 25; XI. 
20; composite things )( crocxeia, 
Il. 33 VI. 10= xuxewy, the ‘ farrago’ 
_ of things; ovyxprors )( Avaous, XII. 
24, 36; the elements comprising 
the cama, I. 17 
cuuradera, Sympathetic connexion 
or affinity of the parts in an or- 
ganic whole, v. 26; Ix. 9, § 3; 
mutual interdependence, IV. 27 
ouveidnors, It is curious that Mar- 
cus never uses this Stoic equiva- 
lent for ‘Conscience,’ but see 
evaouveidntos, VI. 30 ad fin. 
cicrnua, an organized body, or or- 
ganism, the parts of which have 
a relation to one another 
oxéo.s, & non-essential quality or 
feature of a thing, ) ktvnous = rest 
(Rendall), vil. 60; XI. 2; attitude 
or relation towards other things, 
q 12° Vi.. 88; VE. 27; x1. 18. 
Three oxéces, (1) towards the 
body, (2) towards God, (3) to- 
wards our neighbour, VIII. 27. 
See under ééts, xivyous 
capa, rd [cwuariov, capé, capKia 
(plur.), capxidvov, kpeddiov] a com- 
pound of 7d yeades and 76 vypor, 
together forming 76 orepéuor, 
Iv. 4; x. 7; the vessel or sheath 
of Soul, 1%. 3; VIM. 27; IX. 3; 
that which overlays the Soul, 
xl. 2, 3 


TEAOS, 8€& TKOTOS 

tévos (rovikos) = tension imparted to 
soul by atmospheric substance 
therein existing (Zeller), the cause 
of virtues and vices. Zeller also 
says that the Stoics imagined two 
sorts of motion, the one (= our 





GREEK TERMS 


. Repulsion) tending outwards and 
giving rise to the qualities of mat- 
ter, the other (our Attraction) 
tending inwards and causing con- 
densation. Cleanthes calls tovos 
& TANy!) TUpOS r 


vAn, 7d VAcKdv, matter on which the 
attvov (g.v.) acts 

bmoxeiwevov, 76 (or plural), matter not 
in its primary condition but as 
formed by the airov, VII. 29; 7 
droKxeyn€évy VAy, IX. 36; all material 
things and objects, v. 10; VI. 4, 
23; VIII. 22, 24; Ix. 3; x. 18 

tmeaipeois, IV. 1; V. 20; VI. 50; 
xI. 37, exception or reservation ; 
ep. ‘“‘sapiens ad omnia cum ex- 
ceptione (uO breéaipécews) veniet, 
si nihil inciderit, quod impediat’ 
(Seneca, De Benef. iv. 34) 

bmrodynyes, opinion, imagination; all 
things are merely what we think 
them to be, Il. 15; Iv. 3, ad fin.; 
xr. 8, 26; away with opinion! 
Iv. 7; vil. 40; XI. 18, § 7; XII. 
22, 25; leave the fact as it is and 
add no opinion to it, v. 26; hold 
the power of forming opinions 
sacred, III. 9; a droA KatadnmTiKy 
(q.v.) amounts to a truth, Ix. 6. 
See wi gdavracia and Kpios 

tiréaracis, substance, IX. 1 ad fin. 
subsistence, IX. 42; X. 5 


davracia, impression, thought, no- 
tion; don’t go beyond first im- 
pressions, VIII. 49; they dye or 
stamp the soul, Vv. 16; VI. 16; sift 
them, vill. 26; appraise them 
aright, V. 36; davtacia Katadnr- 
7.x, irresistible impression that 
carries assent, IV. 22; Vil. 54; 
wipe it out, Iv. 24; v. 2; vl. 17, 
29; vir. 29; Ix. 7. See under 
vroAnwis and Kpiors 

dvoodoyetv, VII. 13 = Physics; cp. 
Ix. 41; x. 9; so of the physio- 
logical disquisitions of Heraclitus, 
1m. 3; ep. Ix. 41 (from Epicurus). 


Wuxi, Wuxdpiov, Man = copa, puxy, 
vous, Il. 16; but the Soul (fvx7) 
twofold, (a) = tvevjcrvov (rvedpa), 


413 


GLOSSARY .OF 


an exhalation from blood (ava- 
Oupiagts, V. 33, vI. 15), and 
an inhalation (avémvevais) from 
the air; (b) 7 voepa, eet tgeult VI. 14, 


32; Ix. 8; XI.1; Xi. oxi 
= 7d Ey met nag I. a a os fin.; 
Iv. 41; Vv. 26; 27, 34; an 


emanation ina God, x. 26; 
imprisoned in the body, UL 

ep. Int. p, xiv. The natural soul 
is called powBds, a vortex or cur- 
rent, 11. 17, § 1; the rational 
soul a sphere, XI. 12; its attri- 
butes, XI. 1, §2. There is a Soul 


414 


GREEK TERMS i 
of the Universe, xm. 30, 32,an || 
of God, v. 34, the two ie | qj 
really the same 
Wye ows. It wasa view ofthe Stoi 
that the embryo in the womb h: 
only the voix Wuxn of Rr 
and that the voepa w Wry 
epee? to the child a r bi 
by contact with the (cold) | 
xi. 24. It was by the respiratio: 
of the atmospheric mreipa ‘that 
the child received the mvevpariov, | 
VI. 153; 'X.7 


| 





| PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY 
| RicHarD CLay AND Sons, LiMirep, 
BRUNSWICK STREET, STAMFORD STREET, 8.E., 
AND BUNGAY, SUFFOLK. 








) ;. 


ou oN 
aly a 


















foes 


tie 





We pees TARA ME Gore Re 
ETE MD TS Ree aay yh tM ator 
O- PAN RTS gmivars dipg CPR DO alee 
Z i! : 


ee) ; RPMI 2 Taggly ting, 


‘ at a ie pe erm 
a a 

A ies bie 3 = 
; oat Sh he ror 4 


4 i 
Roa ate a 


a phi * ergy 













sy vt ~ SYNATS 







oh Nw 
“Pit taan¥d 















LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 
VOLUMES ALREADY PUBLISHED. 


Latin Authors, 
APULEIUS. The Golden Ass. ~. (Metamorphoses.) 
W. Adlington (1566). Revised by 8. Gaselee. 1 Vol. 


fas: CIVIL WARS. Trans. by A. G. Peskett. 
1 Vol: 


CATULLUS. Trans. by F. W, Cornish; TIBILLUS. 
Trans. by J. P. Postgate; PERVIGILIUM VENE- 
RIS. Trans. by J. W. Mackail. 1 Vol. 


Sar as DE FINIBUS. Trans. by H. Rackham.” 
1 Vol. 


CHE ERG DE OFFICIIS. Trans. by Walter Miller. 
ol. 


, CICERO: LETTERS TO ATTICUS. Trans. by E. O. 
Winstedt. Vols. I and II. 


CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTINE. Trans. by W. 
Watts (1631). 2 Vols. 


HORACE: ODES AND EPODES. Trans. by C. E. 
Bennett. 1. Vol. 


OVID: HEROIDES AND AMORES. Trans. by Grant 
Showerman. 1 Vol. 


PETRONIUS. Trans. by M. Heseltine; SENECA: 
oe ae Trans. by W. H. D.. Rouse. 
ol. 


PLINY. LETTERS. Melmoth’s Translation revised by 
'-W. M. L. Hutchinson. 2 Vols. 


PROPERTIUS.. Trans. by H. E. Butler. 1 Vol. 
SUETONIUS. Trans. by J. C. Rolfe. 2 Vols. 


TACITUS: DIALOGUS.. Trans..by. Sir-Wm.. Peterson; 
~- AGRICOLA. AND GERMANTIA.. Trans. by Maurice 
Hutton. 1 Vol. 


TERENCE. Trans. by John’ Sargeaunt: 2 Vols. | 
1 


4 


LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY—(Ccontd.) 
Greek Authors. 


bes i ipa RHODIUS. Trans. by R. C. Seaton. 
ol. 


fc ns clare scat FATHERS. Trans. by Kirsopp Lake. 








APPIAN’S ROMAN HISTORY. Trans. by Horace 
White. 4 Vols. 


DIO CASSIUS: ROMAN HISTORY. Trans.-by E. 
Cary. - Vols. I, II, and III 


EURIPIDES. Trans. by A. S. Way. 4 Vols. 


THE GREEK BUCOLIC POETS (THEOCRITUS, 
BION, MOSCHUS). Trans. by J. M. Edmonds. 1 Vol. 


HESIOD AND THE HOMERIC HYMNS. Trans. by 
H. G. Evelyn-White. 1 Vol. 


JULIAN. Trans. by Wilmer Cave Wright. Vols. I and II. 
LUCIAN. Trans. by A. M. Harmon. Vols. I and II. 


PHILOSTRATUS: THE LIFE OF APOLLONIUS OF 
' TYANA. Trans. by F. C. Conybeare. 2 Vols. 


PINDAR. Trans. by Sir J. E. Sandys. 1 Vol, 


PLATO: EUTHYPHRO, APOLOGY, CRITO, PHAZDO, 
PHADRUS. Trans. by H. N. Fowler. 1 Vol. 


PLUTARCH: THE PARALLEL LIVES. Trans. by 
B. Perrin. Vols. I and II. 


PROCOPIUS. Trans. by H. B. Dewing. Vol. I. 
QUINTUS SMYRNARUS.. Trans. by A. 8. Way. 1 Vol. 
SOPHOCLES. Trans. by F. Storr. 2 Vols. 


ST. JOHN DAMASCENE: BARLAAM AND IOASAPH. 
Trans. by the Rev. G. R. Woodward and Harold 
Mattingly. 1 Vol. 


oe : CYROPADIA. Trans. by Walter Miller. 
2 Vols. 


DESCRIPTIVE PROSPECTUS ON APPLICATION. 


LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN. 
NEW YORK: G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS. 


a aw 
|) 








ae. See a Sle ee 

















a = 





PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 





UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 





















“ee x 
a yorrtdun awe 
pen peices A ae 















ar we ae he . 
“ib {ie zt ea Ton 
aay . AtiK 












Pye ae! 

mh sialraty ap ia ” 
ay Bales Fy Paes ae 

3 uh te 


im sel oul 





ae Kies 
a eee tig iat a 7 






” 

Vie epee ne La Aob 9 Wy! 

yous inca ive 
Noe 


ite yet uy rindly 
i fart IN Miata 





Hag rath 


chat 



















igs ety er 
TT dtianeee 
by 














> 
en jonas 
De Pieo is 
aide: ny 










aay a Lae 
ie 


















ticity 4 eh 
is emanates Baio 


Te Reset 





Any 
Me Prk Fa bP ER Te at Hy phe 

Baye yer 1, Bi hasan, teak , 
YP biel Fe Lae ha 
2 ete at Sheets nat tay Ah, 
hare hed 





























toons as 

eH Tt peer hor eee! arr on Pt 
ace ha ald oe Oi eRe ini Wis courts 4 

Wee SY) 


lastp ue oeak 








Savy Nee nae he 
relexiretewntua? 













eet 





PF fe bane 
a er 
bigest 19 igh “7 

OF atime Lip iar 
no Ari her Pe RR 
BRE PSAs 


i aus 1 vei 
tai 



































Herel Nthirral rte 
A maha Oy mitt es bart " 
‘hee 1 
















| ealoatindes| 
ATE) #09 Lew 
ihe 
Lah | 


ene 














ast ht 





Sethe Jeahy ay 6 














piss at] 
Ag ie AS NA 




























































Sheth aaah baa! te be Bh at hk 9 » tare 
. as ns romye 5 por ‘ 

As ‘ Minit Sane Fiver ~ ia 
ay Ae es Fate hs 
aes Seer wo y 

Recut me : 
AL O98 AR Leh Bo Om PA Tele e yo 








