





EPICURUS 


Museo Capitoting, Rome 





EPICURUS 


THE EXTANT REMAINS 


WITH SHORT CRITICAL APPARATUS 


TRANSLATION AND NOTES 
BY 


CYRIL BAILEY, M.A. 


Jowett Fellow and Classecal Tutor of 
Balliol College, Oxford 


OXFORD 
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 
1926 


Printed 1m England 
At the Oxrorp UNIVERSITY PRESS 
By John Joknson 
Printer to the Unsverssty 


PREFACE 


AN interest in Lucretius took me back many years 
ago, as it has others, to the study of the remains of 
Epicurus, without which the true meaning of the 
Latin poet cannot be fully understood. The great 
work of Usener placed at one’s disposal all that was 
then available for the knowledge of Epicurus, and with 
the exception of the Vatican Gnomologium nothing has 
since been added.! But the study of Lpzcurea brought 
me to the conclusion that something more than a mere 
text was needed: the work of Brieger, Giussani, Tohte, 
and others on certain portions of the Epicurean theory 
had at once shed light and raised new problems, and 
I was thus led to set about making my own text, 
translation, and commentary. Since I have been at 
work, there have appeared the German translation of 
Kochalsky, the Italian translation and brief com- 
mentary of Bignone, and quite recently the new 
Teubner text of von der Muehll. Each of these— 
and especially in my view the work of Bignone—have 
greatly advanced the study of Epicurus, but there is 


1 For certain fragments of the Περὶ Φύσεως see Commentary, 
Pp. 391. 


6 INTRODUCTION 


still no complete ! translation in English and no com- 
plete commentary in any language. 

In the circumstances it seems worth while to publish 
the result of a good many years’ work on the Epicurean 
text. But I do so with much hesitation, No one can 
be more fully aware than I am of the extreme difficulty 
of the writings of Epicurus, and the necessarily tenta- 
tative character of any solution of their many eruces : 
I would repeat with fervour the words of Usener, 
‘nunc cum librum manibus emitto, sentio me Hominem 
et inconstantem fuisse’. But I trust that I have shed 
some light on dark places and at least have made it 
clear where the problems lie and what are the data for 
their solution. I hope to follow up this work shortly 
with a volume of critical essays on the system of 
Epicurus, where it will be possible to deal with some 
of the problems at greater length. 

My debt to many predecessors in Epicurean studies 
is great, and will become obvious in the commentary, 
but I think that after Usener I owe most to two great 
Italian scholars, Giussani and Bignone. 

C. B. 

OXFORD, Sepientber, 1924. 

’ Many of the important passages have been translated by Mr. R D. 
Hicks in his Stoc and £picurean (1910), but I do not always find 
myself in agreement with his versions. His translation of Diogenes 
Laertius in the Loeb series unfortunately appeared too late for me to 


use it. For the same reason I have been unable to use the translation 


of the Letters and the Κύριαι Adgac by A. Ernout in his Commentary 
on Lucretius I, II. 


CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION. MSS. and editions . 


TEXT AND TRANSLATION. 
Epistula ad Herodotum 
Epistula ad Pythoclea . 
Epistula ad Menoeceum 
Κύριαι Adgar . 

Fragmenta 
Vita Epicuri . 


COMMENTARY. 
Letter to Herodotus 
Letter to Pythocles 
Letter to Menoeceus 
Principal Doctrines 
Fragments 
Life of Epicurus 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 
INDEX OF PRINCIPAL TERMS 


FRonTIsPIECE. Epicurus, from the bust in the Museo 
Captiohno, Rome. 


. 106 
. 140 


. 173 
» 275 
. 327 


344 


- 375 
» 401 


. 423 


425 


INTRODUCTION 
MSS. AND EDITIONS. 


By far the greater part of the extant remains of Epicurus— 
the three letters, the Κύριαι Δόξαι, and many of the surviving 
fragments—are embodied in the tenth book of Diogenes Laertius. 
The book purports to be a ‘Life’ of Epicurus and 1s compiled 
in haphazard fashion from many doxographical sources, the 
quotations occurring from time to time in the course of the 
narrative. Thus the problem of the text of Epicurus is for the 
most part that of the MS. sources for Diogenes. Six MSS. 
(BFGHPQ) were used by Usener in the preparation of his 
great edition (1887): for a full account of them his preface 
should be consulted. These six have recently been re-read, 
and Usener’s report of the readings of the principal codices 
checked and occasionally corrected by P. von der Muehll (1922), 
who has added readings from five more MSS. (TDWCoZ)of which 
the last two are the most important. A brief account, based on 
the work of Usener and von der Muehll, will suffice for this 
edition in which I have been guided entirely by their reports. 

The MSS. of Diogenes fall into two main classes, not, accord- 
ing to Usener, representing any ancient cleavage of tradition, 
but both derived during the Middle Ages from the same source, 
the one class representing a careful copying, the other more 
negligent work: this is shown by the occasional unexpected 
agreement of the chief representatives of the two classes, 
B and F. 

Β I. The oldest representative of the first class is B, the Codex 
Borbonicus gr. ni. B. 29 (formerly 253), a parchment codex 
of the twelfth century, in the public lbrary at Naples: it was 
corrected by a hand of the fourteenth century whose readings 
not infrequently agree with those of Co. 


10 INTRODUCTION 


P Later than B, but almost more important, 1s P, the Codex 
Parisinus gr. 1759, a paper codex of the beginning of the 
fourteenth century. It is described by Usener as ‘the twin’ 
of B, but von der Muehll is inclined to regard it as representing 
another family of the same stock. P has unfortunately been 
much corrected and the corrections have often obscured or 
obliterated its orginal readings: von der Muehll distinguishes 
P* (Usener’s P') who derived his readings from another copy 
of the same family and P* (Usener’s P’) who corrected the text 
later by the vulgate tradition. 

We are, however, often able to recover the original reading 
of P from two other MSS. which appear to have been copied 
from P before it was corrected. For this purpose Usener relies 

Q mostly on the authority of Q, the Codex Parisinus gr. 1758, 
a paper codex made in the fourteenth century or at the be- 
ginning of the fifteenth. Von der Muehll prefers to quote a 
MS. which he has himself collated from photographs and 

Co which he refers to as Co, the Codex Constantinopolitanus - 
Veteris Serail. (‘The Old Seragho’): this MS. was written 
in the fourteenth or fifteenth century (the last page being 
added later in the sixteenth). These two, or one or other 
of them, frequently confirm the original text of P, and in other 
places, where P’s reading has been obscured, may be taken to 
preserve It. 

H Belonging to the same class, though of lesser importance, are 
H, the Codex Laurentianus LXIX. 35 of the fourteenth 
century, also a copy of P, but later than Q and made after the 

W correction of P and therefore embodying a mixed text, and W, 
the Codex Vaticanus gr. 140 of the fourteenth century (one of 
von der Muehll’s MSS.), which he believes, though with less 
certainty, to be also derived from P. 

F II. The chief MS. of the second class, derived more carelessly 
from the same original tradition as the first class, is F, the 
Codex Laurentianus LXIX. 13, a large parchment MS., attri- 
buted by Usener to the twelfth and by von der Muehll to the 
thirteenth century. Usener is, however, of opinion that it is an 


MSS. AND EDITIONS II 


unscholarly copy and cannot be taken by itself to represent the 
tradition of the second class. 

Von der Muehll finds the necessary support for F in Z, the 
Codex Lobcowicensis Raudmitzianus, which he has himself 
collated. ‘This codex again has been much corrected and von 
der Muehll beheves that after it had already received the 
additions of Z? and Ζ' it was the source of the first printed 
edition of Diogenes. 

The edtto princeps was published by Froben at Basle in 1523 
and is said in the preface to be a transcript of the MS. of 
Matthew Aurigathus, professor at Wittenberg The MS. would 
appear to have been a bad copy of the corrected Z This 
printed text has therefore derivatively the authority of a MS. 
and is accordingly quoted by Usener in support of F. (1 have 
not myself quoted it, except where readings rest on its sole 
authority.) 

Von der Muehll points out the frequency with which we find 
in support of a reading the combination FP‘Zf this combina- 
tion may be taken to represent the second class. Its best 
readings, however, are not infrequently due to conjecture 
rather than to tradition, and von der Muehll 1s of opinion that 
Usener is sometimes mistaken 1n attributing too great importance 
to them 

The remainng MS quoted by Usener ts G, the Codex 
Laurentianus LXIX. 28, a paper MS., said to be of the four- 
teenth century. It appears to represent a mixed tradition of 
the two classes. Von der Muehll refers also occasionally to T, 
the Codex Urbrnas Vat. gr. 109, and to D, the Codex Borbonicus 
gr. iu. Β. 28. He has also made some use of Φ, an epitome of 
Diogenes Laertius in Codex Vaticanus gr. 96, made, as he thinks, 
at the time of Constantine Porphyrogenitus, which is available 
when from time to time it quotes passages 272: extenso A less 
valuable epitome of the same character 15 ¥, found in the Codex 
Palatinus Vaticanus gr. 93 and dated 1338. 

The MSS. of Diogenes were enriched by a considerable body 
of scholia, often references to other passages in Epicurus or 


12 INTRODUCTION 


amplifications of or comments on the text: these have become 
interwoven into the text and are especially frequent in the 
letters to Herodotus and to Pythocles. Sometimes, where they 
are accompanied by references (e.g. to the Περὶ Φύσεως) it is easy 
to detect them, but in other places the task of disentangling text 
and gloss 1s extremely difficult and delicate. Most modern 
editors would agree that Usener was too ready to assume ‘gloss, 
scholium, or additamentum’, and that many phrases thus ex- 
cluded by him can be restored to the text. Von der Muehll 
1s of opinion that 1t 1s the intrusion of these additions in the 
letter to Pythocles which has caused its dislocated and incoherent 
appearance, and that it was in origin a genuine work of 
Epicurus’ own hand. I am myself more inclined to hold the 
opinion of Usener that it is an Epicurean compilation. 

With the earlier editions of Diogenes or of the tenth book 
Usener has dealt in his Introduction (pp. xv—xvun), and recent 
criticism has not altered his opinions. They fall naturally into 
two classes. The editors of the sixteenth century had access 
only to inferior MSS. and used them unscientifically. Of the 
edtho princcps of Froben (1523) I have already spoken. Stephanus 
(1570) relied on G and another inferior MS. Marianus 393: 
Sambucus (1566) used the Venetus, Vaticanus, and Borbonicus, 
and made some corrections, but did not consult the MSS. 
constantly or with judgement. To the same class belong the 
editions of Aldobrandinus (1594) and Menagius (1664). Yet to 
each and al] of these earlier editors are due certain conjectural 
restorations which still find a place in modern texts. 

In the seventeenth century Gassendi revived the serious 
study of Epicureanism and may be said to have introduced the 
theory of atomism to the modern world. But though he too has 
contributed permanent emendations to the text, he was a poor 
Greek scholar, and in his edition of Book X (1649) showed no 
respect for tradition and practically re-wrote the text. Meibom 
(1692) 1n Usener’s view did still greater damage to the text. 
Schneider (1813) was able to some extent to repair the harm 
done, but Huebner (1828) again returned to the tradition of 


MSS. AND EDITIONS 13 


Meibom, and Cobet (1862), though he derived assistance from F 
and from his own scholarship, could not get free from it. 

Hermann Usener’s great work Epicurea appeared in 1887, 
and is the foundation of all modern study of Epicurus. By 
collecting together from the whole range of classical literature 
citations from Epicurus and allusions to his theories, he estab- 
lished a store-house of information on Epicureanism and in many 
eases parallels which serve to illustrate and often to explain the 
text of Epicurus himself. But almost more important were his 
services to the text. The way for a scientific study of the MS. 
tradition had been prepared by Wachsmuth who had collated 
the Italian MSS. and Bonner who had collated the two Paris 
MSS. (P and 9). Usener threw over the whole previous 
tradition of printed editions and made a fresh start from the 
scientific study of the MSS and their relations to one another. 
His text is accordingly established on a far sounder basis and 
he has himself made important and valuable corrections. At 
the same time he is not what would now be called a conservative 
editor, and in dealing with passages which he could not under- 
stand he was too apt either to introduce violent emendations or 
to assume the intrusion of a gloss or scholum. Buta glance 
at the critical apparatus 1n this edition or that of von der Muehll 
will show how often his corrections have been accepted, and any 
future work must take the form of a re-examination of the 
evidence on the lines which he laid down. 

The work of Usener naturally gave an impetus to the study 
of Epicurus, and since his edition there has been published a 
considerable body of essays and articles, dealing for the most 
part with individual points in the Epicurean theory, but in many 
instances also making contributions to the elucidation of the 
text. Of these the most important are the works of Breger and 
Giussani. Brieger, who already in 1882 had published a com- 
mentary on the letter to Herodotus, added a second pamphlet 
in 1893 Epikurs Lehre von der Seele, nm which there 1s a further 
study of the text: he 1s too apt to indulge in wild emendation, 
but has made a few useful suggestions. More stimulating and 


14 INTRODUCTION 


valuable are the essays of Giussani in his edition of Lucretius 
(1896-8): he showed wonderful penetration in the understand- 
ing and elucidation of Epicurean ideas, but again was too reckless 
in his dealings with the text to have left much of permanent 
value. Useful work has also been done by Arndt, Crénert, 
Diels, R. D. Hicks, P. Merbach, R. Philippson, and H. Weil. 

Within the last ten years two translations of Epicurus have 
been published containing critical notes on the text. The 
German translation of A. Kochalsky (1914) introduces a con- 
siderable number of emendations, but they seem to me on the 
whole arbitrary and too often to take the form of re-writing. 
Of greater importance is the Itahan translation of E. Bignone 
(1920): in brief foot-notes and some appendices he has made 
most penetrating comments on the text and in not a few places 
suggested corrections of his own which are of great value. I am, 
however, inclined to think that he 1s too prone to suppose that 
words have fallen out and to restore the text by additions. The 
Teubner text of von der Muehll (1922) came into my hands 
after I had practically completed my work. Its great value is 
the re-examination of the MSS. and the addition of readings 
from other MSS. not made by Usener. The editor also appears 
to me to use very sound judgement as between readings and 
conjectures and to have established a good text, with which I am 
happy to find myself in general agreement. I have endeavoured 
to introduce from his critical apparatus the necessary modifica- 
tions of Usener’s report of the readings of his MSS. together 
with the evidence gleaned from the additional MSS. The 
tendency of all these three recent critics is to a more conserva- 
tive text than that of Usener, and with this tendency I am fully 
in accord. In the many difficult places which still remain 
I have used my judgement to the best of my ability in choosing 
between the alternatives available and in a few have introduced 
corrections of my own, But I doubt whether any editor could 
claim to have produced a fully satisfactory text. 

For the fragments the text must necessarily depend on the 
MSS. of the authors from whom they are cited, except for the 


MSS. AND EDITIONS 15 


Vatican Gnomologium. This is contained in Codex Vaticanus 
gr. 1950, a MS. of the fourteenth century. It was first published 
by C. Wotke, with some notes by Usener and Gomperz in 
Wiener Studien, vol, x (1888). Von der Muehll has collated 
the MS. again from photographs and in some cases has cor- 
rected the readings reported by Wotke. In the majority of 
these excerpts the text is fairly sound, but there are some in 
which it still remains very uncertain. 


1, 


σΞ Ων πρς ποῖ Ὁ ὦ 


SIGLA 


codex Borbonicus Neapolitanus gr. 11 13, 29 (saecl. x11). 
codex Parisinus gr. 1759 (saecl xiv). 

codex Parisinus gr. 1758 (saecl. xiv vel xv init ). 

codex Constantinopolitanus Veteris Serail. (saecl. xiv vel xv) 
codex Laurentianus LXIX. 35 (saecl. xiv) 

codex Vaticanus gr 140 (saecl. xiv). 

codex Laurentranus LXIX 13 (saecl, xi vel xi). 
codex Lobcowicensis Raudnitzianus VI. fe 38. 

editio Frobeniana Basiliensis (anni MDxxxu1) 

codex Laurentianus LXIX, 28 (saecl xiv). 

codex Urbinas Vat. gr 109 (saecl xv), 

codex Borbonicus Neapolitanus gr mm, B 28, 


EPICURUS 


35 


36 


10 


1ο 


ἘΠΙΚΟΥ͂ΡΟΣ HPOAOTQI XAIPEIN 


Τοῖς μὴ δυναμένοις, ὦ “Hpddore, ἕκαστα τῶν περὶ φύσεως 
᾽ δ > “ ΄ Ν , fad 
ἀναγεγραμμένων ἡμῖν ἐξακριβοῦν μηδὲ τὰς μείζυς τῶν 

tf , - » Ν lal 2 
συντεταγμέιων βίβλους διαθρεῖν ἐπιτομὴν τῆς ὅλης πραγμα- 
τείας εἰς τὸ κατασχεῖν TOY ὁλοσχερωτάτων γε δοξῶν τὴν 
μιήμην ἱκανῶς αὐτοῖς παρεσκεύασα, ἵνα παρ᾽ ἑκάστους τῶν 
καιρῶν ἐν τοῖς κυριωτάτοις βοηθεῖν αὑτοῖς δύνωνται, καθ᾽ 
wv ἣν ᾿ Lol Ν 4 , 4, Ἂς 
ὅσον ἂν ἐφάπτωνται τῆς περὶ φύσεως θεωρίας. καὶ τοὺς 

, Ν « lal by lal ~ μὲ 3 , Ν 
προβεβηκότας δὲ ἱκανῶς ἐν τῇ τῶν ὅλων smu Ae Viel τὸν 

fal “ Ἀ 
τύπον τῆς ὅλης πραγματείας τὸν κατεστοιχειωμένον δεῖ 

td γι X > / 5 lal ‘ , 
μνημονεύειν. τῆς yap ἀθρόας ἐπιβολῆς muKrov δεόμεθα, 
fad ᾿ Ν , ᾽ ς ΄ ig Ν * >? 
τῆς δὲ κατὰ μέρος οὐχ ὁμοίως. | βαδιστέον μὲν οὖν ἐπ 
yon 5 a 4 a , N - , ΓΞ) 
ἐκεῖνα καὶ συνεχῶς ἐν τῇ μνήμῃ τὸ τοσοῦτον ποιητέον, ἀφ 
oe 3 > Ν 
οὗ ἢ τε κυριωτάτη ἐπιβολὴ ἐπὶ τὰ πράγματα ἔσται καὶ δὴ 
καὶ τὸ κατὰ μέρος ἀκρίβωμα πᾶν ἐξευρήσεται, τῶν ὁλοσχερω- 

4 

τάτων τύπω! εὖ περιειλημμένων καὶ μνημονευομένων" ἐπεὶ 
καὶ τοῦ τετελεσιουργημένον τοῦτο κυριώτατον τοῦ παντὸς 
ἀκριβώματος γίνεται, τὸ ταῖς ἐπιβολαῖς ὀξέως δύνασθαι 
χρῆσθαι, καὶ (τοῦτο γίνοιτ᾽ ἂν ἁπάντω!) πρὸς ἁπλᾶ στοι- 
χειώματα καὶ φωγτὰς συναγομένων. οὐ γὰρ οἷόν τε τὸ 
πύκνωμα τῆς συνεχοῦς τῶν ὅλων περιοδείας εἶναι μὴ δυνα- 

35 3, βίβλους] βύβλους Usener: βίβλων Meibom 4 γε δοξῶν 
Usener in commentanio: δὲ δοξῶν Β΄. δεδοξῶν P'QCo: δωξῶν 
FGHP! 5 avrvis] dy τις Usener. fortasse αὐτὸς Brieger παρε- 
σκεύασα ἵνα HP®Z: παρεσκεύασα.... ἵνα cum httura F : παρεσκεύασαν ἃ 

P'Co!l- παρεσκεύασα ἃ BGCo? 6 αὑτοῖς Schneider. αὐτοῖς 
libri 7 καὶ] καὶ δὴ καὶ Giussani 8 προβεβηκότας Casaubon: 
προβεβληκότας libri 36 1 ἐπ’ ἐκεῖνα καὶ Gassendi: καὶ ἐπ᾽ ἐκεῖνα 


hbn 2 ἐν τῇ͵ & re Usener. ἐν δὲ Muehll ὃ (τοῦτο γίνοιτ᾽ ἂν 
ἁπάντων) supplevi: pro καὶ scripsit ἑκάστων Usener: {περὶ τῶν κατὰ 


I 
EPICURUS TO HERODOTUS 


35 For those who are unable, Herodotus, to work in detail Zntroduction : 
through all that I have written about nature, or to peruse Sone 
the large: books which I have composed, I have already advanced 
prepared at sufficient Iength an epitome of the whole διρθεπι 
system, that they may keep adequately in παπᾶ at least 
the most general principles in each department, 1n order 
that as occasion arises they may be able to assist them- 
selves on the most important points, in so far as they 
undertake the study of nature. But those also who have 
made considerable progress in the survey of the main 
principles ought to bear in mind the scheme of the whole 
system set forth 11} its essentials. For we have frequent 
need of the general view, but not so often of the detailed 

36 exposition. Indeed it 1s necessary to go back on the main 
principles, and constantly to fix in one’s memory enough 
to give one the most essential comprehension of the truth. 

And in fact the accurate knowledge of details will be fully 
discovered, if the general principles in the various depart- 
ments are thoroughly grasped and borne in mind , for even 
in the case of one fully imtiated the most essential feature 
in all accurate knowledge is the capacity to make a rapid 
use of observation and mental apprehension, and (this can 
be done if everything) is summed up in elementary pnn- 
ciples and formulae. For it is not possible for any one to 
abbreviate the complete course through the whole system, 
if he cannot embrace in his own mind by means of short 
μὲρος καὶ περὶ τῶν ὅλων) supplevit Bignone 09. συναγοιένων] συναγο- 
μένοις Muebll. ἀναγομένων Usener 10 εἶναι] εἰδέναι Μειθοπὶ δυνα- 


μένον Thomas: δυνάμενον libri 
B2 


20 I, ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


μένου διὰ βραχεῶν φωνῶν ἅπαν ἐμπεριλαβεῖν ἐν αὑτῷ τὸ 
37 καὶ κατὰ μέρος ἂν ἐξακριβωθέν. ὅθεν δὴ πᾶσι χρησίμης 
οὔσης τοῖς φκειωμένοις φυσιολογίᾳ τῆς τοιαύτης ὁδοῦ, παρεγ- 
γυῶν τὸ συνεχὲς ἐνέργημα ἐν φυσιολογίᾳ καὶ τοιούτῳ μάλιστα 
ἐγγαληνίζων τῷ βίῳ ἐποίησά σοι καὶ τοιαύτην τινὰ ἐπιτομὴν 
5 καὶ στοιχείωσιν τῶν ὅλων δοξῶν. 
n a - 
Πρῶτον μὲν οὖν τὰ ὑποτεταγμένα τοῖς φθόγγοις, ὦ 
κ᾿ Ἀ 
‘Hpddore, δεῖ εἰληφέναι, ὅπως ἂν τὰ δοξαζόμενα ἢ (ζητούμενα 
a \ 
ἢ ἀπορούμενα ἔχωμεν els ταῦτα ἀναγαγόντες ἐπικρίνειν, καὶ 
μὴ ἄκριτα πάντα ἡμῖν (Ὁ) εἰς ἄπειρον ἀποδεικνύουσιν ἢ 
38 κενοὺς φθόγγους ἔχωμεν. | ἀνάγκη yap τὸ πρῶτον ἐννόημα 
καθ’ ἕκαστον φθόγγον βλέπεσθαι καὶ μηθὲν ἀποδείξεως 
προσδεῖσθαι, εἴπερ ἕξομεν τὸ ζγτούμενον ἢ ἀπορούμενον καὶ 
δοξαζόμενον ἐφ᾽ ὃ ἀνάξομεν. ἔτι τε κατὰ τὰς αἰσθήσεις 
5 δεῖ πάντα τηρεῖν καὶ ἁπλῶς (κατὰ) ras παρούσας ἐπιβολὰς 

“ >, 9 , lanl c ‘\ 
εἴτε διανοίας εἴθ᾽ ὅτου δήποτε τῶν κριτηρίων, ὁμοίως δὲ κατὰ 

Ἂν «ς , “ 4 ‘ \ Ds 
τὰ ὑπάρχοντα πάθη, ὅπως ἂν καὶ τὸ προσμένον καὶ τὸ ἄδηλον 
ἔχωμε:’ οἷς σημειωσόμεθα. 

Ταῦτα δεῖ διαλαβόντας συνορᾶν ἤδη περὶ τῶν ἀδήλων" 

10 πρῶτον μὲν ὅτι οὐδὲν γίνεται ἐκ τοῦ μὴ ὄντος. πᾶν γὰρ 

ἐκ παντὸς ἐγίνετ᾽ ἂν σπερμάτων γε οὐθὲν προσδεόμενον. | 

39 καὶ εἰ ἐφθείρετο δὲ τὸ ἀφανιζύμενον εἰς τὸ μὴ ὄν, πάντα 

ἂν ἀπωλώλει τὰ πράγματα, οὐκ ὄντων εἰς ἃ διελύετο. καὶ 

μὴν καὶ τὸ πᾶν ἀεὶ τοιοῦτον ἣν οἷον viv ἐστι, καὶ ἀεὶ τοιοῦτον 

ἔσται. οὐθὲν γάρ ἐστιν els ὃ μεταβάλλει. παρὰ γὰρ τὸ 

5 πᾶν οὐθέν ἐστι», ὃ ἂν εἰσελθὸν εἰς αὐτὸ τὴν μεταβολὴν 
ποιήσαιτο. 

If αὑτῷ Schneider: αὐτῷ libri 37 2 παρεγγνῶν τὸ QH*Co 
Usener . παρεγγυώντων FH? P§Z: παρεγγυῶντ Pl* παρεγγυ -τὸ B: 
παρεγγυῶ τὸ Gassendi 3 ἐνέργημα F Usener: ἐνάργημα BGH 
PQCo τοιούτω Hirzel. τὸ τούτων libri: τοιοῦτος ὧν Bignone 
4 ἐγγαληνίζων τῷ Usener * ἐγγαληνίζοντῷ ΡΊΓΟΕΣ: ἐιταληνίζων τῶ B'* 
ἐγγαληνιζόντων F PZ, ἐποίησά σοι Usener: ποιήσασθαι libri 
9 (ἢ) Roeper (iy) ὕβοποτγ: 7G 38 4 ἔτι τε Arndt εἴτε δ τι 
εἶτα Gassendi: ἔπειτα Usener, in commentario ἔπειτεν κατὰ 
seclusit Bignone καὶ Muehll 5 πάντα] πάντων Bignone. πάντως 
Muehll xara) supplevit Gassendi 6 κατὰ Ginssani. καὶ 
libri: καὶ (xara) Gassends 9 δεῖ Cobet: δὲ libri post 
διαλαβόντας (Bec) Arndt 11 éyiver')| ἐγένετ᾽ P!Co 39 2 ὄντων 
Ἐπ ὄντων τῶν codd cett 4 εἰς 6] ὃ Brieger μεταβάλλει) 


μεταβιλεῖ Usener 6 ποιήσαιτο] ποιήσαι Usener, ποιῆσαι (δύναιντο 
Cronert 


37 


38 


39 


I. TO HERODOTUS 21 


formulae all that might be set out with accuracy in detail. 
Wherefore since the method I have described is valuable 
to all those who are accustomed to the investigation of 
nature, 1 who urge upon others the constant occupation in 
the investigation of nature, and find my own peace chiefly 
in a life so occupied, have composed for you another 
epitome on these lines, summing up the first principles of 
the whole doctrine. 


First of all, Herodotus, we must grasp the ideas attached 1 Methods of 
ἢ procedure, 

to words, in order that we may be able to refer to them Words to 
and so to judge the inferences of opinion or problems of be used in 
investigation or reflection, so that we may not either leave nes 
everything uncertain and go on explaining to infinity or 
use words devoid of meaning For this purpose it 1s 
essential that the first mental image associated with each 
word should be regarded, and that there should be no 
need of explanation, 1f we are really to have a standard to 
which to refer a problem of investigation or reflection or 
a mental inference. And besides we must keep all our a The 
investigations in accord with our sensations, and in par- ΡΣ 
ticular with the immediate apprehensions whether of the 
mind or of any one of the instruments of judgement, 
and likewise in accord with the feelings existing in us, 
in order that we may have indications whereby we may 
judge both the problem of sense-perception and the 


unseen. 


Having made these points clear, we must now consider II The Uw- 


things imperceptible to the senses First of all, that 27S ad ws 

x i . constituents, 
nothing is created out of that which does not exist: for 1f A Impercep- 
4 : tible things, 
it were, everything would be created out of everything Ὁ Nothing is 
with no need of seeds. And again, 1f that which dis- created out of 
appears were destroyed into that which did not exist, all nothing 

δ i ἢ 2 Nothing 1s 

things would have perished, since that into which they destroyed 
were dissolved would not exist. Furthermore, the universe pa art 
always was such as it is now, and always will be the same. verse 1s ever 


For there 1s nothing into which it changes: for outside the the same. 
universe there is nothing which could come into it and 
bring about the change. 


40 


41 


43 


22 I, ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


᾿Αλλὰ μὴν καὶ τὸ πᾶν ἐστι (σώματα Kai τόπος)' σώματα 
μὲν γὰρ ws ἔστιν, αὐτὴ ἡ αἴσθησις ἐπὶ πάντων μαρτυρεῖ, καθ᾽ 
ἣν ἀναγκαῖον τὸ ἄδηλον τῷ λογισμῷ τεκμαίρεσθαι, ὥσπερ 
“π᾿ Α 4 > x Ἂς a εἴ 4 ¥ . 
προεῖπον τὸ πρόσθεν" | εἰ (δὲ) μὴ ἦν ὃ κενὸν καὶ χώραν καὶ 
μ col Ψ' Bd , > > Ν ΄ “ 
ἀναφῆ φύσιν ὀνομάζομεν, οὐκ ἂν εἶχε τὰ σώματα ὅπου ἦν 
οὐδὲ δι’ οὗ ἐκινεῖτο, καθάπερ φαίνεται κινούμενα. παρὰ δὲ 
ταῦτα οὐθὲν οὐδ᾽ ἐπινοηθῆναι δύναται οὔτε περιληπτικῶς οὔτε 
5 ἀναλόγως τοῖς περιληπτοῖς, ὡς καθ᾽ ὅλας φύσεις λαμβανόμενα 
καὶ μὴ ὡς τὰ τούτων συμπτώματα ἢ συμβεβηκότα λεγόμενα. 
καὶ μὴν καὶ τῶν σωμάτων τὰ μέν ἐστι συγκρίσεις, τὰ δ᾽ 
ἐξ ὧν αἱ συγκρίσεις πεποίηνται: | ταῦτα δέ ἐστιν ἄτομα καὶ 
ἀμετάβλητα, εἴπερ μὴ μέλλει πάντα εἰς τὸ μὴ ὃν φθαρήσεσθαι 
ἀλλ᾽ ἰσχῦόν τι ὑπομένειν ἐν ταῖς διαλύσεσι τῶν συγκρίσεωι"", 
πλήρη τὴν φύσιν ὄντα, οὐκ ἔχοντα Onn ἢ ὅπως διαλυθήσεται. 


had Ν 3 Ν > , 4 ~ - , - 
5 More τὰς ἀρχὰς ἀτύμους ἀναγκαῖον εἷναι σωμάτων φύσεις. 


pce) 


᾿Αλλὰ μὴν Kai TO πᾶν ἄπειρόν ἐστι. τὸ yap πεπερασμένον» 
ἄκρον ἔχει τὸ δὲ ἄκρον παρ᾽ ἕτερόν τι θεωρεῖται. ὥστε οὐκ 
Μ ” , J , Ν > we a 
ἔχον ἄκρον πέρας οὐκ ἔχει: πέρας δὲ οὐκ ἔχον ἄπειρον av 
, x lol , lot 
εἴη καὶ οὐ πεπερασμένον. καὶ μὴν καὶ TH πλήθει τῶν 
σωμάτων ἄπειρόν ἐστι τὸ πᾶν καὶ τῷ μεγέθει τοῦ κενοῦ. } 
ς N 
εἴτε yap ἢ» τὸ Kerdv ἄπειρον, τὰ δὲ σώματα ὡρισμένα, 
> na U«f ν x , > Pes , x ht 
οὐδαμοῦ av ἔμενε τὰ σώματα, ἀλλ᾽ ἐφέρετο κατὰ τὸ ἄπειρον 
4 * Μ Ν, ε Ζ' Ν 
κενὸν διεσπαρμένα, οὐκ ἔχοντα τὰ ὑπερείδοντα καὶ στέλλοντα 
x ἈΝ ’ ν 4X ἈΝ ἣν. « , ’ 
κατὰ τὰς ἀνακοιτάς. εἴτε τὸ κενὸν ἦν ὡρισμένον, οὐκ ἂν 
Ν bl , 
εἶχε τὰ ἄπειρα σώματα ὅπου ἐνέστη. 
x “ 
Πρός τε τούτοις τὰ ἄτομα τῶν σωμάτων καὶ μεστά, ἐξ 


7 (σώματα καὶ τόπος) supplevit Usener 10 τὸ πρόσθεν 
τύπος δὲ Usener 401 (δὲν supplevit Gassend1 ὃ BG: op 
FHPQ: ὃν Usener 4 οὐδ Usener: οὔτε libri περιληπτι- 
κῶς Co Usener* περιληπτῶς libr. cett. 5-7 ὡς. . AapBavipeva 
«++ λεγόμενα) ὅσα. . . λαμβάνομεν... λέγομεν Usener 7 καὶ 
τῶν B'P'QCo: καὶ ταυτὸν ΕῊΗΡΖ 41 3 ἰσχῦόν te scmpsi 
(idem Bignone): ἰσχύοντα ibn ἰσχύειν τι Usener: (ἰσχύοντά τινα 
in notis mss. Rohde) ὑπομένειν] ὑπομενεῖ» Cronert 4 ὄντα 
Usener: ὅταν libri: ὄντα καὶ Meibom . οἷα δὴ Bignone 7 τὸ δὲ 
FHPQ: τὸ γὰρ Βα post θεωρεῖται Usener ἀλλὰ μὴν τὸ 
πᾶν οὐ παρ᾽ ἕτερόν τι θεωρεῖται supplendum censuit 42 5 ἐνέστη 
BFGP?: éveort HP'Q 


Scholia 


39,7, post ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ legitur τοῦτο καὶ ἐν τῇ Μεγάλῃ ἐπιτομῇ φησι 
κατ᾽ ἀρχὴν καὶ ἐν τῇ ἃ Περὶ φύσεως 
ἀλλὰ μὴν... ἀρχὴν om. Ζ ἃ BHPQ: πρώτη FZ 


40 


41 


42 


Scholia 


1. TO HERODOTUS 23 ; 


Moreover, the universe is (bodies and space): for that B Bodies 
bodies exist sense itself witnesses in the experience of all os 
men, and in accordance with the evidence of sense we consists of 
must of necessity judge of the imperceptible by reasoning, eae and 
as 1 have already said. And if there were not that which 
we term void and place and intangible existence, bodies 
would have nowhere to exist and nothing through which 
to move, as they are seen to move. And besides these There is no 
two nothing can even be thought of either by conception pe hs 
or on the analogy of things conceivable such as could be existence 
grasped as whole existences and not spoken of as the 
accidents or properties of such existences. Furthermore, 
among bodies some are compounds, and others those of 
which compounds are formed. And these latter are Body exists 
indivisible and unalterable (if, that is, all things are not to ἵν τὰς OER 
be destroyed into the non-existent, but something per- particles 
manent 15 to remain behind at the dissolution of com- 
pounds) they are completely solid in nature, and can 
by no means be dissolved in any part. So it must 
needs be that the first-beginnings are indivisible corporeal 
existences. 

Moreover, the universe is boundless. For that which ts Ὁ Infinity of 
bounded has an extreme point. and the extreme point 15 ahs oa δὰ θὰ 
seen against something else. So that as τί has no extreme 15» !nfimte, 
point, it has no hmit, and as it has no limit, 1t must be 
boundless and not bounded. Fuithermore, the infinite 15 both in the 
boundless both in the number of the bodies and in the akan 
extent of the void. For if on the one hand the void were the extent of 
boundless, and the bodies limited in number, the bodies ae 
could not stay anywhere, but would be carried about and 
scattered through the infinite void, not having other bodies 
to support them and keep them in place by means of 
colhsions. But if, on the other hand, the void were limited, 
the infinite bodies would not have room wherein to take 
their place. 


Besides this the indivisible and solid bodies, out of Ms oe 
the atoms— 
40 7 post καὶ τῶν legitur τοῦτο καὶ ἐν τῇ πρώτῃ Περὶ φύσεως καὶ τῇ but not 
ιδ καὶ t€ καὶ τῇ Μεγάλη ἐπιτομῇ infinite 

καὶ τε BGHP'Q: καὶ τῇ ἴε FP* θιβεγοηξξβ, 


43 


44 


45 


10 


an 


an 


24 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


ὧν καὶ al συγκρίσεις γίνονται καὶ els ἃ διαλύονται, ἀπερίληπτά 
ἐστι ταῖς διαφοραῖς τῶν σχημάτων: οὐ γὰρ δυνατὸν γενέσθαι 
τὰς τοσαύτας διαφορὰς ἐκ τῶν αὐτῶν σχημάτων περιειλημ- 
μένων. καὶ καθ᾽ ἑκάστην δὲ σχημάτισιν ἁπλῶς ἄπειροί εἰσιν 
αἵ ὅμοιαι, ταῖς ὃὲ διαφοραῖς οὐχ ἁπλῶς ἄπειροι ἀλλὰ μόνον 
ἀπερίληπτοι. 
Κινοῦνταί τε συνεχῶς αἱ ἄτομοι τὸν αἰῶνα καὶ αἱ piv... 
εἰς μακρὰν an’ ἀλλήλων διιστάμεναι, αἱ δὲ αὖ τὸν παλμὸν 
- fot a 
ἴσχουσιν, ὅταν τύχωσι TH περιπλοκῇ κεκλιμέναι ἣ στεγαζό- 
μεναι παρὰ τῶν πλεκτικῶν. | ἢ τε γὰρ τοῦ κενοῦ φύσις ἡ 
διορίζυσα ἑκάστην αὐτὴν τοῦτο παρασκευάζει, τὴν ὑπέρεισιν 
οὐχ οἵα τε οὖσα ποιεῖσθαι: ἢ τε στερεότης ἡ ὑπάρχουσα 
αὐταῖς κατὰ τὴν σύγκρουσιν τὸν ἀποπαλμὸν ποιεῖ, ἐφ᾽ ὅποσον 
ἂν ἡ περιπλοκὴ τὴν ἀποκατάστασιν ἐκ τῆς συγκρούσεως διδῷ. 
ἀρχὴ δὲ τούτων οὐκ ἔστιν, αἰτίων τῶν ἀτόμων οὐσῶν καὶ 
τοῦ κενοῦ. 
« ’ Ἂς Ν - , , A 
Η τοσαύτη δὴ φωνὴ τούτων πάντων μνημονευομένων TOV 
ε Ν Ἃ: ε z lal n » , 
ἱκανὸν τύπον ὑποβάλλει τῆς TOV ὄντων φύσεως ἐπινοίας, 
᾽ x N 4 , Ἂ - κι σ΄ > 9 , 
Αλλὰ μὴν καὶ κόσμοι ἄπειροι εἰσὶν οἵ θ᾽ ὅμοιοι τούτῳ 
| , “ Ν Μ᾿ Ε2 ~ ε 
καὶ οἱ ἀνόμοιοι. al τε γὰρ ἄτομοι ἄπειροι οὖσαι, ὡς ἄρτι 
ἀπεδείχθη, φέρονται καὶ πορρωτάτω. οὐ γὰρ κατανήλωνται 
ς a ¥ - ΄ ΄ A © 1) @ 
at τοιαῦται ἄτομοι, ἐξ ὧν dv γένοιτο κόσμος ἣ ὑφ᾽ ὧν ἂν 
f ° . “ we , Ψ a? Ld 
ποιηθείη, οὔτ᾽ eis ἕνα οὔτ᾽ els πεπερασμένους, οὔθ᾽ ὅσοι 
“ +n) lid , Ve La 3 Ν Ν 
τοιοῦτοι οὔθ᾽ ὅσοι διάφοροι τούτοις. ὥστε οὐδὲν τὸ ἐμποδο- 
στατῆσόν ἐστι πρὸς τὴν ἀπειρίαν τῶν κόσμων. | 
9 αὐτῶν om G 43 1 lacunam post καὶ αἱ μὲν indicavit 
Bignone, ante eadem verba Usener 2 a} Usener (Gn commen- 
tario) αὐτὸν libri: αὐτοῦ Brieger 3 ἴσχουσιν] ἴσχονσαι Brieger 
τῇ περιπλουκῇ Usener: τὴν περιπλοκὴν libri 4 παρὰ G: περὶ 
BHPQ 44 2 αὐτὴν] αὐτῶν G 6 αἰτίων] ἀϊδίων H. Weil 
45 1 5) BPQ δὲ G 2 (ταῖς περὶ) ante τῆς inseruit Usener 


ἐπινοίας Ζ1 Bignone ἐπινοίαις libr cett. Usener 3 οἵ θ᾽ B°GH 
PQCo: & BIFZ 4 καὶ of GHPQCo: καὶ BFZ?: εἴτ᾽ 


Scholia 


42 12 post ἀπερίληπτοι legitur οὐδὲ γάρ φησιν ἐνδοτέρω eis ἄπειρον 
τὴν τομὴν τυγχάνειν, Ἀέγει δέ, ἐπειδὴ αἱ ποιότητες μεταβάλλονται, εἶ 
μέλλει τις μὴ καὶ τοῖς μεγέθεσιν ἁπλῶς εἰς ἄπειρον αὐτὰς ἐκβάλλειν 
λέγει] λήγει C. F. Hermann: λήγειν Usener εἰ μέλλει... 
ἐμβάλλειν in textu retinuit Muehll μέλλει libri plerique : 
μέλλοι BG 
43 1 post al ἄτομοι legitur φησὶ δὲ ἐνδοτέρω καὶ ἰσοταχῶς αὐτὰς 
κινεῖσθαι τοῦ κενοῦ τὴν εἶξιν ὁμοίαν παρεχομένου καὶ τῇ κουφοτάτῃ καὶ 
τῇ Bapurary 
εἶξιν Kuhn: ἴξιν B: ἐξὶν libr. cett. 


I, TO HERODOTUS 25 


which too the compounds are created and into which they 
are dissolved, have an incomprehensible number of 
varieties in shape for it is not possible that such great 
varieties of things should arise from the same (atomic) 
shapes, if they are limited in number. And so in each 
shape the atoms are quite infinite in number, but their 
differences of shape are not quite infinite, but only incom- 
prehensible in number. 

43. And the atoms move continuously for all time, some of E Motion of 
them (falling straight down, others swerving, and others ‘"* *°™* 
recoiling from their collisions. And of the latter, some 
are borne on) separating to a long distance from one 
another, while others again recoil and recoil, whenever 
they chance to be checked by the interlacing with others, 

44 or else shut in by atoms interlaced around them. For on 
the one hand the nature of the void which separates each 
atom by itself brings this about, as it 1s not able to afford 
resistance, and on the other hand the hardness which 
belongs to the atoms makes them recoil after collision to 
as great a distance as the interlacing permits separation 
after the collision. And these motions have no beginning, 
since the atoms and the vord are the cause. 

45 These brief sayings, if all these points are borne in mind, 
afford a sufficient outline for our understanding of the 
nature of existing things. 

Furthermore, there are infinite worlds both like and F Infimte 
unlike this world of ours. For the atoms being infinite in ee δι 
number, as was proved already, are borne on far out into 
space. For those atoms, which are of such nature that 
a world could be created out of them or made by them, 
have not been used up either on one world or on a limited 
number of worlds, nor again on all the worlds which are 
alike, or on those which are different from these. So that 
there nowhere exists an obstacle to the infinite number of 
the worlds. 


Scholia 
44. 7 post τοῦ κενοῦ legitur Φησὶ δ᾽ ἐνδοτέρω μηδὲ ποιότητά τινα περὶ 
τὰς ἀτόμους εἶναι πλὴν σχήματος καὶ μεγέθους καὶ βάρους' τὸ δε 
χρῶμα παρὰ τὴν θέσιν τῶν ἀτόμων ἀλλάττεσθαι ἐν rais Δώδεκα στοι- 
χειώσεσί φησι. πᾶν δὲ μέγεθος μὴ εἶναι περὶ αὐτάς" οὐδέποτε γοῦν 
ἄτομος ὥφθη αἰσθήσει 
παρὰ libr. plerique, περὶ HQ δώδεκα Libr. plerique: iB BPCo 


46" 


47° 


48 


49 


ut 


26 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


Kai μὴν καὶ τύποι ὁμοιοσχήμονες τοῖς στερεμνίοις εἰσί, 
λεπτότησιν ἀπέχοντες μακρὰν τῶν φαινομένων. οὔτε γὰρ 
n n~ 4 n 
ἀποστάσεις ἀδυνατοῦσιν ἐν τῷ περιέχοντι γίνεσθαι τοιαῦται 
οὔτ᾽ ἐπιτηδειότητες τῆς κατεργασίας τῶν κοιλωμάτων καὶ 
, ’ LA 2 δ᾽ ‘ « ~ , id 
5 λεπτοτήτων γίνεσθαι, οὔτε ἀπόρροιαι τὴν ἑξῆς θέσιν καὶ βάσιν 
διατηροῦσαι, ἣν περ καὶ ἐν τοῖς στερεμνίοις εἶχον' τούτους 
δὲ τοὺς τύπους εἴδωλα προσαγορεύομεν. | 
Ei@’ ὅτι τὰ εἴδωλα ταῖς λεπτότησιν ἀνυπερβλήτοις κέχρηται, 
Lvs bs 5 ~ a ” % ,ὔ 
οὐθὲν ἀντιμαρτυρεῖ τῶν φαινομένων' ὅθεν καὶ τάχη ἀνυπέρ- 
Vv 4 , ¢ w A n a 
βλητα ἔχει, πάντα πόρον σύμμετρον ἔχοντα πρὸς (78) τῷ 
ἀπορρῷ αὐτῶν μηθὲν ἀντικόπτειν ἢ ὀλίγα ἀντικόπτειν, πολλαῖς 
δὲ καὶ ἀπείροις εὐθὺς ἀντικόπτειν τι. | πρός τε τούτοις, ὅτι 
ἡ γένεσις τῶν εἰδώλων ἅμα νοήματι συμβαίνει. καὶ γὰρ 
ῥεῦσις ἀπὸ τῶν σωμάτων τοῦ ἐπιπολῆς συνεχής, οὐκ ἐπίδηλος 
τῇ μειώσει διὰ Thy ἀνταναπλήρωσιν, σῴζουυσσα τὴν ἐπὶ τοῦ 


΄ ἢ lol γ΄ 4, ἐπ 4 
5 στερεμνίου θέσιν καὶ τάξιν τῶν ἀτόμων ἐπὶ πολὺν χρόνον, 


\ v4 r δ A εἰ ΄- / 
εἰ καὶ ἐνίοτε συγχεομένη, καὶ συστάσεις ἐν τῷ περιέχοντι 
tal “-“ ᾿ Ν 
ὀξεῖαι διὰ τὸ μὴ δεῖν κατὰ βάθος τὸ συμπλήρωμα γίνεσθαι, 
᾿ς καὶ Ν ͵ Ν Ν “ ΄, ie , 
καὶ ἄλλοι δὲ τρόποι τινὲς γεννητικοὶ τῶν τοιούτων φύσεών 
Ἂς Ν “ ~ , 
εἰσι». οὐθὲν γὰρ τούτων ἀντιμαρτυρεῖται ταῖς αἰσθήσεσιν, 


to dy βλέπῃ τις τίνα τρόπον τὰς ἐναργείας, τίνα καὶ τὰς 
t ᾽ 


’, A ~ Ν A € Cal > ro 
συμπαθείας ἀπὸ τῶν ἔξωθεν πρὸς ἡμᾶς ἀνοίσει. 
Δεῖ δὲ καὶ νομίζειν, ἐπεισιόντος τινὸς ἀπὸ τῶν ἔξωθεν 
μ 
τὰς μορφὰς ὁρᾶν ἡμᾶς καὶ δια"οεῖσθαι" οὐ γὰρ ἃν» ἐναποσφρα- 
γίσαιτο τὰ ἔξω τὴν ἑαυτῶν φύσιν τοῦ τε χρώματος καὶ τῆς 
~ Ν lel “ἢ ~ a 4 - %. ΄ὔ > ἃς, 
μορφῆς διὰ τοῦ ἀέρος τοῦ μεταξὺ ἡμῶν τε κἀκείνων, οὐδὲ 
x x aA fol 
διὰ τῶν ἀκτίνων ἢ οἵων δή ποτε ῥευμάτων ἀφ᾽ ἡμῶν» πρὸς 


465 3 ἀποστάσεις] συστάσεις Gassendi 4 τῆς SCripsi* τοὺς 
BP'QCo- tas FHP?: ταῖς αΤῚ πρὸς Usener 5 λεπτοτήτων} 
λειοτήτων Usener γίνεσθαι del. Ktihn 46 κιὼὰ μὴν και... 


47 κατασχεῖν τὸ στοιχεῖον has duas sententias suadente Giussani ad 
$9 61, 62 transtuli 47° 1 εἶθ' FPQ: εἴθ᾽ ΒΗ 53 (τῷ) supplevit 

eibom : (τὸ) Tescari 4 ἀπορρῶ scripsi collato Lucr.iv. 205. ἀπείρῳ 
libri: (μὴ) ἀπείρῳ Bignone: τὸ ἀπείροις Muehll: post ἀπείρῳ aliquid 
intercidisse suspicabatur Tescari πολλαῖς] πολλοῖς Usener in com- 
mentario 48 3 ἐπιπολῆς ΖΥ{: ἐπὶ πολλῆς libr. cett. (ἐπιπολλῆς 
P®) συνεχῆς Ῥϑ mg : συνοχῆς libri 4 τῇ μειώσει Usener: σημειώσει 
BGHPQ: ἢ μειώσει F 6 Post συγχεομένη supplet ὑπάρχει H mg. 
9 ἀντιμαρτυρεῖται H. Weil: ἀντιμαρτυρεῖ BOCHPOQCoZ: μαρτυρεῖ F 
10 τις τίνα scripsi: τίς twa libri ἐναργείας Gassendi ἐνεργείας hibri 
τίνα Usener: ἵνα libri 11 ἀνοίσει Β : ἀνοίστη FHPQCOZ. ἄνεισι G 


I. TO HERODOTUS 27 


46* Moreover, there are images like in shape to the solid III. Sense 
bodies, far surpassing perceptible things in their subtlety eo 
of texture, For it is not impossible that such emanations : The | 
should be formed in that whicn surrounds the objects, nor #5°* 
that there should be opportunities for the formation of such 
hollow and thin frames, nor that there should be effluences 
which preserve the respective position and order which they 
had before in the sold bodies: these images we call idols, 

47* Next, nothing among perceptible things contradicts the 2 Their 
belief that the images have unsurpassable fineness of Stcty and 

g Ρ speed, 
texture. And for this reason they have also unsurpass- 
able speed of motion, since the movement of all their atoms 
1s uniform, and besides nothing or very few things hinder 
their emission by collisions, whereas a body composed of 
many or infinite atoms 1s at once hindered by collisions. 

48 Besides this (nothing contradicts the belief) that the 3 Their 

creation of the idols takes place as quick as thought. For oe 
the flow of atoms from the surface of bodies 1s continuous, 
yet it cannot be detected by any lessening in the size of 
the object because of the constant filling up of what 1s lost. 
The flow of images preserves for a long time the position 
and order of the atoms 1n the solid body, though it 1s 
occasionally confused. Moreover compound idols are 
quichly formed in the air around, because it is not neces- 
sary for their substance to be filled m deep inside: and 
besides there are certain other methods in which existences 
of this sort are produced For not one of these beliefs 1s 
contradicted by our sensations, 1f one looks to see in 
what way sensation will bring us the clear visions from 
external objects. and in what way again the corresponding 
sequence of qualities and movements. 

49 Nowwe must suppose too that it is when something 4 The method 
enters us fiom external objects that we not only see but er 
think of their shapes. For external objects could not make 
on us an impression of the nature of their own colour and 
shape by means of the air which lies between us and 
them, nor again by means of the rays or effluences of any 


49 2 ἂν ἐναποσφραγίσαιτο Cobet: ἃ μὲν (ἂν GZ) ἀποσφραγίσαιτο 
libri 5 τῶν] τινῶν Usener 


80 


5 


52 


10 


Io 


28 I, ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


ἐκεῖνα παραγινομένων, οὕτως ὡς τύπων τινῶν ἐπεισιόντων 
ἡμῖν ἀπὸ τῶν πραγμάτων ὁμοχρόων τε καὶ ὁμοιομόρφων κατὰ 
ἊΨ Ν » μὴ Ν 4 4 

τὸ ἐνάρμοττον μέγεθος els τὴν ὄψιν ἢ τὴν διάνοιαν, ὠκέως 
ταῖς φοραῖς χρωμένων, | εἶτα διὰ ταύτην τὴν αἰτίαν τοῦ ἑνὸς 
καὶ συνεχοῦς τὴν φαντασία» ἀποδιδόντων καὶ τὴν συμπάθειαν 
ἀπὸ τοῦ ὑποκειμένου σῳζόντων κατὰ τὸν ἐκεῖθεν σύμμετρον 
ἐπερεισμὸν ἐκ τῆς κατὰ βάθος ἐν τῷ στερεμνίῳ τῶν ἀτόμων 
πάλσεως. καὶ ἣν ἂν λάβωμεν φαντασίαν ἐπιβλητικῶς τῇ 
διανοίᾳ ἢ τοῖς αἰσθητηρίοις εἴ ns εἴτε συμβεβηκό 

ι ἢ ητηρίοις εἴτε μορφῆς εἴτε συμβεβηκότων, 
μορφή ἐστιν αὕτη τοῦ στερεμνίοι, γινομένη κατὰ τὸ ἑξῆς 
πύκνωμα ἢ ἐγκατάλειμμα τοῦ εἰδώλον τὸ δὲ ψεῦδος καὶ τὸ 
διημαρτημένον ἐν τῷ προσδοξαζομένῳ ἀεί ἐστιν (ἐπὶ τοῦ 
προσμένοντος ἐπιμαρτυρηθήσεσθαι ἣ μὴ ἀντιμαρτυρηθήσεσθαι, 
εἶτ᾽ οὐκ ἐπιμαρτυρουμένου (ἢ ἀντιμαρτυρουμένου)" | ἢ τε γὰρ 
ὁμοιότης τῶν φαντασμῶν οἷον εἰ ἐν εἰκόνι λαμβανομένων 
~ » “ i Kn , wv xX x o 
ἢ καθ᾽ ὕπνους γινομένων ἢ Kar’ ἄλλας τινὰς ἐπιβολὰς τῆς 
διανοίας ἢ τῶν λοιπῶν κριτηρίων οὐκ ἄν ποτε ὑπῆρχε τοῖς 
οὖσί τε καὶ ἀληθέσι προσαγορευομένοις, εἰ μὴ ἦν τινα καὶ 
τοιαῦτα προσ βαλλόμενα" τὸ δὲ διημαρτημένον οὐκ ἂν ὑπῆρχεν, 
εἰ μὴ ἐλαμβάνομεν καὶ ἄλλην τινὰ κίνησιν ἐν ἡμῖν αὐτοῖς 
συνημμένην μὲν (τῇ φανταστικῇ ἐπιβολῇ), διάληψιν δὲ 

δὰ x Ν , x x XN Bb} a * > 
ἔχουσαι" κατὰ δὲ ταύτην, ἐὰν μὲν μὴ ἐπιμαρτυρηθῇ ἢ aunt: 

“ ἣν ~ ΄ ὟΝ Ἂς ~ 

μαρτυρηθῇ, τὸ ψεῦδος γίνεται: ἐὰν δὲ ἐπιμαρτυρηθῇ ἢ μὴ 
ἀντιμαρτυρηθῇ, τὸ ἀληθές. | καὶ ταύτην οὖν σφόδρα ye det 
τὴν δόξαν κατέχειν, ἵνα μήτε τὰ κριτήρια ἀναιρῆται τὰ κατὰ 
τὰς ἐναργείας μήτε τὸ διημαρτημένον ὁμοίως βεβαιούμενον 
πάντα συνταράττῃ. 

7 ὁμοχρόων Ross: ἀπὸ χροῶν libri 9 Φυραῖς H τῇ μορ- 
φαῖς libri 50 2 ἀποδιδόντων . σῳζόντων Usener: ἀποδίδοντος 
ες σῴζοντος libri 5 πάλσεως TD Usener: πλάσεως FHPQCoZ. 
w... . BG ἂν λάβωμεν TD Gassendi' ἀναλάβωμεν ΠΟΥ cett. 
8 ἐγκατάλειμμα τοῦ Ζ " ἐγκαταλείμματος ΕΖ'" ἐνκαταλείμματος B: 
ἐγκαταλήματος HPQCo 9 (ἐπὶ τοῦ προσμένοντοον) supplevit Usener 
11 (ἢ ἀντιμαρτυρουμένου) supplevit Usener 51 2 οἷον εἰ] οἷον ἣ 
Usener 6 τοιαῦτα Gassendi. ταῦτα libn προσβαλλόμενα 
Usener: πρὸς ὁ (ἃ F) βάλλομεν ibn τὸ δὲ) τὸ τε Usener 


8 {τῇ φανταστικῇ ἐπιβολῇ) ex glossemate ὃ 50 adscripto supplevit 
Usener 52 3 évapyeios Gassendi. ἐνεργείας libri 


Scholia 


50 IL post ἐπιμαρτυρουμένου legitur κατά twa κίνησιν ἐν ἡμῖν αὐτοῖς 
συνημμένην τῇ φανταστικῇ ἐπιβολῇ, διάληψιν δὲ ἔχουσαν, καθ᾽ ἣν τὸ 


I. TO HERODOTUS 29 


sort which pass from us to them—nearly so well as if 
models, similar in colour and shape, leave the objects and 
enter according to their respective size either into our 
50 sight or into our mind, moving along swiftly, and so by 
this means reproducing the image of a single continuous 
thing and preserving the corresponding sequence of quall- 
ties and movements from the original object as the result 
of their uniform contact with us, kept up by the vibration 
of the atoms deep in the interio: of the concrete body. 
And every image which we obtain by an act of appre- 5 Truth and 
᾿ falsehood in 
hension on the part of the mind or of the sense-organs, vision, 
whether of shape or of properties, this image 1s the shape 
cor the properties) of the concrete object, and 1s produced by 
the constant repetition of the image or the impression it has 
left. Now falsehood and error always he in the addition 
of opinion with regard to (what 1s waiting) to be confirmed 
or not contradicted, and then is not confirmed (or is con- 
δι tradicted). For the similarity between the things which 
exist, which we call real, and the images received as a 
likeness of things and produced either in sleep or through 
some other acts of apprehension on the part of the mind 
or the other instruments of judgement, could never be, 
unless there were some effluences of this nature actually 
brought into contact with our senses. And error would 
not exist unless another kind of movement too were pro- 
duced inside ourselves, closely linked to the apprehension 
of images, but differing from it, and it 1s owing to this, 
supposing it 1s not confirmed, or 1s contradicted, that false- 
hood arises, but if it is confirmed or not contradicted, it 
52 15 true. Therefore we must do our best to keep this doc- 
trine in mind, in order that on the one hand the standards 
of judgement dependent on the clear visions may not be 
undermined, and on the other error may not be as firmly 
established as truth and so throw all into confusion. 
Scholia 
ψεῦδος yirerat. 
Schohon usque ab ἐπιμαρτυρηθήσεσθαι incipere credidit Muehll 
τινα κίνησιν Usener: τὴν ἀκίνητον libri τὴν κίνησιν Menagius 
ἔχουσαν Gassendi: ἐχούση libri 
ΒῚ 9 post κατὰ δὲ ταύτην legitur τὴν συνημμένην tH φανταστικῇ 
ἐπιβολή, διάληψιν δὲ ἔχουσαν 
ἔχουσαν ῬΞΗ : ἐχούσης BGP!QCo: ἔχουσαι F 


53 


54 


30 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


5 ᾿Αλλὰ μὴν καὶ τὸ ἀκούειν γίνεται ῥεύματός Tivos φερομένου 
ἀπὸ τοῦ φωνοῦντος ἢ ἠχοῦντος ἢ ψοφοῦντος ἢ ὅπως δήποτε 
ἀκουστικὸν πάθος παρασκευάζντος. τὸ δὲ ῥεῦμα τοῦτο εἰς 
ὁμοιομερεῖς ὄγκους διασπείρεται, ἅμα τινὰ διασῴζοντας συμ- 
πάθειαν πρὸς ἀλλήλους καὶ ἑνότητα ἰδιότροπον διατείνουσαν 


x 
10 πρὸς τὸ ἀποστεῖλα», καὶ τὴν ἐπαίσθησιν τὴν ἐπ᾽ ἐκείνου ws 


τὰ πολλὰ ποιοῦσαν, εἰ δὲ μή γε, τὸ ἔξωθεν μόνον ἔνδηλον 
παρασκευάζουσαν'" | ἄνευ yap ἀναφερομένης τινὸς ἐκεῖθεν συμ- 
παθείας οὐκ ἂν γένοιτο ἡ τοιαύτη ἐπαίσθησις. οὐκ αὐτὸν 
οὖν δεῖ νομίζειν τὸν ἀέρα ὑπὸ τῆς προιεμένης φωνῆς ἢ καὶ 
ie se Ὁ 5 Sho fo ” a 
τῶν ὁμογενῶν σχηματίζεσθαι (πολλὴν yap ἔνδειαν ἕξει τοῦτο 

, ¢ 9 5» ΄ 2 ᾽ AS Ν ᾿ “ 4 
πάσχειν ὑπ᾽ ἐκείνης), ἀλλ᾽ εὐθὺς τὴν γινομένην πληγὴν ἐν 
« - ᾿ Ν 3 , ΄ v “ nw 
ἡμῖν, ὅταν φωνὴν adpimper, τοιαύτην» ἔκθλιψιν ὄγκων τινῶν 
ῥεύματος πιευματώδους ἀποτελεστικῶ ποιεῖσθαι, ἣ τὸ πάθος 


on 


τὸ ἀκουστικὸν ἡμῖν παρασκευάζει. 
Καὶ μὴ» καὶ τὴν ὀσμὴν νομιστέο;, ὥσπερ καὶ τὴν ἀκοήν, 


10 οὐκ ἄν ποτε οὐθὲν πάθος ἐργάσασθαι, εἰ μὴ ὄγκοι τινὲς ἦσαν 


ἀπὸ τοῦ Apdyparos ἀποφερύόμενοι σύμμετροι πρὸς τὸ τοῦτο 
τὸ αἰσθητήριον κινεῖν, of μὲν τοῖοι τεταραγμένως καὶ ἀλλο- 
τρίως, οἱ δὲ τοῖοι ἀταράχως καὶ οἰκείως ἔχοντες. | 
Καὶ μὴν καὶ τὰς ἀτόμους τομιστέον μηδεμίαν ποιότητα 
“ , r Ἀ A i 
τῶν pawopévwry προσφέρεσθαι TAY σχήματος Kal βάρους 
‘ \ “ > 2 , ~ 3 
Kat μεγέθους καὶ ὅσα ἐξ ἀνάγκης σχήματι συμφυῆ ἐστι. 
ποιύτης γὰρ πᾶσα μεταβάλλει: al δὲ ἄτομοι οὐδὲν μεταβάλ- 
> ΄ὔ a ¢ ᾿ς °° ~ > ¢ lal 
5 λουσιν, ἐπειδήπερ Set τι ὑπομένει» ἐν ταῖς diadvoect τῶν 
‘4 Xx Ν * f Δ Ν ‘ > 
συγκρίσεων» στερεὸν καὶ adidAvTor, ὃ τὰς μεταβολὰς οὐκ els 
‘ Ἂς Δ , o> » cot Ns a 7 - ΄ο 
τὸ μὴ ὃν ποιήσεται οὐδ’ ἐκ τοῦ μὴ ὄντος, ἀλλὰ κατὰ μετα- 
θέσεις (rurdv), τινῶν δὲ καὶ προσύδους καὶ ἀφόδους. ὅθεν 
ἀναγκαῖον τὰ μὲν μετατιθέμειια ἄφθαρτα εἶναι καὶ τὴν τοῦ 


10 μεταβάλλοντος φύσιν οὐκ ἔχοντα, ὄγκους δὲ καὶ σχημα- 


5 ῥεύματος Gassendi: πνεύματος libri 10 ὡς τὰ πολλὰ] ut glos- 
sema seclusit Usener 11 ποιοῦσαν. - παρασκευάζουσαν) mutourras . 
παρισκευάζοντας Usener 53 5 πάσχειν Meibom: πάσχων 


B®GHPQ πάσχον BIF 6 ἔκθλιψιν Briegei' ἐκλίθην B: ἐκλήθην 
P'QH?Co: ἐκ FGHP®%Z: ἔγκλισιν Usener ὄγκων τινῶν P'QCo. 
τινων ὄγκων ΕὈΗΡΒΖ : ὄγκων τινὸς αὶ Usener 7 ἀποτελεστικῶν] 
ἀποτελεστικὴν Usener [11 πρὸς τὸ ΕῸξὶ πρὸς ΒΗΡΟ 54 3 σχή- 
port Kuhn: σγήματος hbri 4 οὐδὲν Ζέ. οὐδὲ cett. 5 διῖ ΒΡῚ: 
ἀεὶ ΕΖ. δὴ Co 8 {ζτινῶν) Bignone: ἐν πολλοῖς (se. lemma) hbri 
plerique " ἐκ πολλοῦ Z: μὲν πολλῶν Gassendi: ἐν πολλοῖς - . - αφό- 
δους ut variam lectionem seclusit Usener 9 μὲν Kochalsky. 
μὴ libri: δὴ Usener 


53 


54 


1. TO HERODOTUS 31 


Moreover, hearing too results when a current is carried B Hearing. 

off from the object speaking or sounding or making a ey 
noise, or causing in any other way a sensation of hearing. effluence from 
Now this current is split up into particles, each like the Ser sell 
whole, which at the same time preserve a correspondence up into similar 
of qualities with one another and a unity of character ani 
which stretches right back to the object which emitted the serve the 
sound: this unity it is which in most cases produces com- Tae 
prehension in the recipient, or, if not, merely makes 
manifest the presence of the external object. For without 
the transference from the object of some correspondence 
of qualities, comprehension of this nature could not result. 
We must not then suppose that the actual air is moulded 
into shape by the voice which 1s emitted or by other similar 
sounds—for it will be very far from being so acted upon 
by 1t—but that the blow which takes place inside us, when 
we emit our voice, Causes at once a squeezing out of certain 
particles, which produce a stream of breath, of such a 
character as to afford us the sensation of hearing 

Furthermore, we must suppose that smell too, just like C Smellis 
hearing, could never bring about any sensation, unless PL 
there were certain particles carried off from the object effluences 
of suitable size to stir this sense-organ, some of them in 
a manner disorderly and alien to it, others ina regular 
manner and akin in nature. 

Moreover, we must suppose that the atoms do notIV The 
possess any of the qualities belonging to perceptible things, gee 
except shape, weight, and size, and all that necessarily properties 
goes with shape. For every quality changes, but the sap Renee 
atoms do not change at all, since there must needs be: Other 
something which remains solid and indissoluble at the Sere Bi 
dissolution of compounds, which can cause changes; Not there must be 
changes into the non-existent or from the non-existent, core 
but changes effected by the shifting of position of some prevent com- 
particles, and by the addition or departure of others. For Plete destruc: 
this reason it is essential that the bodies which shift their 
position should be imperishable and should not possess 
the nature of what changes, but parts and configuration of 


their own For thus much must needs remain constant 


55 


56 


57 


32 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


τισμοὺς ἰδίους" τοῦτο yap καὶ ἀναγκαῖον ὑπομένειν: | καὶ γὰρ 
ἐν τοῖς παρ᾽ ἡμῖν μετασχηματιζομένοις κατὰ τὴν περιαίρεσιν 
τὸ σχῆμα ἐνυπάρχον λαμβάνεται, al δὲ ποιότητες οὐκ evundp- 
Xovoa ἐν τῷ μεταβάλλοντι, ὥσπερ ἐκεῖνο καταλείπεται, ἀλλ᾽ 
5 ἐξ ὅλου τοῦ σώματος ἀπολλύμεναι. ἱκανὰ οὖν τὰ ὑπολειπό- 
μενα ταῦτα τὰς τῶν συγκρίσεων διαφορὰς ποιεῖν, ἐπειδή περ 
ὑπολείπεσθαί γέ τινα ἀναγκαῖον καὶ (μὴ) εἷς τὸ μὴ ὃν 
φθείρεσθαι. 
᾿Αλλὰ μὴν οὐδὲ δεῖ νομίζειν πᾶν μέγεθος ἐν ταῖς ἀτόμοις 


to ὑπάρχειν, ἵνα μὴ τὰ φαινόμενα ἀντιμαρτυρῇ" παραλλαγὰς 


δέ τινας μεγεθῶν νομιστέον εἶναι. βέλτιον γὰρ καὶ τούτου 
προσόντος τὰ κατὰ τὰ πάθη καὶ τὰς αἰσθήσεις γινόμενα 
ἀποδοθήσεται. | πᾶν δὲ μέγεθος ὑπάρχον οὔτε χρήσιμόν ἐστι 
πρὸς τὰς τῶν ποιοτήτων διαφοράς, ἀφῖχθαι τε ἅμ᾽ ἔδει καὶ 
πρὸς ἡμᾶς δρατὰς ἀτόμους: ὃ οὐ θεωρεῖται yurdpevoy, οὐδ᾽ 
ὕπως ἂν γένοιτο ὁρατὴ ἄτομος ἔστιν ἐπινοῆσαι. 

5. Πρὸς δὲ τούτοις οὐ δεῖ νομίζειν ἐν τῷ ὡρισμένῳ σώματι 
ἀπείρους ὄγκους εὖναι οὐδ᾽ ὁπηλίκους οὖν. ὥστε οὐ μόνον 
τὴν «ls ἄπειρον τομὴν ἐπὶ τοὔλαττον ἀναιρετέο;», ἵνα μὴ 
πάντα ἀσθενῆ ποιῶμεν Kav ταῖς περιλήψεσι τῶν ἀθρόων 
εἰς τὸ μὴ Ov ἀναγκαζώμεθα τὰ ὄντα θλίβοντες καταναλίσκειν, 


το ἀλλὰ καὶ τὴν μετάβασιν μὴ νομιστέον γενέσθαι ἐν τοῖς 


ὡρισμένοις εἰς ἄπειρον μηδ᾽ (ἐπὶ τοὔλαττον. | οὔτε yap 
μη " x we oO wv ν Ψ 
ὅπως, ἐπειδὰν ἅπαξ τις εἴπῃ ὅτι ἄπειροι ὄγκοι ἔν τινι 
« i a ε - Γ - a > 
ὑπάρχουσιν ἢ ὁπηλίκοι οὗ», ἔστι νοῆσαι, πῶς τ᾽ ἂν ἔτι 
τοῦτο πεπερασμένον εἴη τὸ μέγεθος; (πηλίκοι γάρ τινες 
δ δῆλον ὡς οἱ ἄπειροί εἶσιν ὄγκοι. καὶ οὗτοι ὁπηλίκοι ἄν 
> τ na Ν Ν Ν 
πότε wow, ἄπειρον ἂν ἦν καὶ τὸ μέγεθος") ἄκρον τε ἔχοντος 
a r ΄ Ἂς Ν Σ - Ἂν ΄ 

τοῦ πεπερασμένον διαληπτόν, el μὴ καὶ καθ᾽ ἑαυτὸ θεωρητόν, 
οὐκ ἔστι μὴ οὐ καὶ τὸ ἑξῆς τούτου τοιοῦτον νοεῖν καὶ οὕτω 


11 τοῦτο] ταῦτα Meibom ὑπομένει.) ὑποτιθέναι Usener 
55 7 καὶ (μὴ) Aldobrandmus . καὶ libri: οὐκ Usener: καὶ μηδὲν 
Bignone 9 οὐδὲ δεῖ Gassendi οὐδὲ ἀεὶ libri 56 I ὑπάρ- 
xov] ὑπάρχειν Usener 2 dp’ ἔδει Usener: ἀμέλει (ἀμέλλει 
ἨΔ) libri: ἂν ἔδει Weil 3 οὐδ᾽ Usener 088 hbri 4 ὁρατὴ 
ἄτομος ut glossema seclusit Usener 8 κἂν Usener' xai 
libri ἀθρόων B: ἀτόμων F 11 μηδ᾽ (ἐπὶ) Gassendi: μηδὲ 
vel μὴ δὲ libri 57 2 ὅπως] om F Guussani 3 ἢ] of Usener 
5 οἷ om. FGHP® post οὗτοι addunt ἐξ ὧν omnes hbri excepto B 
6 ἔχοντος Gassendi-> ἔχοντες libri 7 θεωρητόν Co Usener. 
θεωρητέον libr. cett. 8 μὴ od BP'QO: μὴ cett. οὕτω PCoF*Z: 
τοῦτο BF!: οὐ τῷ Giussant 


I, TO HERODOTUS 33 


55 For even in things perceptible to us which change their 
shape by the withdrawal of matter it is seen that shape 
remains to them, whereas the qualities do not remain in 
the changing object, in the way in which shape is left 
behind, but are lost from the entire body. Now these 
particles which are left behind are sufficient to cause the 
differences 1n compound bodies, since it is essential that 
some things should be left behind and not be destroyed 
into the non-existent, 

Moreover, we must not either suppose that every size a The atoms 
exists among the atoms, in order that the evidence of πᾶνε νά εῖοῦ 
phenomena may not contradict us, but we must suppose not all’sizes. 
that there are some variations of size. For if this be the ee 
case, we can give a better account of what occurs in our visible 

56 feelings and sensations. But the existence of atoms of 
every size is not required to explain the differences of 
qualities in things, and at the same time some atoms 
would be bound to come within our ken and be visible, 
but this is never seen to be the case, nor is it possible 
to imagine how an atom could become visible. 

Besides this we must not suppose that in a limited body B The parts 
there can be infinite parts or parts of every degree of he behion 
smallness. Therefore, we must not only do away with οἵ ἃ limited 
division into smaller and smaller parts to infinity, in order Lage ethane 
that we may not make all things weak, and so in the com- number or 
position of aggregate bodies be compelled to crush and phaitely 
squander the things that exist into the non-existent, but 
we must not either suppose that in limited bodies there 
is a possibility of continuing to infinity in passing even to 

57 smaller and smaller parts. For if once one says that For, if they 
there are infinite parts in a body or parts of any degree a (4) ae 
of smallness, it is not possible to conceive how this should pe Vaated in 
be, and indeed how could the body any longer be limited size, 
in size? (For it is obvious that these infinite particles 
must be of some size or other; and however small they 
may be, the size of the body too would be infinite.) And and (6) 1 the 
again, since the limited body has an extreme point, which ar 

1s distinguishable, even though not perceptible by itself, points it 1s 
you cannot conceive that the succeeding point to it is not not possible 


to continue 
2978 c to infinity 


34 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


κατὰ τὸ ἑξῆς els τοὔμπροσθεν βαδίζοντι els τὸ ἄπειρον 

58 ὑπάρχειν κατὰ (τὸ) τοιοῦτον ἀφικνεῖσθαι τῇ ἐννοίᾳ. | τό τε 
ἐλάχιστον τὸ ἐν τῇ αἰσθήσει δεῖ κατανοεῖν ὅτι οὔτε τοιοῦτόν 
ἐστιν οἷον τὸ τὰς μεταβάσεις ἔχον οὔτε πάντῃ πάντως 
ἀνόμοιον, ἀλλ᾽ ἔχον μέν τινα κοινότητα τῶν μεταβατῶν, 

5 διάληψιν δὲ μερῶν οὐκ ἔχον" ἀλλ᾽ ὅταν διὰ τὴν τῆς κοινότη- 
τος προσεμφέρειαν οἷηθῶμεν διαλήψεσθαί τι αὐτοῦ, τὸ μὲν 
ἐπιτάδε, τὸ δὲ ἐπέκεινα, τὸ ἴσον ἡμῖν δεῖ προσπίπτειν. ἑξῆς 
τε θεωροῦμεν ταῦτα ἀπὸ τοῦ πρώτου καταρχόμενοι καὶ οὐκ 
ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ, οὐδὲ μέρεσι μερῶν ἁπτόμενα, ἀλλ᾽ H ἐν τῇ 

10 ἰδιότητι τῇ ἑαυτῶν τὰ μεγέθη καταμετροῦντα, τὰ πλείω πλεῖον 
καὶ τὰ ἐλάττω ἔλαττον. ταύτῃ τῇ ἀναλογίᾳ νομιστέον καὶ τὸ 

59 ἐν τῇ ἀτόμῳ ἐλάχιστον κεχρῆσθαι" | μικρότητι yap ἐκεῖνο δῆλον 
ὡς διαφέρει τοῦ κατὰ τὴν αἴσθησιν θεωρουμένον, ἀναλογίᾳ 
δὲ τῇ αὐτῇ κέχρηται. ἐπεί περ καὶ ὅτι μέγεθος ἔχει ἡ ἄτομος, 
κατὰ τὴν (τῶν) ἐνταῦθα ἀναλογίαν κατηγορήσαμεν, μικρόν 

5τι μόνον μακρὰν ἐκβάλλοντες. ἔτι τε τὰ ἐλάχιστα καὶ 
ἀμιγῆ πέρατα δεῖ νομίζειν, τῶν μηκῶν τὸ καταμέτρημα ἐξ 
αὑτῶν πρώτων τοῖς μείζοσι καὶ ἐλάττοσι παρασκευάζοντα, 
τῇ διὰ λόγου θεωρίᾳ ἐπὶ τῶν ἀοράτων. ἡ γὰρ κοινότης ἡ 
ὑπάρχουσα αὐτοῖς πρὸς τὰ ἀμετάβολα ἱκανὴ τὸ μέχρι τούτου 

τὸ συντελέσαι' συμφόρησιν δὲ ἐκ τούτων κίνησιν ἐχόντων οὐχ 
οἷόν τε γενέσθαι. 

60 Καὶ μὴν καὶ τοῦ ἀπείρου ws μὲν ἀνωτάτῳ ἣ κατωτάτῳ 
οὐ δεῖ κατηγορεῖν τὸ ἄνω ἢ κάτω: εἰς μέντοι τὸ ὑπὲρ 
κεφαλῆς, ὅθεν ἂν στῶμεν, εἰς ἄπειρον ἄγειν (ἐυνγὸν μηδέποτε 
φανεῖσθαι τοῦτο ἡμῖν' ἢ τὸ ὑποκάτω τοῦ νοηθέντος els 


βαδίζοντι Usener: βαδέζοντα libri 10 xara] καὶ τὸ Muehll 
(ras supplevit Schneider 58 4 μεταβατῶν Schneider: μετα- 
βάντων libri 5 ἀλλ᾽ ὅταν Cobet‘ add’ ὅτε (ἄλλοτε HPQ) libri 


59 3 κέχρηται Gassendi: κεχρῆσθαι τι 4 (τῶν supplevit Usener 
5 μακρὰν Usener : μακρὸν libri ἐκβάλλοντες] ἐκβαλόντες Usener 
6 ἀμιγη) ἀμερῆ von Arnim μηκῶν ΒΡΟ ; μικρῶν F : μακρῶν ΟΗΡ"Ζ 
7 αὑτῶν Usener: αὐτῶν Ὁ πρώτων HPQ: πρῶτον BFGZ post 
παρασκευάζοντα hiatum indicavit Usener 9 ἀμετάβολα) dperd- 
Bara Usener : μεταβατὰ von Arnim 10 τούτω»] τούζτων ds) τῶν 
Bignone ἐχόντων] (otk) ἐχόντων Brieger 60 1 ἀνωτάτῳ 
Usener: ἀνωτάτω bri ἣ GHPCoZ: καὶ ΒΕῸ κατωτάτῳ Usener: 
κατωτάτω libri 2 post κατηγορεῖν hiatum indicavit Usener eis 
μέντοι H®P'QCo: ἴσμεν τοι B: μέντοι FGH'P8Z 3 στῶμεν 
BHPQCo: τὸ μὲν ΕΟσΖ ἄγειν (ἐνγὰν scripsi: ἄγειν ὃν (ὃν FG) hbri. 
τεῖνον Usener: ἄγειν (ἐξὸν Cidkeani : ἄγειν ζνοοῦσι, 847A ov Bignone 


58 


59 


1. TO HERODOTUS 35 


similar in character, or that if you go on in this way from 
one point to another, it should be possible for you to 
proceed to infinity marking such points in your mind. 
We must notice also that the least thing in sensation is α The mum- 
neither exactly hke that which admuts of progression from [win usible ᾿ 
one part to another, nor again is it in every respect wholly without parts 
unlike it, but it has a certain affinity with such bodies, 
yet cannot be divided into parts But when on the analogy 
of this resemblance we think to divide off parts of it, one 
on the one side and another on the other, it must needs 
be that another point like the first meets our view And 
we look at these points in succession starting from the and is the 
first, not within the limits of the same point nor in contact pda οἵ 
part with part, but yet by means of their own proper size 
characteristics measuring the size of bodies, more In a 
greater body and fewer in a smaller. Now we must Similarly, 
suppose that the least part in the atom too bears the same tein, 
relation to the whole; for though in smallness it is obvious visible parts 
that it exceeds that which is seen by sensation, yet it has '" the atom, 
the same relations. For indeed we have already declared 
on the ground of its relation to sensible bodies that the 
atom has size, only we placed it far below them in small- 
ness. Further, we must consider these least indivisible which are the 
points as boundary-marks, providing in themselves as το aie 
primary units the measure of size for the atoms, both for 
the smaller and the greater, in our contemplation of these 
unseen bodies by means of thought. For the affinity 
which the least parts of the atom have to the homogeneous 
parts (of sensible things) 1s sufficient to justify our con- 
clusion to this extent. but that they should ever come 
together as bodies with motion is quite impossible. 

[Furthermore, in the infinite we must not speak of ‘up’ (In what 
or ‘down ’, as though with reference to an absolute highest sense there 
or lowest—and indeed we must say that, though it is possible ἀρ ενα ἀπ 
to proceed to infinity in the direction above our heads sieeve 
from wherever we take our stand, the absolute highest ° mene 
point will never appear to us—nor yet can that which 
passes beneath the point thought of to infinity be at the 


ς 2 


61 


46" 


62 


36 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


s&mepov ἅμα ἄνω re εἶναι καὶ κάτω πρὸς τὸ αὐτό" τοῦτο 
γὰρ ἀδύνατον διανοηθῆναι. ὥστε ἔστι μίαν λαβεῖν φορὰν 
τὴν ἄνω νοουμένην εἰς ἄπειρον καὶ μίαν τὴν κάτω, ἂν καὶ 
μυριάκις πρὸς τοὺς πόδας τῶν ἐπάνω τὸ παρ᾽ ἡμῶν φερόμενον 
(és) τοὺς ὑπὲρ κεφαλῆς ἡμῶν τόπους ἀφικνῆται ἣ ἐπὶ τὴν 


10 κεφαλὴν τῶν ὑποκάτω τὸ παρ᾽ ἡμῶν κάτω φερόμενον" ἡ γὰρ 


ὅλη φορὰ οὐθὲν ἧττον ἑκατέρα ἑκατέρᾳ ἀντικειμένη ἐπ᾽ 
ἄπειρον νοεῖται. 

Καὶ μὴν καὶ ἰσοταχεῖς ἀναγκαῖον τὰς ἀτόμους εἶναι, ὅταν 
διὰ τοῦ κενοῦ εἰσφέρωνται μηθενὸς ἀντικόπτοντος. οὔτε 
γὰρ τὰ βαρέα θᾶττον οἰσθήσεται τῶν μικρῶν καὶ κούφων, 
ὅταν ye δὴ μηδὲν ἀπαντᾷ αὐτοῖς: οὔτε τὰ μικρὰ τῶν μεγαλῶν, 

5 πάντα πόρον σύμμετρον ἔχοντα, ὅταν μηθὲν μηδὲ ἐκείνοις 
ἀντικόπτῃ" οὔθ᾽ ἡ ἄνω οὔθ᾽ ἡ εἰς τὸ πλάγιον διὰ τῶν 
κρούσεων φορά, οὔθ᾽ 7 κάτω διὰ τῶν ἰδίων βαρῶν. ἐφ᾽ 
ὁπόσον γὰρ ἂν κατίσχῃ éxarép(a αὐτ)ῶν, ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον ἅμα 
νοήματι τὴν φορὰν σχήσει, ἕως (ἄν τι) ἀντικόψῃ, ἢ ἔξωθεν 


10% ἐκ τοῦ ἰδίου βάρους πρὸς τὴν τοῦ πλήξαντος δύναμων». | 


καὶ μὴν καὶ ἡ διὰ τοῦ κενοῦ φορὰ κατὰ μηδεμίαν ἀπάντησιν 
τῶν ἀντικοψόντων γινομένη πᾶν μῆκος περιληπτὸν ἐν ἀπερι- 
νοήτῳ χρόνῳ συντελεῖ. βράδους γὰρ καὶ τάχους ἀντικοπὴ 
καὶ οὐκ ἀντικοπὴ ὁμοίωμα λαμβάνει. | ἀλλὰ μὴ» καὶ κατὰ 
τὰς συγκρίσεις θάττων ἑτέρα ἑτέρας ῥηθήσεται τῶν ἀτόμων 
ἰσοταχῶν οὐσῶν, τῷ ἐφ᾽ ἕνα τόπον φέρεσθαι τὰς ἐν τοῖς 
ἀθροίσμασιν ἀτόμους καὶ κατὰ τὸν ἐλάχιστον συνεχῆ χρόνον, 
εἰ μὴ ἐφ᾽ ἔνα κατὰ τοὺς λόγῳ θεωρητοὺς χρόνους, ἀλλὰ 


u 


g (és) supplevit Usener 61 2 εἰσφέρωνται GH®P*: εἰσφέρωντα 
P'Q : eiohépovtac FH'* εἰσφέροντε B : εἰς (ένα τύπον) φέρωνται Brieger 
3 τὰ βαρέα) τὰ (μεγάλα καὶ) βαρέα Usener in commentario μικρῶν 


kat delevit Gassendi 4 ἀπαντᾳ Usener: ἀπαντᾷ BP'Co: ἅπαντα 
ἘΠ: ἀπαντᾶν libr. cett. post ra μικρὰ supplevit βραδύτερον Usener 
5 ἔχοντα) ἐχόντων Giussani 8 ἑκατέρζα αὐτ)ῶν scripsi: ἑκατέρων 
libri: ἑκάτερον Usener 9 (ἄν rt) supplevit Usener 10 πρὸς τὴν 


τοῦ πλήξαντος δύναμιν αἱ glossema seclusit Usener: πρὸς τὴν (ex) τοῦ 
wh. Sov. Bignone 46 1-4 καὶ μὴν καὶ, .. ὁμοίωμα λαμβάνει hunc 


locum ex § 40 petitum huc inser! 1ussit Giussan1 2 ἀντικοψόν- 
τῶν Usener: ἀντικοψαντων libri ἀντεκοπτόντων Giussant 3 Βράδους 
BGH'P1Q: βραδύτητος FH?P*Z 62 1 καὶ delevit Brieger 
2 θάττων Z°F: θᾶττον codd. cett.: (ot) θαττων Usener ῥηθή- 
σεται] οἰσθήσεται Kuhn: φορηθήσεται Brieger 3 τῷ] καὶ τὸ F 
unde κἀν τῷ vel καὶ (xara) τὸ conrecit Bignone 4 καὶ delevit 


Usener τὸν ἐλάχιστον Meibom: τῶν ἐλαχίστων libri 5. εἰ 


61 


I. TO HERODOTUS 37 


same time both up and down in reference to the same 
thing: for it is impossible to think this. So that it is 
possible to consider as one single motion that which is 
thought of as the upwards motion to infinity and as another 
the downward motion, even though that which passes 
from us into the regions above our heads arrives countless 
times at the feet of beings above and that which passes 
downwards from us at the head of beings below; for none 
the Jess the whole motions are thought of as opposed, the 
one to the other, to infinity.] 

Moreover, the atoms must move with equal speed, when C The mo- 
they are borne onwards through the void, nothing colliding ‘ens of the 
with them For neither will the heavy move more quickly move always 
than the small and light, when, that 1s, nothing meets DENY 
them: nor again the small more quickly than the great, thought’, 
having their whole course uniform, when nothing collides wale ame 
with them either: nor is the motion upwards or sideways direction 
owing to blows (quicker), nor again that downwards owing rh Ὲ ἘΠΥ 
to their own weight. For as long as either of the two 
motions prevails, so long will it have a course as quick as 
thought, until something checks it either from outside or 
from its own weight counteracting the force of that which 


46dealt the blow. Moreover, their passage through the Their speed 


62 


15 iInconcelvs 


void, when it takes place without meeting any bodies ably arnt 


which might collide, accomplishes every comprehensible 

distance in an inconceivably short time. For it is collision 

and its absence which take the outward appearance of 

slowness and quickness, Moreover, 3t will be said that In compound 
in compound bodies too one atom is faster than another, pana 
though as a matter of fact all are equal in speed this will move at the 
be said because even in the least period of continuous Shonen ane 
time all the atoms in aggregate bodies move towards one inference 
place, even though in moments of time perceptible only corer 
by thought they do not move towards one place but are deny this 
constantly jostling one against another, until the continuity 


μὴ] ἢ μὴ Usener: εἶτα μὴ Giussani: εἰ (και) μὴ Muehll κατὰ τοὺς 
λόγῳ θεωρητοὺς χρόνους ut glossema seclusit Usener 


38 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


πυκνὸν ἀντικόπτουσιν, ἕως ἂν ὑπὸ τὴν αἴσθησιν τὸ συνεχὲς 
τῆς φορᾶς γίνηται. τὸ γὰρ προσδοξαζόμενον περὶ τοῦ 
ἀοράτου, ὡς ἄρα καὶ οἱ διὰ λόγου θεωρητοὶ χρόνοι τὸ συνεχὲς 
τῆς φορᾶς ἕξουσιν, οὐκ ἀληθές ἐστιν ἐπὶ τῶν τοιούτων" 
10 ἐπεὶ τό γε θεωρούμενον πᾶν ἢ κατ᾽ ἐπιβολὴν λαμβανόμενον 
41") τῇ διανοίᾳ ἀληθές ἐστιν. | οὐ μὴν οὐδ᾽ ἅμα κατὰ τοὺς διὰ 
λόγου θεωρητοὺς χρόνους καὶ τὸ φερόμενον σῶμα ἐπὶ τοὺς 
πλείους τόπους ἀφικνεῖται (ἀδιανόητον γάρ, καὶ τοῦτο συνα- 
φικνούμενον ἐν αἰσθητῷ χρόνῳ ὅθεν δήποθεν τοῦ ἀπείρου 
govx ἐξ οὗ ἂν περιλάβωμεν τὴν φορὰν τύπου ἔσται ἀφιστά- 
μενον)" ἀντικοπῇ γὰρ ὅμοιον ἔσται, κἂν μέχρι τοσούτου τὸ 
τάχος τῆς φορᾶς μὴ ἀντικοπτὸν καταλίπωμεν. χρήσιμον 

δὴ καὶ τοῦτο κατασχεῖν τὸ στοιχεῖον. | 
63 Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα δεῖ συνορᾶν ἀναφέροντα ἐπὶ τὰς αἰσθήσεις 
καὶ τὰ πάθη (οὕτω γὰρ ἡ βεβαιοτάτη πίστις ἔσται), ὅτι ἡ 
ψυχὴ σῶμά ἐστι λεπτομερὲς παρ᾽ ὅλον τὸ ἄθροισμα παρεσπαρ- 
μένον, προσεμφερέστατον δὲ πνεύματι θερμοῦ τινα κρᾶσιν 
5 ἔχοντι καὶ πῇ μὲν τούτῳ προσεμφερές, πῇ δὲ τούτῳ. ἔστι 
ὃὲ τὸ μέρος πολλὴν παραλλαγὴν εἰληφὸς τῇ λεπτομερείᾳ 
καὶ αὐτῶν τούτων, συμπαθὲς δὲ τούτῳ μᾶλλον καὶ τῷ λοιπῷ 
ἀθροίσματι: τοῦτο δὲ πᾶν ai δυνάμεις τῆς ψυχῆς δῆλον 
(ποιοῦσι) καὶ τὰ πάθη καὶ αἱ εὐκινησίαι καὶ αἱ διανοήσεις 
το καὶ ὧν στερόμενοι θνήσκομεν. καὶ μὴν καὶ ὅτι ἔχει ἣ 
ψυχὴ τῆς αἰσθήσεως τὴν πλείστην αἰτίαν, δεῖ κατέχειν" | 
64 οὐ μὴν εἰλήφει ἂν ταύτην, εἰ μὴ ὑπὸ τοῦ λοιποῦ ἀθροίσματος 
ἐστεγάζξετό πως. τὸ δὲ λοιπὸν ἄθροισμα παρασκευάσαν 
ἐκείνῃ τὴν αἰτίαν ταύτην μετείληφε καὶ αὐτὸ τοιούτου συμ- 
πτώματος παρ᾽ ἐκείνης, οὐ μέντοι πάντων ὧν ἐκείνη κέκτηται" 
5 διὸ ἀπαλλαγείσης τῆς ψυχῆς οὐκ ἔχει τὴν αἴσθησιν. οὐ 


6 ἀντικόπτουσιν Gassendi. ἀντικόπτωσιν libri 47° 1-8 οὐ μὴν 
οὐδὲ. . . τὸ στοιχεῖον hunc locum ex § 47 petitum πὰς transferri 
iussit Giussanl 1 οὐδ᾽ ἅμι} οὔθ᾽ Gua Usener: υὐδαμὴ Bignone 
2 καὶ τὸ φερόμενον Usener : κατὰ τὸ φερόμενον libri: αὐτὸ ro φερόμενον 
Muehil: καὶ τἀποφερόμενον Bignone 3 συναφικνούμενον) οὔτ᾽ 
ἀφικνούμενον Usener . οὔτε συναφικνούμενον Giussani 6 τοσούτου 
hbn plerique: τούτου BG 7 ἀντικοπτὸν SCrIpSl: ἀντικόπτον 
Usener: ἀντικοπέον B (sine accentu) GHP!Q: ἀντικοπτέον ΕΡ3Ζ 
63 4 πνεύματι] σπέρματι F 5 ἔστι δὲ τὸ μέρος] ἔστι δέ τι μέρος 
Woltjer: ἐπὶ δὲ τοῦ μέρους Usener: ἔστι δὲ τὸ Ὑ μέρος Diels 
8 δῆλον (ποιοῦσι) Brieger: δῆλον libri: δηλοῦσι Gassendi: διῆγον 
Usener 


I. TO HERODOTUS 39 


of their movement comes under the ken of sensation. 
For the addition of opinion with regard to the unseen, 
that the moments perceptible only by thought will also 
contain continuity of motion, 1s not true in such cases; 
for we must remember that it 1s what we observe with the 
senses or grasp with the mind by an apprehension that 


47°is true Nor must it either be supposed that in moments Nor of course 


63 


64 


perceptible only by thought the moving body too passes ΡΟΣ ποις 
to the several places to which its component atoms move perform the 
(for this too is unthinkable, and in that case, when it jus OM 
arrives all together in a sensible period of time from any atoms 
point that may be in the infinite void, it would not be 

taking its departure from the place from which we appre- 

hend tts motion) ; for the motion of the whole body will be 

the outward expression of its internal collisions, even 

though up to the limits of perception we suppose the 

speed of tts motion not to be retarded by collision, It is 

of advantage to grasp this first principle as well. 

Next, referring always to the sensations and the feelings y, The soul. 
(for in this way you will obtain the most trustworthy * τὴν ed 
ground of belief), you must consider that the soul 15 a wiemes like. 
body of fine particles distributed throughout the whole wind and 
structure, and most resembling wind with a certain admix- era οἱ 
ture of heat, and in some respects like to one of these and more subtle, 
ἢ . element 
in some to the other. There ts also the part which is 
many degrees more advanced even than these in fineness 
of composition, and for this reason 1s more capable of 
feeling in harmony with the rest of the structure as well. 

Now all this is made manifest by the activities of the soul 

and the feelings and the readiness of its movements and 

its processes of thought and by what we lose at the moment 

of death. Further, you must grasp that the soul possesses 2, The soul 
the chief cause of sensation: yet it could not have acquired pear 
sensation, unless it were in some way enclosed by the rest protection 
of the structure. And this in its turn having afforded the re 
soul this cause of sensation acquires itself too a share in which 1 then 
this contingent capacity from the soul. Yet it does not communicates 
acquire all the capacities which the soul possesses: and 


therefore when the soul is released from the body, the 


65 


66 


67 


σι 


40 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


yap αὐτὸ ἂν ἑαυτῷ ταύτην ἐκέκτητο τὴν δύναμιν, ἀλλ᾽ ἑτέρῳ 
ἅμα συγγεγενημένῳ αὐτῷ παρεσκεύαζεν, ὃ διὰ τῆς συντελε- 
σθείσης περὶ αὐτὸ δυνάμεως κατὰ τὴν κίνησιν σύμπτωμα 
αἰσθητικὸν εὐθὺς ἀποτελοῦν ἑαυτῷ ἀπεδίδον κατὰ τὴν ὁμού- 
pnow καὶ συμπάθειαν καὶ ἐκείνῳ, καθάπερ εἶπον. | διὸ δὴ 
καὶ ἐνυπάρχουσα ἡ ψυχὴ οὐδέποτε ἄλλου τινὸς μέρους ἀπηλλαγ- 
μένου ἀναισθητήσει ἀλλ᾽ ἃ ἂν καὶ ταύτης ξυναπόληται τοῦ 
στεγάζντος λυθέντος εἴθ᾽ ὅλου εἴτε καὶ μέρους τινός, ἐάν 
mep διαμένῃ, ἕξει τὴν αἴσθησιν: τὸ δὲ λοιπὸν ἄθροισμα 
διαμένον καὶ ὅλον καὶ κατὰ μέρος οὐκ ἔχει τὴν αἴσθησιν 
ἐκείνου ἀπηλλαγμένου, ὅσον ποτὲ ἐστὶ τὸ συντεῖνον τῶν 
ἀτόμων πλῆθος εἰς τὴν τῆς ψυχῆς φύσιν. καὶ μὴν καὶ 
διαλυομένου τοῦ ὅλου ἀθροίσματος ἡ ψυχὴ διασπείρεται 
καὶ οὐκέτι ἔχει τὰς αὐτὰς δυνάμεις οὐδὲ κινεῖται, ὥστε οὐδ᾽ 
αἴσθησιν κέκτηται. | od γὰρ οἷόν τε νοεῖ» αὐτὸ αἰσθανόμενον 
μὴ (dv) ἐν τούτῳ τῷ συστήματι καὶ ταῖς κινήσεσι ταύταις 
χρώμενον, ὅταν τὰ στεγάζοντα καὶ περιέχοντα μὴ τοιαῦτα ff, 
ἐν οἷς νῦν οὖσα ἔχει ταύτας τὰς κινήσεις. | ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ 
τόδε γε δεῖ προσκατανοεῖν ὅτι τὸ ἀσώματον λέγεται κατὰ 
τὴν πλείστην ὁμιλίαν τοῦ ὀνόματος ἐπὶ τοῦ καθ᾽ ἑαυτὸ νοη- 
θέντος ἄν. καθ᾽ ἑαυτὸ δὲ οὐκ ἔστι νοῆσαι τὸ ἀσώματον 
πλὴν τοῦ κενοῦ: τὸ δὲ κενὸν οὔτε ποιῆσαι οὔτε παθεῖν 
δύναται, ἀλλὰ κίνησιν μόνον δι’ ἑαυτοῦ τοῖς σώμασι παρέ- 


64 6 ἑτέρῳ... συγγεγενημένῳ Brieger: érépw . . . συγγενενη- 
μένω libri: ἕτερον =. . συγγεγενημένον Usener 8 αὐτὸ libri 
plerique: αὐτῶ BZ κίνησιν ΒΡῚΟ : δίνησιν FHP*®: δύνησιν 
GZ 65 3 ἀναισθητήσει Kuhn: ἀναισθήσει ΒΒ ἀναισθησία libr. 
cett.: ἀναισθητεῖ Schneider ἀλλ᾽ ἃ dy FP®: ἀλλὰ ἂν hbr. cett. 
ταύτης Usener " ταύτη libri ξυναπόληται G: ξυναπόλληται FHPQ: 
ξυναπόλλνται BCo 5 ἔξει Usener: ὀξὺ hbri: σῴζει Muehil 
6 καὶ κατὰ μέρος FG: κατὰ μέρος BHPQCo: καὶ μέρος Usener 
9 διαλυομένον ΕἼ" δυομένου Β : λυομένου libr. cett. 10 κινεῖται) 
κινήσεις Bignone: (ras αὐτὰς κινήσεις) supplendum censuit Brieger 
66 1 αὐτὸ) τὸ Usener 2 (8) supplendum suspicatus est Usener 
4 ols] οἵοις comiecit Usener 67 2 ὅτι] ὅ τι Usener λέγεται 
Bignone : λέγει yap libri: λέγομεν Muehll: verba λέγει γὰρ κατὰ τὴν 
πλείστην ὁμιλίαν ut glossema seclusit Usener 3 καθ᾽ ἑαυτὸ 
Stephanus: καθ᾽ ἑαυτὸν libri 5. οὔτε] οὐδὲ comecit Usener 


Scholia 


67 1 post καὶ τόδε legitur λέγει ἐν ἄλλοις καὶ ἐξ ἀτόμων αὐτὴν 
συγκεῖσθαι λειοτάτων καὶ στρογγυλωτάτων, πολλῷ τινι διαφερουσῶν τῶν 
τοῦ πυρός᾽ καὶ τὸ μέν τι ἄλογον αὐτῆς, ὃ τῷ λοιπῷ παρεσπάρθαι σώματι; 
τὸ δὲ λογικὸν ἐν τῷ θώρακι, ὡς δῆλον ἔκ τε τῶν φόβων καὶ τῆς χαρᾶς. 


65 


66 


67 


I. TO HERODOTUS ane 


body no longer has sensation. For it never possessed 

this power in itself, but used to afford opportunity for it 

to another existence, brought into being at the same time 

with itself: and this existence, owing to the power now 
consummated within itself as a result of motion, used 
spontaneously to produce for itself the capacity of sensation 

and then to communicate it to the body as well, in virtue 

of its contact and correspondence of movement, as | have 

already said. Therefore, so long as the soul remains in 3 Even 
the body, even though some other part of the body be lost, SO Baa 
it will never lose sensation; nay more, whatever portions be lost the 
of the soul may perish too, when that which enclosed it is cag 
removed either in whole or in part, if the soul continues 

to exist at all, it will retain sensation. On the other hand but if the soul 
the rest of the structure, though it continues to exist either apie 
as a whole or in part, does not retain sensation, if it to feel; 
has once lost that sum of atoms, however small it be, 

which together goes to produce the nature of the soul. 
Moreover, if the whole structure is dissolved, the soul 15 and so does 
dispersed and no longer has the same powers nor performs {Pe SOU, 
its movements, so that it does not possess sensation either. body 1s 

For it is impossible to imagine it with sensation, if it is '**" ¥P 
not in this organism and cannot effect these movements, 

when what encloses and surrounds it is no longer the 

same as the surroundings in which it now exists and per- 

forms these movements Furthermore, we must clearly 4 The soul 
comprehend as well, that the incorporeal in the general eels 
acceptation of the term is applied to that which could be for if it were 
thought of as such as an independent existence. Now it eee 
is impossible to conceive the incorporeal as a separate dependent 
existence, except the void: and the void can neither act cuca. 


nor be acted upon, but only provides opportunity of motion not at or be 
acted on. 


Scholia 


ὕπνον re γίνεσθαι τῶν τῆς ψυχῆς μερῶν τῶν παρ᾽ ὅλην τὴν σύγκρισιν 
παρεσπαρμένων ἐγκατεχομένων ἢ διαφορουμένων, εἶτα συμπιπτόντων τοῖς 
ἐπερεισμοῖς. τό τε σπέρμα ad’ ὅλων τῶν σωμάτων φέρεσθαι 
μέν τι epit. vat. Cobet μέντον libri παρεσπάρθαν Schneider : 
παρεσπάρθη B®: παρεσαρθρε; BSF GH PQCo: παρεσαθμεῖ 2 θώρακι 
τσὶ plerique: σώμα ΟΖ συμππτόντων] ἐμπιπτόντων F : unde 
ἐκπιπτόντων Giussani ἐπερεσμοῖς Usener: ποργμοῖς ΒΗΡΟ: 
'πορμοῖς F (sc. ἐπυρμοῖς) : ἐσπαρμένοις GZ: πόροις Traversarius 


69 


0 


σι 


ἐπ 


Jo 


42 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


/ 
xerat, ὥσθ᾽ of λέγοντες ἀσώματον εἶναι τὴν ψυχὴν parg- 
ζυσιν. οὐθὲν γὰρ ἂν ἐδύνατο ποιεῖν οὔτε πάσχειν, εἰ ἦν 
τοιαύτη" νῦν δ᾽ ἐναργῶς ἀμφότερα ταῦτα διαλαμβάνεται περὶ 
τὴν ψυχὴν τὰ συμπτώματα. | ταῦτα οὖν πάντα τὰ διαλογίσματα 
(ra) περὶ ψυχῆς ἀνάγων τις ἐπὶ τὰ πάθη καὶ τὰς αἰσθήσεις, 
μνημονεύων τῶν ἐν ἀρχῇ ῥηθέντων, ἱκανῶς κατόψεται τοῖς 
τύποις ἐμπεριειλημμένα εἰς τὸ (καὶ Ta) κατὰ μέρος ἀπὸ 
τούτων ἐξακριβοῦσθαι βεβαίως. 

᾿Αλλὰ μὴν καὶ τὰ σχήματα καὶ τὰ χρώματα καὶ τὰ μεγέθη 
καὶ τὰ βάρη καὶ ὅσα ἄλλα κατηγορεῖται σώματος ὡσανεὶ 
, “a “ “a ~ ε “ I Ἂς Ν a 
συμβεβηκότα ἢ πᾶσιν ἣ τοῖς ὁρατοῖς καὶ κατὰ τὴν αἴσθησιν 
αὐτῶν γνωστοῖς, οὔθ᾽ ὡς καθ᾽ ἑαυτάς εἰσι φύσεις δοξαστέον 
(οὐ γὰρ δυνατὸν ἐπινοῆσαι τοῦτο), | οὔτε ὅλως ὡς οὐκ εἰσίν, 
va? « a Lg ig 4 > , ¥ a? © 
οὔθ᾽ ὡς ἕτερ᾽ ἅττα προσυπάρχοντα τούτῳ ἀσώματα, οὔθ᾽ ws 
μόρια τούτου, ἀλλ᾽ ὡς τὸ ὅλον σῶμα καθόλου μὲν (ex) τούτων 
πάντων τὴν ἑαυτοῦ φύσιν ἔχον ἀίδιον, οὐχ οἷον δ᾽ εἶναι (ex) 
f vr vr 2) > Lal nr ν “ 
συμπεφορημένων (ὥσπερ ὅταν ἐξ αὐτῶν τῶν ὄγκων μεῖζον 
LA n ” na 7 4 cal ~ lia Qn 
ἄθροισμα συστῇ ἤτοι τῶν πρώτων ἣ τῶν τοῦ ὅλου μεγεθῶν 
τοῦδε τινὸς ἐλαττόνων), ἀλλὰ μόνον, ὡς λέγω, ἐκ τούτων 
bd ε na a Ν 5.5, Ν > x ‘ 
ἁπάντων τὴν ἑαυτοῦ φύσιν ἔχον ἀΐδιον. καὶ ἐπιβολὰς μὲν 
ἔχοντα ἰδίας πάντα ταῦτά ἐστι καὶ διαλήψεις, συμπαρακολου- 
θοῦντος δὲ τοῦ ἀθρύου καὶ οὐθαμῇ ἀποσχιζομένου, ἀλλὰ κατὰ 
bs , » a e ,ὔ > , 
τὴν ἀθρόαν ἔννοιαν τοῦ σώματος κατηγορίαν εἰληφότος. | 
Καὶ μὴν καὶ τοῖς σώμασι συμπίπτει πολλάκις καὶ οὐκ ἀίδιον 


παρακολουθεῖν «αὶ « « « οὔτ᾽ ἐν τοῖς ἀοράτοις εἶναι οὔτε ἀσώματα. 


9 διαλαμβάνεται scripsi. διαλαμβάνει libri: διαλαμβάνεις Big- 


none: διαλαμβάνομεν Meibom: συμβαίνει Usener 68 2 (ra) 
supplevit Usener 4 (καὶ ra) supplevit Usener 7 Bapn 
Usener: βαρέα ἣ hbri ὡσανεὶ συμβεβηκότα Galesius ὡς ἂν εἰς 
αὐτὰ βεβηκότα libri: ὡς ἂν ἀεὶ συμβεβηκύτα Bignone 9 αὐτῶν 


γνωστοῖς P?: αὐτοῖς γνωστοῖς libr. cett,: σώματος γνωστά Usener 
6g 2 οὔθ' ὡς Gassendi: ὡς οὔθ᾽ (οὐθ᾽ FQ) hhbri érep ἄττα 
Usener: érepa τὰ libri 3 (x) supplevit Meibom 4 (ex) 
supplevi 5 συμπεφορημένων BOP'Co: συμπεφωρημένον F 6 μεγε- 
θῶν] μερῶν Schneider 7 τοῦδε ros ἴἸβεηεῦ " τοῦ δέ τιέος 
hbn 8 διυτοῦ) ἑαυτῶν HPQ 10 οὐθωμῇ Usener: οὐθιμὴ 
BP'Q: ov8euq libr. cett. arugxiCopévov] ἀποσχηζομένου B: ἀπο- 
σχιζόμενα Usener 11 εἰληφότος] εἴἶληφότι Usener 70 2 παρα- 
κολονθεῖν libr. plerique: παρακολουθεῖ B: παρακολουθεῖ ἅ γ᾽ 
Bignone: post παρακολουθεῖν lacunam indicavit Usener εἶναι 


68 


69 


70 


I, TO HERODOTUS 43 


through itself to bodies So that those who say that the 

soul is incorporeal are talking idly. For it would not be 

able to act or be acted on in any respect, if it were of chis 

nature, But as it is, both these occurrences are clearly 
distinguished in respect of the soul. Now if one refers all These general 
these reasonings about the soul to the standards of feeling a eae 
and sensation and remembers what was said at the outset, & basis for 
he will see that they are sufficiently embraced in these on 
general formulae to enable him to work out with certainty 

on this basis the details of the system as well. 

Moreover, as regards shape and colour and size and VI. Properties 
weight and all other things that are predicated of body, Ἧς elaesten 
as though they were concomitant properties either of all are not 
things or of things visible or recognizable through the ooear 
sensation of these qualities, we must not suppose that existences or 
they are either independent existences (for it 1s impossible RCorPoree! 
to imagine that), nor that they absolutely do not exist, nor parts of body, 
that they are some other kind of incorporeal existence atic 
accompanying body, nor that they are material parts of physical con- 
body: rather we should suppose that the whole body in bode οἱ 
Its totality owes its own permanent existence to all these, put body owes 
yet not in the sense that it is composed of properties "15 essential 
brought together to form it (as when, for instance, a larger soceagate of 
structure 1s put together out of the parts which compose propetties, al- 
it, whether the first units of size or other parts smaller ae 
than itself, whatever it 1s), but only, as I say, that it owes untling to 
its own permanent existence to all of them. All these ae 
properties have their own peculiar means of being per- 
ceived and distinguished, provided always that the aggre- 
gate body goes along with them and is never wrested trom 
them, but in virtue of its comprehension as an aggregate 
of qualities acquires the predicate of body. 

Furthermore, there often happen to bodies and yet do 2 Accidents 
not permanently accompany them (accidents, of which we ΠΣ ΝΕ 
must suppose neither that they do not exist at all nor that existences, 
they have the nature of a whole body), nor that they can alle and 


be classed among unseen things nor as incorporeal. So soonattached 
to body, but 


scripsi: καὶ libri: ἔσται Usener: κζαὶ ἀναισθήτοις δοξαστέον εἶνγαι NOt perma- 
Bignone nently. 


44 1. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


Sore δὴ κατὰ τὴν πλείστην φορὰν τούτῳ τῷ ὀνόματι χρώμενοι 

φανερὰ ποιοῦμεν τὰ συμπτώματα οὔτε τὴν τοῦ ὅλου φύσιν 

5 ἔχειν, ὃ συλλαβόντες κατὰ τὸ ἀθρόον σῶμα προσαγορεύομεν, 

οὔτε τὴν τῶν ἀΐδιον παρακολουθούντων, ὧν ἄνευ σῶμα οὐ 

δυνατὸν νοεῖσθαι. κατ᾽ ἐπιβολὰς δ᾽ ἄν τινας παρακολου- 

7m θοῦντος τοῦ ἀθρόου ἕκαστα προσαγορευθείη, | ἀλλ᾽ Gre δήποτε 

ἕκαστα συμβαύ"οντα θεωρεῖται, οὐκ ἀίδιον τῶν συμπτωμάτων 

παρακολουθούντων. καὶ οὐκ ἐξελατέον ἐκ τοῦ ὄντος ταύτην 

τὴν ἐναργείαν, ὅτι οὐκ ἔχει τὴν τοῦ ὅλου φύσιν ᾧ συμ- 

5 βαίνει οὐδὲ τὴ» τῶν ἀΐδιον παρακολουθούντων, οὐδ᾽ αὖ καθ᾽ 

αὑτὰ νομιστέον (οὐδὲ γὰρ τοῦτο διανοητέον οὔτ᾽ ἐπὶ τούτων 

οὔτ᾽ ἐπὶ τῶν ἀίδιον συμβεβηκότων), ἀλλ᾽ ὅπερ καὶ φαίνεται, 

συμπτώματα πάνζ(τα κα)τὰ τὰ σώματα νομιστέον, καὶ οὐκ 

ἀΐδιον παρακολουθοῦντα οὐδ᾽ αὖ φύσεως καθ᾽ ἑαυτὰ τάγμα 

1ὸ ἔχοντα, ἀλλ᾽ ὃ» τρόπο» αὐτῇ ἡ αἴσθησις τὴ» ἰδιότητα ποιεῖ 
θεωρεῖται. | 

72 Kai μὴν καὶ τόδε ye δεῖ προσκατανοῆσαι σφοδρῶς" τὸν 

γὰρ δὴ χρόνον οὐ ζητητέον ὥσπερ καὶ τὰ λοιπά, ὅσα ἐν 

ὑποκειμένῳ ζητοῦμεν ἀνάγοντες ἐπὶ τὰς βλεπομένας παρ᾽ 

ἡμῖν αὐτοῖς προλήψεις, ἀλλ᾽ αὐτὸ τὸ ἐνάργημα, καθ᾽ ὃ τὸν 

ὃ πολὺν ἢ ὀλίγον χρόνον ἀναφωνοῦμεν, συγγενικῶς τοῦτο 

ἐπιφέροντας ἀναλογιστέον. καὶ οὔτε διαλέκτους ὡς βελτίους 

μεταληπτέον, ἀλλ᾽’ αὐταῖς ταῖς ὑπαρχούσαις κατ᾽ αὐτοῦ 

χρηστέον: οὔτε ἄλλο τι κατ᾽ αὐτοῦ κατηγορητέον ὡς τὴν 

αὐτὴν οὐσίαν ἔχον τῷ ἰδιώματι τούτῳ (καὶ γὰρ τοῦτο ποιοῦσι 

10 τινές), ἀλλὰ μόνον ᾧ συμπλέκομεν τὸ ἴδιον τοῦτο καὶ παρα- 

73 μετροῦμεν, μάλιστα ἐπιλογιστέον. | καὶ γὰρ τοῦτο οὐκ ἄπο- 

δείξεως προσδεῖται ἀλλ᾽ ἐπιλογισμοῦ, ὅτι ταῖς ἡμέραις καὶ 


5 8 FGZ: 8» HPQCo: ἣν Β 6 ἀΐδιον BF: ἀιδίων libr cett. 
8 post προσαγορευθείη Jacunam indicavit Usener ἼΤ 1 ὅτε] 
ὅτῳ Usener 2 ἀΐδιον Meibom: ἀιδίων libri 4 ἐναργείαν) ἐνερ- 
γείαν GH ὦ ΕἸΟΖ: ὧΒ: ὃ HPQCoF? 5 ἀΐδιον Ῥζο : ἀϊδίων 
BGZ 6 διανοητέον διανοητὸν Bernays 7 ἀιδιον] ἀιδίων 
BFGZ 8 πάνζ(τα κατὰ τὰ σώματα Bignone: πάντα τὰ σώματα 
hbrni: πάντα σώματος Usener: πάντα τὰ τοιαῦτα Muebll 10 ἀλλ᾽ 
ὃν} ἄλλον P'Q: ἀλλ’ (dv) ὃν coniecit Bignone 11 θεωρεῖται) 
θεωρεῖσθαι vel θεωρητέον suspicatus est Usener 2 6 ἐπιφέροντας 
scripsi: περιφέροντες libri: ἐπέφέροντες Usener 7-8 κατ᾽ αὐτοῦ 

. κατ᾽ αὐτοῦ Gassendi: καθ᾽ αὑτοῦ ... καθ᾽ αὑτοῦ libri 9 ἔχον 


Usener : ἔχοντος libri (ἔχοντ H) 10 τοῦτο BH P!Q: τούτω FCP 


Scholia : : 
τ 4 post συμβαίνει legitur ὃ δὴ καὶ σῶμα προσαγορεύομεν : ἴῃ textu 
retinuit Muehll 


vi 


72 


73 


I, TO HERODOTUS 45 


that when according to the most general usage we employ 

this name, we make it clear that accidents have neither 

the nature of the whole, which we comprehend in its 
aggregate and call body, nor that of the qualities which 
permanently accompany it, without which a given body 

cannot be conceived. But as the result of certain acts ot 
apprehension, provided the aggregate body goes along 

with them, they might each be given this name, but only on 
occasions when each one of them 1s seen to occur, since 
accidents are not permanent accompaniments. And we Both their 
must not banish this clear vision from the realm of exis- ὀκιβίοπος 
tence, because it does not possess the nature of the whole transitory 
to which it 1s Joined nor that of the permanent accompani- cherecict 
ments, nor must we suppose that such contingencies exist recognized. 
independently (for this is inconceivable both with regard 

to them and to the permanent properties), but, just as it 
appears In sensation, we must think of them all as accidents 
occurring to bodies, and that not as permanent accom- 
paniments, or again as having in themselves a place in the 

ranks of material existence; rather they are seen to be 

Just what our actual sensation shows their proper 
character to be. 

Moreover, you must firmly grasp this point as well ; we 3. Time is not 
must not look for time, as we do for all other things which δῶν ἀρ τόνε 
we look for in an object, by referring them to the general as are con- 
conceptions which we perceive in our own minds, but we Satu: 
must take the direct intuition, in accordance with which we butisa special 
speak of ’a long time’ or ‘a short time’, and examine it, ae meets 
applying our intuition to time as we do to other things. 

Neither must we search for expressions as likely to be 
better, but employ just those which are in common use 
about it. Nor again must we predicate of time anything 
else as having the same essential nature as this special 
perception, as some people do, but we must turn our 
thoughts particularly to that only with which we associate 
this peculiar perception and by which we measure it. For 
indeed this requires no demonstration, but only reflection, 
to show that it is with days and nights and their divisions 


46 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


tats νυξὶ συμπλέκομεν καὶ τοῖς τούτων μέρεσιν, ὡσαύτως 
δὲ καὶ τοῖς πάθεσι καὶ ταῖς ἀπαθείαις, καὶ κινήσεσι καὶ 
5 στάσεσιν, ἴδιόν τι σύμπτωμα περὶ ταῦτα πάλιν αὐτὸ τοῦτο 
ἐννοοῦντες, καθ΄ ὃ χρόνον ὀνομάζομεν. 

Ἐπί τε τοῖς προειρημένοις τοὺς κόσμους δεῖ καὶ πᾶσαν 
σύγκρισιν πεπερασμένην τὸ ὁμοιοειδὲὲξ τοῖς θεωρουμένοις 
πυκνῶς ἔχουσαν νομίζει" γεγονέναι ἀπὸ τοῦ ἀπείρου, πάντων 

το τούτων ἐκ συστροφῶν ἰδίων ἀποκεκριμένων καὶ μειζόνων καὶ 

ἐλαττόνων: καὶ πάλιν διαλύεσθαι πάντα, τὰ μὲν θᾶττον, 

τὰ δὲ βραδύτερον, καὶ τὰ μὲν ὑπὸ τῶν τοιῶνδε, τὰ δὲ ὑπὸ 

74 τῶν τοιῶνδε πάσχοντα. | ἔτι δὲ καὶ τοὺς κόσμους οὔτε ἐξ 

ἀνάγκης δεῖ νομίζειν ἕνα σχηματισμὸν ἔχοντας « + « « x οὐδὲ 

γὰρ ἂν ἀποδείξειεν οὐδείς, ὡς (ἐν) μὲν τῷ τοιούτῳ καὶ οὐκ 

ἂν ἐμπεριελήφθη τὰ τοιαῦτα σπέρματα, ἐξ ὧν ζῷά τε καὶ φυτὰ 

5 καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ πάντα (Ta) θεωρούμενα συνίσταται, ἐν δὲ τῷ 
τοιούτῳ οὐκ ἂν ἐδυνήθη. | 

75 ᾿Αλλὰ μὴ» ὑποληπτέον καὶ τὴν φύσιν πολλὰ καὶ παντοῖα 

ὑπὸ αὐτῶν τῶν πραγμάτων διδαχθῆναί τε καὶ ἀναγκασθῆναι" 

τὸν δὲ λογισμὸν τὰ ὑπὸ ταύτης παρεγγυηθέντα ὕστερον 

ἐξακριβοῦν καὶ προσεξευρίσκειν ἐν μὲν τισὶ θᾶττον, ἐν δὲ 

5 τισὶ βραδύτερον καὶ ἐν μὲν τισὶ περιόδοις καὶ χρόνοις Tard 

τῶν ἀπὸ τοῦ ἀπείρου « .», ἐν δὲ τισὶ καὶ ἐλάττους. ὅθεν καὶ 

τὰ ὀνόματα ἐξ ἀρχῆς μὴ θέσει γενέσθαι, ἀλλ᾽ αὐτὰς τὰς 

Ἴ3 κὶ πάλιν] πάντα Usener 7 τοὺς κόσμοι"»] τούς (re) κόσμους 
suspicatus est Usener 8 épowedes FPQCo: ὁμοειδὲς BGHZ 
13 πάσχοντι FGH'P®8Z. τοῦτο σχόα BP'Q: τοῦτο πάσχοντα H* 
4 2 post ἔχονταν verba genuina scholio intruso expulsa esse indicavit 
Usecee 3 (ev) supplevit Gassendi 5 (ra) supplevit Schneider 
9§ 2 αὐτῶν τῶν BHPQ: τῶν αὐτῶν F: τῶν αὐτῶν τῶν GCoZz 
3 ὕστερον BP'Q: καὶ ὕστερον codd cett. 5 ἀπὸ τῶν ἀπὸ τοῦ 
ἀπείρου ut glossema seclusit Usener ἀποτομὴν pro ἀπὸ τῶν legendo : 


retinuit Bignone qui (P68 ov μείζαυς παρασκενάζεσθαι λύσεις) addere 
voluit Lacunam indicavit Usener 6 καὶ Usener: κατ᾽ hbri 
Scholia 
73 6 post ὀνομάζομεν legitur φησὶ δὲ τοῦτο καὶ ἐν τῇ δευτέρᾳ Περὶ 
φύσεως καὶ ἐν τῇ Μεγάλῃ ἐπιτομῆ 
τὴ δευτέρᾳ libri plerique: τῇ 8 FGZ 
13 post πάσχοντα legitur δῆλον οὖν ws καὶ GOaprovs ῴησι τοὺς 
κόσμους μεταβαλλόντων τῶν μερῶν. καὶ ἐν ἄλλοις τὴν γῆν τῷ ἀέρι 
ἐποχεῖσθαν. 
δῆλον... καὶ in textu retinuit et post καὶ * κ «(cai ἐν τῇ - . . Περὶ 
φύσεων adiecit Muehil φθαρτοὺς BPCo: φθάρτας F : ἀφϑάρ- 
τους ΟΖ τοὺς κόσμους libri plerique : τὸν κόσμον Ὁ 
94 2 post ἔχοντας legitur ἀλλὰ καὶ διαφόρους αὐτοὺς ἐν τῇ 1B Περὶ 
φύσεως φησιν" obs μὲν γὰρ σφαιροειδεῖς, καὶ φοειδεῖς ἄλλους, καὶ ἀλλοιο- 


74 


75 


I. TO HERODOTUS 47 


that we associate it, and likewise also with internal feelings 
or absence of feeling, and with movements and states of 
rest; in connexion with these last again we think of this 
very perception as a peculiar kind of accident, and in virtue 
of this we call it time. 
And in addition to what we have already said we must VII Worlds, 


believe that worlds, and indeed every limited compound dine 


body which continuously exhibits a similar appearance to shapes, and 
the things we see, were created from the infinite, and that τ ἃς 
all such things, greater and less alike, were separated off are created 


oc . out of the 
from individual agglomerations of matter ; and that all are }o.4 be tanita 


again dissolved, some more quickly, some more slowly, of separate 


ἢ aggregations 
some suffering from one set of causes, others from another. of taatlerand 


And further we must believe that these worlds were are similarly 
neither (created) all of necessity with one configuration (nor grihiee 

yet with every kind of shape. Furthermore, we must Ais aricnk: 3. 
believe that 1n all worlds there are living creatures and Shapes. 


plants and other things we see in this world ;) for indeed δ. oe δὰ 


no one could prove that 1n a world of one kind there might animals, 


or might not have been included the kinds of seeds from Besa a 


which living things and plants and all the rest of the 
things we see are composed, and that in a world of another 
kind they could not have been. 

Moreover, we must suppose that human nature too was VIII. The 
taught and constrained to do many things of every kind oe ο 
merely by circumstances; and that later on reasoning and the ongin 
elaborated what had been suggested by nature and made 2 gl 
further inventions, in some matters quickly, in others were iaught 
slowly, at some epochs and times (making great advances), develope ἰὸν 
and lesser again at others. And so names too were not reason 
at first deliberately given to things, but men’s natures 2 Language 


according to their different nationalities had their own bays 


Scholia 


σχήμονας ἑτέρονς᾽ οὐ μέντοι πᾶν σχῆμα ἔχειν. οὐδὲ ζῷα εἶναι ἀποκριθέντα 
ἀπὸ τοῦ ἀπείρου 
verbum ἀλλὰ In textu retinuit Muehil Περὶ φύσεως Brieger. 
περὶ αὐτοῦ BHP1QCo: περὶ τούτου FGZ: περὶ ζφύσεωτ) αὐτὸς 
Usener ἔχειν bri plerique. ἔχεται 8 οὐ μέντοι... ἀπείρου 
in textu retinere volult Brieger 
6 post ἐδυνήθη legitur ὡσαύτως δὲ καὶ ἐντραφῆναι. τὸν αὐτὸν δὲ 
τρόπον καὶ ἐπὶ γῆς νομιστέον 
τὸν αὐτὸν. . . νομιστέον in textu retinuit Muehil 


48 I, ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


φύσεις τῶν ἀνθρώπων καθ᾽ ἕκαστα ἔθνη ἴδια πασχούσας 

πάθη καὶ ἴδια λαμβανούσας φαντάσματα ἰδίως τὸν ἀέρα 

10 ἐκπέμπειν στελλόμενον ὑφ᾽ ἑκάστων τῶν παθῶν καὶ τῶν 

φαντασμάτων, ὡς ἄν ποτε καὶ ἡ παρὰ τοὺς τόπους τῶν ἐθνῶν 

6 διαφορὰ εἴη" | ὕστερον δὲ κοινῶς καθ᾽ ἕκαστα ἔθνη τὰ ἴδια 

τεθῆναι πρὸς τὸ τὰς δηλώσεις ἧττον ἀμφιβόλους γενέσθαι 

ἀλλήλοις καὶ συντομωτέρως δηλουμένας: τινὰ δὲ καὶ οὐ 

συνορώμενα πράγματα εἰσφέροντας τοὺς συνειδότας παρεγ- 

5 γνῆσαι τινὰς φθόγγους τοὺς (μὲν) ἀναγκασθέντας ἀναφωνῆσαι, 

τοὺς δὲ τῷ λογισμῷ ἑλομένους κατὰ τὴν πλείστην αἰτίαν 

οὕτως ἑρμηνεῦσαι. 

Καὶ μὴν (xat τὴν) ἐν τοῖς μετεώροις φορὰν καὶ τροπὴν 

καὶ ἔκλειψιν καὶ ἀνατολὴν καὶ δύσιν καὶ τὰ σύστοιχα τούτοις 

το μήτε λειτουργοῦντος τινὸς νομίζειν δεῖ γενέσθαι καὶ διατάτ- 

rovros ἢ διατάξαντος καὶ ἅμα τὴν πᾶσα» μακαριότητα ἔχοντος 

7] μετὰ ἀφθαρσίας (οὐ γὰρ συμφωνοῦσιν πραγματεῖαι καὶ 

φροντίδες καὶ ὀργαὶ καὶ χάριτες μακαριότητι, ἀλλ᾽ ἐν ἀσθενείᾳ 

καὶ φόβῳ καὶ προσδεήσει τῶν πλησίον ταῦτα γίνεται), μήτε 

αὖ πῦρ ἅμα ὄντα συνεστραμμένον τὴν μακαριότητα κεκτημένα 

β κατὰ βούλησιν τὰς κινήσεις ταύτας λαμβάνειν. ἀλλὰ πᾶν 

τὸ σέμνωμα τηρεῖν κατὰ πάντα ὀνόματα φερόμενα ἐπὶ τὰς 

τοιαύτας ἐννοίας, ἵνα μηδ᾽ ὑπεναντίαι ἐξ αὐτῶν (γένωνται) 

τῷ σεμνώματι δόξαι: εἰ δὲ μή, τὸν μέγιστον τάραχον ἐν 

ταῖς ψυχαῖς αὐτὴ ἡ ὑπεναντιότης παρασκευάσει. ὅθεν δὴ 

τοκατὰ τὰς ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἐναπολήψεις τῶν συστροφῶν τούτων 

ἐν τῇ τοῦ κόσμου γενέσει δεῖ δοξάζειν καὶ τὴν ἀνάγκην 
ταύτην καὶ περίοδον συντελεῖσθαι, | ᾿ 

78 Kat μὴν καὶ (rd) τὴν ὑπὲρ τῶν κυριωτάτων αἰτίαν ἐξακρι- 

βῶσαι φυσιολογίας ἔργον εἶναι δεῖ νομίζειν, καὶ τὸ μακάριον 


12 εἴη] ἢ Usener 76 3 ἀλλήλοις Meibom: ἀλλήλους F - ἀλλήλαις 

2 libr. cett. 5 τοὺς (μὲν) Schneider: τοὺν hbri: seclusit Usener 6 éAo- 
μένους] ἑπομένους Schneider αἰτίαν] φαντασίαν suspicatus est Usener 
8 {καὶ τὴν) supplevit Usener 11 διατάξαντος GHZ: διατάξοντος 
BFPQCo 77.2 ἀλλ᾽ ἐν P}QCo: ἀλλὰ ἐν B: ἀλλ᾽ FGH PIZ 
4 αὖ πῦρ dua (dua H) ὄντα P®?GHZ: av supa paovra P'Q: λυπυρα pa 
ovra B!: λυπυρὰ ἅμα ὄντα ΒΝ". αὖ rip ὄντα F: ad πυρὸς dupa ὄντα 
Μ. Casaubon: αὖ πυρὸς ἀνάμματα Usener συνεατραμμένονἾ συνε- 
στραμμένου Usener 6 φερόμενα] φερόμενον Usener 7 iva Usener: 
ἐὰν libri μ δ᾽ urevavria.. δόξαι) μηδὲν ὑπεναντιον.... δόξῃ Meibom 
(γένωνται) supplevit Gassendi οὐ αὐτὴ ἡ HPQCo: αὐτὴν ἡ B: αὕτη 


76 


77 


78 


1. FO HERODOTUS 49. 


peculiar feelings and received their peculiar impressions, natural 
and so each in their own way emitted air formed into Saal 
shape by each of these feelings and impressions, according feelings and 
to the differences made in the different nations by the places '™Pression® 
of their abode as well, And then later on by common con: and was 
sent in each nationality special names were deliberately gece 
given in order to make their meanings less ambiguous to dehberately 
one another and more briefly demonstrated. And some- New names 
times those who were acquainted with them brought in Maced etl 
things hitherto unknown and introduced sounds for them, these ways 
on some occasions being naturally constrained to utter 
them, and on others choosing them by reasoning in accord- 
ance with the prevailing mode of formation, and thus 
making their meaning clear. 
Furthermore, the motions of the heavenly bodies and X Celesteat 
᾿ . . ee ° > henomena 
their turnings and eclipses and risings and settings, and kin- | Their 
dred phenomena to these, must not be thought to be due to causes 
᾿ 2 ‘ (a) The mo- 
any being who controls and ordains or has ordained them tions of the 
and at the same time enjoys perfect bliss together with im- heavenly 
° . bodies are 
mortality (for trouble and care and anger and kindness are pot controlled 
not consistent with a hfe of blessedness, but these things by any 1m- 
mortal blessed 
come to pass where there is weakness and fear and depen- peing, 
dence on neighbours). Nor again must we believe that (4) nor are 
they, which are but fire agglomerated in a mass, possess Bee θα 
blessedness, and voluntarily take upon themselves these selves 
movements. But we must preserve their full majestic We must not 
significance in all expressions which we apply to such regis 
conceptions, in order that there may not arise out of them derogate from 
opinions contrary to this notion of majesty. Otherwise pened 
this very contradiction will cause the greatest disturbance 
in men’s souls. Therefore we must believe that it 1s due 
to the original inclusion of matter in such agglomerations 
during the birth-process of the world that this law of 
regular succession is also brought about. 

Furthermore, we must believe that to discover accurately 2. Ihe know- 
the cause of the most essential facts is the function of the eee oe. 
science of nature, and that blessedness for us in the know- heavenly 
FGZ 10 κατὰ Meibom: καὶ hbrt 11 γενέσει] συστάσει FGZ 
78 1 (τὸ) supplevit Usener 

2078 D 


79 


80 


50 1, ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


ἐν τῇ περὶ μετεώρων γνώσει ἐνταῦθα πεπτωκέναι καὶ ἐν τῷ 
τίνες φύσεις αἱ θεωρούμεναι κατὰ τὰ μετξωρα ταυτί, καὶ 
δὅσα συγγενῆ πρὸς τὴν els τοῦτο ἀκρίβειαν: ἔτι τε ob τὸ 
πλεοναχῶς ἐν τοῖς τοιούτοις εἶναι καὶ τὸ ἐνδεχόμενον καὶ 
ἄλλως πως ἔχειν, ἀλλ᾽ ἁπλῶς μὴ εἶναι ἐν ἀφθάρτῳ καὶ 
μακαρίᾳ φύσει τῶν διάκρισιν ὑποβαλλόντων ἢ τάραχον μηθέν" 
καὶ τοῦτο καταλαβεῖν τῇ διανοίᾳ ἔστιν ἁπλῶς εἶναι. | τὸ δ᾽ 
ἐν τῇ ἱστορίᾳ πεπτωκὸς τῆς δύσεως καὶ ἀνατολῆς καὶ τροπῆς 
καὶ ἐκλείψεως καὶ ὅσα συγγενῆ τούτοις μηθὲν ἔτι πρὸς τὸ 
μακάριον τῆς γνώσεως συντείνειν, ἀλλ᾽ ὁμοίως τοὺς φόβους 
5 ἔχειν τοὺς ταῦτα κατιδόντας, τίνες δ᾽ αἱ φύσεις ἀγνοοῦντας 
καὶ τίνες αἱ κυριώταται αἰτίαι, καὶ εἰ μὴ προσήδεισαν ταῦτα" 
τάχα δὲ καὶ πλείους, ὅταν τὸ θάμβος ἐκ τῆς τούτων προσκατα- 
νοησεως μὴ δύνηται τὴν λύσιν λαμβάνειν καὶ τὴν περὶ τῶν 
κυριωτάτων οἰκονομίαν. διὸ δὴ κἂν πλείους αἰτίας εὑρίσκωμεν 


10 τροπῶν καὶ δύσεων καὶ ἀνατολῶν καὶ ἐκλείψεων καὶ τῶν 


τοιουτοτρόπων, ὥσπερ καὶ ἐν τοῖς κατὰ μέρος γινομένοις 
ἦν, | οὐ δεῖ νομίζειν τὴν ὑπὲρ τούτων χρείαν ἀκρίβειαν μὴ 
ἀπειληφέναι, ὅση πρὸς τὸ ἀτάραχον καὶ μακάριον ἡμῶν 
συντείνει. ὥστε παραθεωροῦντας ποσαχῶς παρ᾽’ ἡμῖν τὸ 
ὅμοιον γίνεται, αἰτιολογητέον ὑπέρ τε τῶν μετεώρων καὶ 
5 παντὸς τοῦ ἀδήλου, καταφρονοῦντας τῶν οὔτε (τὸ) μοναχῶς 
ἔχον ἣ γινόμενον γνωριζόντων οὔτε τὸ πλεοναχῶς συμβαῖνον 
(ἐπὶ τῶν) τὴν ἐκ τῶν ἀποστημάτων φαντασίαν παραδιδόντων, 
ἔτι τε ἀγνοούντων καὶ ἐν ποίοις οὐκ ἔστιν ἀταρακτῆσαι. 
ἂν οὖν οἰώμεθα καὶ ὡδί πως ἐνδεχόμενον αὐτὸ γίνεσθαι καὶ 


10 ἐφ᾽ οἵοις ὁμοίως ἐστὶν ἀταρακτῆσαι, αὐτὸ τὸ ὅτι πλεοναχῶς 


γίνεται γνωρίζοντες, ὥσπερ κἂν ὅτι ὡδί πως γίνεται εἰδῶμεν, 


ἐν τῇ . . . γνώσει seclusit Usener ἐνταῦθά (re) suspicatus 
est Usener 4 τίνες Z8f: τινὰς libri συγγενῆ] συντείνει 
Usener. (τούτοις συντείνει) supplevit Kochalsky 6 ἐνδεχό- 
μενον Schneider: ἐνδεχομένω Β : ἐνδεχομένως FHPQCo: ἐν»νδεχο- 
μένας GZ 79 4 τῆς γνώσεως] τὰς γνώσεις Usener § κατι- 
δόντας] κατειδότας Usener 8 καὶ] κατὰ Gassendi ο κἂν 
Usener: καὶ libri εὑρίσκωμεν Usener : εὑρίσκομεν hbri 10 τῶν 
τοιουτοτρόπων Meibom: τῶν τοιούτων τρόπων (τροπῶν FGHP®Z 
libri 12 ἦν Usener: ἢ H: ἢ hibr. cett. 80 5 οὔτε (τὸ 
Gassendi: οὐδὲ libri (οὐδὲν Co) 7 (ἐπὶ τῶν) supplevit Bignone : 
τὴν (τ᾽) Usener παραδιδόντων) παριδόντων Usener 8 ἐν] ἐπὶ 
coniecit Schneider 9 καὶ ante ἐφ᾽ οἵοις seclusit Usener 10 ἐφ᾽ 
οἵοις ἘΡ᾿Ζ : ἐν ποίοις P1QCo ἐστὶν GH : om. libr. cett. 


79 


80 


I. TO HERODOTUS δι 


- 
ledge of celestial phenomena lies in this and in the bodies, &c., 
understanding of the nature of the existences seen in these %Scrtain and 
celestial phenomena, and of all else that is akin to the ourhappiness, 
exact knowledge requisite for our happiness: in knowing 

too that what occurs in several ways or is capable of being 

otherwise has no place here, but that nothing which 

suggests doubt or alarm can be included at all in that 

which is naturally immortal and blessed. Now this we but not the 
can ascertain by our mind is absolutely the case. But Hnowlcdge of 
what falls within the investigation of risings and settings causes of 
and turnings and eclipses, and all'that is akin to this, is no ‘Be Works: 
longer of any value for the happiness which knowledge 

brings, but persons who have perceived all this, but yet do 

not know what are the natures of these things and what 

are the essential causes, are still im fear, just as if they did 

not know these things at all: indeed, their fear may be 

even greater, since the wonder which arses out of the 
observation of these things cannot discover any solution 

or realize the regulation of the essentials. And for this We must 
very reason, even if we discover several causes for turnings therefore be 
and settings and risings and eclipses and the like, as has of we find 
been the case already in our investigation of detail, we Soveral causes 
must not suppose that our inquiry into these things has phenomenon, 
not reached sufficient accuracy to contribute to our peace 

of mind and happiness So we must carefully consider in We must 
how many ways a similar phenomenon is produced on Ἐπ lace 
earth, when we reason about the causes of celestial pheno- phenomena 
mena and all that is imperceptible to the senses ; and we or hisone 
must despise those persons who do not recognize either earth, and not 
what exists or comes into being in one way only, or that acne ei, 
which may occur in several ways in the case of things several causes 
which can only be seen by us from a distance, and further *t Wo" 

are not aware under what conditions τὲ is :mpossible to 
have peace of mind. If, therefore, we think that a pheno- 
menon probably occurs in some such particular way, and 
that in circumstances under which it is equally possible for 
us to be at peace, when we realize that it may occur in 
several ways, we shall be just as little disturbed as if we 
know that it occurs in some such particular way. 


D2 


81 


83 


53 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPQAOGTON 


᾿ἀταρακτήσομεν. | ἐπὶ δὲ τούτοις ὅλως ἅπασιν ἐκεῖνο δεῖ 
κατανοεῖν, ὅτι τάραχος ὁ κυριώτατοφ ταῖς ἀνθρωπίναις ψυχαῖς 
γίνεται ἂν τῷ ταῦτα μακάριά τε δοξάζειν καὶ ἄφθαρτα, καὶ 
ὑπεναντίας ἔχειν τούτοις βουλήσεις ἅμα καὶ πράξεις καὶ 
5 αἰτίας, καὶ ἐν τῷ αἰώνιόν τι δεινὸν ἀεὶ προσδοκᾶν ἣ ὑποπτεύειν 
κατὰ τοὺς μύθους εἴτε καὶ αὐτὴν τὴν ἀναισθησίαν τὴν ἐν 
τῷ τεθνάναι φοβουμένους ὥσπερ οὖσαν κατ᾽ αὐτούς, καὶ ἐν τῷ 
μὴ δόξαις ταῦτα πάσχειν ἀλλ᾽ ἀλόγῳ γέ τινι παραστάσει, 
ὅθεν μὴ SplCovras τὸ δεινὸν τὴν ἴσην ἢ καὶ ἐπιτεταμένην 
ταραχὴν λαμβάνειν ὡς εἰ καὶ ἐδόξαζον ταῦτα: | ἡ δὲ ἀταραξία 
τὸ τούτων πάντων ἀπολελύσθαι καὶ συνεχῆ μνήμην ἔχειν τῶν 
ὅλων καὶ κυριωτάτων. 
“Ὅθεν τοῖς πάθεσι προσεκτέον τοῖς παροῦσι καὶ ταῖς 
αἰσθήσεσι, κατὰ μὲν τὸ κοινὸ! ταῖς κοιναῖς, κατὰ δὲ τὸ 
ἴδιον ταῖς ἰδίαις, καὶ πάσῃ τῇ παρούσῃ καθ᾽ ἕκαστον τῶν 
κριτηρίων ἐναργείᾳ. ἂν γὰρ τούτοις προσέχωμεν, τὸ ὅθεν 
ὁ τάραχος καὶ ὁ φόβος ἐγίνετο ἐξαιτιολογήσομεν ὀρθῶς καὶ 
ἀπολύσομεν, ὑπέρ τε μετεώρων αἰτιολογοῦντες καὶ TGY λοιπῶν 


to τῶν ἀεὶ παρεμπιπτόντων, ὅσα φοβεῖ τοὺς λοιποὺς ἐσχάτως. 


Ταῦτά σοι, ὦ ἱΒρόδοτε, ἔστι κεφαλαιωδέστατα ὑπὲρ τῆς 
τῶν ὅλων φύσεως ἐπιτετμημένα, | ὥστε ἂν γένοιτο οὗτος ὁ 
λόγος δυνατὸς κατασχεθῆζναι) μετ᾽ ἀκριβείας: οἶμαι, ἐὰν 
μὴ καὶ πρὸς ἅπαντα βαδίσῃ τις τῶν κατὰ μέρος ἀκριβωμάτων, 
ἀσύμβλητον αὐτὸν πρὸς τοὺς λοιποὺς ἀνθρώπους ἁδρότητα 


85 λήψεσθαι. καὶ γὰρ καὶ καθαρὰ ἀφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ ποιήσει πολλὰ 


τῶν κατὰ μέρος ἐξακριβουμένων κατὰ τὴν ὅλην πραγματείαν 
ἡμῖν, καὶ αὐτὰ ταῦτα ἐν μνήμῃ τιθέμενα συνεχῶς βοηθήσει. 
τοιαῦτα γάρ ἐστιν, ὥστε καὶ τοὺς (καὶ Ta) κατὰ μέρος ἤδη 


81 1 ὅλως ΒΗΡΟο- ὅλοις FQ: om. GZ 2 τάραχος (per) 
suspicatus est Usener 3 ταῦταὶ] ταὐτὰ Muehll δοξάζειν 
(εἶναι) Usener 4 τούτοις libr, plerique: ταύτας F : τούτῳ Usener 
§ ἀεὶ Usener: καὶ libri: ἢ Muehll 6 εἴτε καὶ αὐτὴν Casaubon : 
etre κατὰ ταύτην libri 7 κατ᾽ Casaubon. καὶ libri 8 ἀλλ᾽ ἀλόγω 
BGHP®: ἀλλὰ λόγω FPFQ 10 ὡς scripsi: τῶ BGZ, τὸ 
FHPQCo: τῷ Usener εἰ καὶ ἐδόξαζον] εἰκαίως δοξάζοντε Usener 
82 2 τὸ] τῷ Usener 4 πάθεσι Bonnet: πᾶσι libri 11 fortasse 
(τὰ) κεφαλαιωδέστατα 83 1 ἂν γένοιτο! ἐὰν γένηται Usener 


οὗτος ὁ λόγος δυνατὸς τ. plerique: δυνατὸς οὗτος 6 λόγος F 
2 κατασχεθῆζναι) Bockemuller: κατασχέθη H: κατεσχέθη libr. cett.: 
κατασχεθεὶς Gassendi 4 ἀσύμβλητον BHPQ: ἀσύγκριτον FGZ 
§ καθαρὰ Gassendi; καθαρὰν libri 6 ἐξακριβουμένων Gassendi ; 


81 


82 


83 


I. TO HERODOTUS 53 


And besides all these matters in general we must grasp 8. The causes 
this point, that the principal disturbance in the minds of 4 pee icatd 
men arises because they think that these celestial bodies causes cf 
are blessed and immortal, and yet have wills and actions “y's οὗ 
and motives inconsistent with these attributes ; and because (a) the belief 
they are always expecting or imagining some everlasting meee 
misery, such as is depicted in legends, or even fear the boctes are 
loss of feeling in death as though it would concern them Ot far 
themselves; and, again, because they are brought to this of eternal 
pass not by reasoned opinion, but rather by some irrational Ῥυπιβήπεπες. 
presentiment, and therefore, as they do not know the limits hon after 
of pain, they suffer a disturbance equally great or even more %*#*>. 
extensive than if they had reached this belief by opinion. 

But peace of mind 1s being delivered from all this, and Peace of mind 
having a constant memory of the general and most essential alpen 
principles. fears 

Wherefore we must pay attention to internal feelings 4, {rust m 
and to external sensations in general and in particular, To be quit of 
according as the subject 1s general or particular, and to our fears, we 
every immediate intuition in accordance with each of the percarpvas l 
standards of judgement. For if we pay attention to these, pee τς 
we shall rightly trace the causes whence arose our mental ΑΨ and 
disturbance and fear, and, by learning the true causes of sensalions, 
celestial phenomena and all other occurrences that come eres eas 
to pass from time to time, we shall free ourselves from all of judgement, 
which produces the utmost fear in other men. 

Here, Herodotus, 1s my treatise on the chief points Conciuston. 
concerning the nature of the general principles, abridged ee 
so that my account would be easy to grasp with accuracy. value both to 
I think that, even if one were unable to proceed to all the [Pe advanced 
detailed particulars of the system, he would from this 1ο the more 
obtain an unrivalled strength compared with other men. acer 
For indeed he will clear up for himself many of the 
detailed points by reference to our general system, and 
these very principles, if he stores them in his mind, will 
constantly aid him. For such is their character that even 


those who are at present engaged in working out the 


ἐξακριβούμενος BFHPQCo: ἐξακριβουμένοις GZ 8 (καὶ τὰν sup- 
plevit ὕὕδεδηςυ ᾿ τὰ prius inseruerat Me:bom 


54 I, ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


ἐξακριβοῦντας ἱκανῶς ἣ καὶ τελείως, els τὰς τοιαύτας dva- 
λύοντας ἐπιβολὰς τὰς πλείστας τῶν περιοδειῶν ὑπὲρ τῆς ὅλης 
φύσεως ποιεῖσθαι: ὅσοι δὲ μὴ παντελῶς αὐτῶν τῶν ἀποτελου- 
μένων, ἐκ τούτων εἰσὶν ot κατὰ τὸν ἄνευ φθόγγων τρόπον τὴν 
ἅμα νοήματι περίοδον τῶν κυριωτάτων πρὸς γαληνισμὸν 
ποιοῦνται, 


ΣΙ ὅσοι Ἡ : ὅσα libr. cett. 12 εἰσὶν of scripsi: εἰσὶν ἢ hbri: 
ἱκανὴν Usener: ὅση δὴ ἡ Bignone ἄνευ φθόγγω»} ἀνεύφθογγον 
ΡΟ : ἄνευ φθόνον H 


I. TO HERODOTUS 58 


details to a considerable degree, or even completely, will 
be able to carry out the greater part of their investigations 
into the’ nature of the whole by conducting their analysis 
in reference to such a survey as this. And as for all 
who are not fully among those on the way to being 
perfected, some of them can from this summary obtain 
a hasty view of the most important matters without oral 
instruction so as to secure peace of mind. 


84 


85 


86 


i] 
ἘΠΙΚΟΥ͂ΡΟΣ ΠΥΘΟΚΛΕῚ XAIPEIN 


Ἤνεγκέ μοι Κλέων ἐπιστολὴν παρὰ σοῦ, ἐν ἡ φιλοφρονού- 
μενός τε περὶ ἡμᾶς διετέλεις ἀξίως τῆς ἡμετέρας περὶ σεαυτὸν 
σπουδῆφ, καὶ οὐκ ἀπιθάνως ἐπειρῶ μνημονεύειν τῶν εἰς 
μακάριον βίον συντεινόντων διαλογισμῶν, ἐδέου τε σεαυτῷ 
περὶ τῶν μετεώρων σύντομον καὶ εὐπερίγραφον διαλογισμὸν 
ἀποστεῖλαι, ἵνα ῥᾳδίως μνημονεύῃς" τὰ γὰρ ἐν ἄλλοις ἡμῖν 
γεγραμμένα δυσμνημόνευτα εἶναι, καΐτοι, ὡς ἔφης, συνεχῶς 
αὐτὰ βαστάζεις. ἡμεῖς δὲ ἡδέως τε σοῦ τὴν δέησιν» ἀπεδεξά- 
μεθα καὶ ἐλπίσιν ἡδείαις συνεσχέθημεν. | γράψαντες οὖν τὰ 
λοιπὰ πάντα συντελοῦμεν ἅπερ ἠξίωσας πολλοῖς καὶ ἄλλοις 


σι 


ἐσόμενα χρήσιμα τὰ διαλογίσματα ταῦτα, καὶ μάλιστα τοῖς 
νεωστὶ φυσιολογίας γνησίου γευομένοις καὶ τοῖς εἰς ἀσχολίας 
βαθυτέρας τῶν ἐγκυκλίων τινὺς ἐμπεπλεγμένοις. καλῶς δὴ 
αὐτὰ διάλαβε, καὶ διὰ μνήμης ἔχων ὀξέως αὐτὰ περιόδευε 


an 


μετὰ τῶν λοιπῶν ὧν ἐν TH μικρᾷ ἐπιτομῇ πρὸς “Hpddoror 
ἀπεστείλαμεν. 
Πρῶτον μὲν οὖν μὴ ἄλλο τι τέλος ἐκ τῆς περὶ μετεώρων 
, x ‘ 4 n , 

10 γνώσεως εἴτε κατὰ συναφὴν λεγομένων εἴτε αὐτοτελῶς νομίζειν 
εἶναι ἤ περ ἀταραξίαν καὶ πίστιν βέβαιοι, καθάπερ καὶ ἐπὶ 
nw ~ , a 3, ΄ ἢ , » 
τῶν λοιπῶν. | μήτε τὸ ἀδύνατον καὶ παραβιάζεσθαι μήτε 
ς x , . Τὰ ν Ἄ ty Ν , ΄ 
ὁμοίαν κατὰ πάντα τὴν θεωρίαν ἔχει» ἢ τοῖς περὶ βίων λόγοις 
ἢ τοῖς κατὰ τὴν τῶν ἄλλων φυσικῶν προβλημάτων κάθαρσιν, 
hid 4 Cal ; ᾿π 9 x 4 3 4, x - A 
οἷον ὅτι τὸ πᾶν σώματα καὶ ἀταφὴς φύσις ἐστὶν ἢ Ste ἄτομα 
5 (ra) στοιχεῖα, καὶ πάντα τὰ τοιαῦτα δὴ ὅσα μοναχὴν ἔχει 

84 7 kairo] κἀδύνατον Cronert 8 βαστάζεις Casaubon : βαστά- 
few hbn: β ἰστάζοντι Usener 85 2 λοιπὰ πάντα] λείποντα con- 
1ecit Usener 9 ἐκ] εἰκὸς Kochalsky 10 post νομίζειν (δεῖ) 
supplevit Gassendi 86 1 καὶ ante παραβιάζεσθαι om FH'P°Z: 
ante μήτε transposuit Kochalsky: καὶ (ἄπρακτον) Bignone 


4 σώματα Usener: σῶμα libri 5 (ra) adiecit Schneider 
τοιαῦτα δὴ ὅσα Bignone: τοιαῦτα ἣ ὅσα libri: τοιαῦτα ὅσα Schneider 


84 


85 


I] 
EPICURUS TO PYTHOCLES © 


CiEON brought me a letter from you in which you con- Aitroducton. 
tinue to express a kindly feeling towards me, which,is ΘΝ, 
a just return for my interest in you, and you attempt with 
some success to recall the arguments which lead to a life 
of blessedness. You ask me to send you a brief argument 
about the phenomena of the sky in a short sketch, that 
you may easily recall it to mind, For you say that 
what I have written in my other works 1s hard to remem- 
ber, even though, as you state, you constantly have them 
m your hands I was glad to receive your request and 
felt constrained to answer it by pleasant expectations for 
the future. Therefore, as I have finished all my other Epicwus' 
writings I now intend to accomplish your request, feeling sae τας 
that these arguments will be of value to many other persons filnesk of thie 
as well, and especially to those who have but recently 'etter. 
tasted the genuine inquiry into nature, and also to those 


_who are involved too deeply in the business of some 


86 


regular occupation. Therefore lay good hold on it, keep 
it in mind, and go through it all keenly, together with the 
rest which I sent in the small epitome to Herodotus. 

First of all then we must not suppose that any other Purpose of 
object is to be gained from the knowledge of the pheno- ἐπα cue ie 
mena of the sky, whether they are dealt with 1n connexion 
with other doctrines or independently, than peace of mind 
and a sure confidence, just as in all other branches of 
study. We must not try to force an impossible explana- 115 principles 
tion, nor employ a method of inquiry like our reasoning ‘vestigation 

A : . of heavenly 
either about the modes of life or with respect to the phenomena 
solution of other physical problems: witness such pro- ἀνε τι pasa 
positions as that ‘the universe consists of bodies and the or physics. 
intangible’, or that ‘the elements are indivisible’, and all 


87 


88 


89 


58 II. ΠΡῸΣ TIY@OKAEA 


Tots φαινομένοις συμφωνίαν’ ὅπερ ἐπὶ τῶν μετεώρων οὐχ 
ὑπάρχει, ἀλλὰ ταῦτά γε πλεοναχὴν ἔχει καὶ τῆς γενέσεως 
αἰτίαν καὶ τῆς οὐσίας ταῖς αἰσθήσεσι σύμφωνον κατηγορίαν. 
οὐ γὰρ κατὰ ἀξιώματα κενὰ καὶ νομοθεσίας φυσιολογητέον, 
ἀλλ᾽ ὡς τὰ φαινόμενα ἐκκαλεῖται" | ob γὰρ ἤδη ἀλογίας καὶ 
κενῆς δόξης ὁ βίος ἡμῶν ἔχει χρείαν, ἀλλὰ τοῦ ἀθορύβως 
ἡμᾶς ζῆν. πάντα μὲν οὖν γίνεται ἀσείστως κατὰ πάντων 
(rév) κατὰ πλεοναχὸν τρόπον ἐκκαθαιρομένων συμφώνως 
5 τοῖς φαινομένοις, ὅταν τις τὸ πιθανολογούμενον ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν 
δεόντως καταλίπῃ" ὅταν δέ τις τὸ μὲν ἀπολίπῃ, τὸ δ᾽ ἐκβάλῃ 
ὁμοίως σύμφωνον ὃν τῷ φαινομένῳ, δῆλον ὅτι καὶ ἐκ παντὸς 
ἐκπίπτει φυσιολογήματος, ἐπὶ δὲ τὸν μῦθον καταρρεῖ. σημεῖα 
δ᾽ ἐπὶ τῶν ἐν τοῖς μετεώροις συντελουμένων φέρειν τῶν παρ᾽ 


10 ἡμῖν τινα φαινομένων, ἃ θεωρεῖται ἣ ὑπάρχει, καὶ οὐ τὰ 


ἐν μετεώροις φαινόμενα" ταῦτα γὰρ ἐνδέχεται πλεοναχῶς 
γενέσθαι. | τὸ μέντοι φάντασμα ἑκάστου τηρητέον καὶ ἐπὶ 
τὰ συναπτόμενα τούτῳ διαιρετέον ἃ οὐκ ἀντιμαρτυρεῖται τοῖς 
παρ᾽ ἡμῖν γινομένοις πλεοναχῶς συντελεῖσθαι. 
Κόσμος ἐστὶ περιοχή τις οὐρανοῦ, ἄστρα τε καὶ γῆν καὶ 
5 πάντα τὰ φαινόμενα περιέχουσα, οὗ λυομένου πάντα τὰ ἐν 
αὐτῷ σύγχυσιν λήψεται, ἀποτομὴν ἔχουσα ἀπὸ τοῦ ἀπείρου 
καὶ καταλήγουσα ἐν πέρατι ἢ ἀραιῷ 7 πυκνῷ καὶ ἣ ἐν 
περιαγομένῳ ἢ ἐν στάσιν ἔχοντι καὶ στρογγύλην ἣ τρίγωνον 
ἢ οἵαν δή ποτε (ἔχουσα) περιγραφήν. πανταχῶς γὰρ ἐνδέ- 


n x f For Ἅ -“ “, lol 
10 XeTau τῶν yap ᾧαινομένων οὐδὲν ἀντιμαρτυρεῖ (ev) τῷδε 


lat te an a. s 
τῷ κόσμῳ, ἐν ᾧ λῆγον οὐκ ἔστι καταλαβεῖν. | ὅτι δὲ καὶ 
τοιοῦτοι κόσμοι εἰσὶν ἄπειροι τὸ πλῆθος, ἔστι καταλαβεῖν, 
καὶ ὅτι καὶ ὁ τοιοῦτος δύναται κόσμος γίνεσθαι καὶ ἐν κόσμῳ 


7 ὑπάρχει Gassendi: ὑπάρχειν hbri 87 τ ἤδη ἀλογίας FHP®Z: 


ἰδιαλογίας BP'QCo unde ἰδιολογίας Stephanus 3 κατὰ] καὶ 
Usener: om. Cronert πάντων (τῶν) Bignone πᾶν τῶν HP!'Q: 
πάντων libr. cett. 9 δ᾽ ἐπὶ Usener: δέ τι BP'QCo: 8€ rwa FH P8Z: 
δὲ πιθανὰ Bignone φέρειν] φέρει Kuhn 1o 9 Wolter: 
ἢ bn ΔΝ οὕτως F unde οὐχ ὡς Cronert 88 τ ἑκάστου] 
ἕκαστον coniecit Usener ἐπὶ) ἔτι Usener 5 οὗ λνομένου ... 
λήψεται huc transtuli, post πυκνῷ καὶ habent hbri, ut additamen- 
tum seclusit Usener 7 καὶ καταλήγουσα.. .. πυκνῷ ut addita- 
mentum seclusit Usener ante ἢ ἐν περιαγομένῳ addunt καὶ 


λήγουσαν libri (καὶ λήγουσα Gassend:) scilicet € καὶ καταλήγουσα 
repetitum: de his tribus versibus vid. commentarium nostrum 
8 ἐν στάσιν Gassendi: ἔνστασιν libri 9 (ἔχουσαν) addidi παν- 
raxas] πανταχοῦ H*Q 10 (ev) rede Usener~ rode libri (τόδε ΕἼ 


87 


88 


89 


Il. TO PYTHOCLES 59 


such statements in circumstances where there is only one 
explanation which harmonizes with phenomena. For this for more than 
is not so with the things above us: they admit of more Droducethe 
than one cause of coming into being and more than one same effect. 
account of their nature which harmonizes with our sen- 

sations. For we must not conduct scientific investigation 

by means of empty assumptions and arbitrary principles, 

but follow the lead of phenomena: for our life has not now 

any place for irrational belief and groundless imaginings, 

but we must live free from trouble. Now all goes on Such plurality 
without disturbance as far as regards each of those things of aie τ 
which may be explained 1n several ways so as to harmonize ing element, 
with what we perceive, when one admits, as we are bound eats ao net 
to do, probable theories about them. But when one accepts trary deci- 
one theory and rejects another, which harmonizes just as *°"* 

well with the phenomenon, it is obvious that he altogether 

leaves the path of scientific inquiry and has recourse to 

myth. Now we can obtain indications of what happens Things on 
above from some of the phenomena on earth: for we can owe 
observe how they come to pass, though we cannot observe explain 

the phenomena in the sky: for they may be produced in heavenly | 
several ways. Yet we must never desert the appearance : 
of each of these phenomena, and further, as regards what 

is associated with it, must distinguish those things whose 
production in several ways is not contradicted by pheno- 

mena on earth, 

A world is a circumscribed portion of sky, containing I Worlds 
heavenly bodies and an earth and all the heavenly pheno- pace ar 
mena, whose dissolution will cause all within it to fall into boundary and 
confusion : it 15 a piece cut off from the infinite and ends Shape 
in a boundary either rare or dense, either revolving or 
stationary : its outline may be spherical or three-cornered, 
or any kind of shape. For all such conditions are possible, 
seeing that no phenomenon is evidence against this in our 
world, in which it is not possible to perceive an ending. 

And that such worlds are infinite in number we can be Worlds 

sure, and also that such a world may come into being both eee 

inside another world and in an interworld, by which we Place of 
formation, 


90 


92 


bo Il, NPOD TITOOKAEA 


καὶ (év) μετακοσμίῳ, ὃ λέγομεν μεταξὺ κόσμων διάστημα, ἐν 
δ πολυκένῳ τόπῳ καὶ οὐκ ἐν μεγάλῳ εἰλικρινεῖ καὶ κενῷ, 
καθάπερ τινὲς φασίν, ἐπιτηδείων τινῶν σπερμάτων ῥυέντων 
ἀφ᾽ ἑνὸς κόσμου ἣ μετακοσμίου ἣ καὶ ἀπὸ πλειόνων κατὰ 
μικρὸν προσθέσεις τε καὶ διαρθρώσεις καὶ μεταστάσεις ποιούν- 
των ἐπ᾽ ἄλλον τόπον, ἐὰν οὕτω τύχῃ, καὶ ἐπαρδεύσεις ἐκ τῶν 


10 ἔχόντων ἐπιτηδείως ἕως τελειώσεως καὶ διαμονῆς ἐφ᾽ ὅσον 


τὰ ὑποβληθέντα θεμέλια τὴν προσδοχὴν δύναται ποιεῖσθαι. 
οὐ γὰρ ἀθροισμὸν δεῖ μόνον γενέσθαι οὐδὲ δῖνον ἐν ᾧ ἐνδέχεται 
κόσμον γίνεσθαι κενῷ κατὰ τὸ δοξαζόμενον ἐξ ἀνάγκης, 
αὔξεσθαί τε, ἕως ἂν ἑτέρῳ προσκρούσῃ, καθάπερ τῶν φυσικῶν 
καλουμενῶν φησί τις. τοῦτο γὰρ μαχόμενόν ἐστι τοῖς φαινο- 


5 μένοις. 


“Ἡλιός τε καὶ σελήνη καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ ἄστρα (od) καθ᾽ ἑαυτὰ 
γενόμενα ὕστερον ἐμπεριελαμβάνετο ὑπὸ τοῦ κόσμου, ἀλλ᾽ 
εὐθὺς διεπλάττετο καὶ αὔξησιν ἐλάμβανεν κατὰ προσκρίσεις 
καὶ δινήσεις λεπτομερῶν τινων φύσεων, Tot πνευματικῶν 


107) πυροειδῶν ἢ τὸ συναμφότερον: καὶ γὰρ ταῦτα οὕτως 1) 


αἴσθησις ὑποβάλλει. | τὸ δὲ μέγεθος ἡλίου τε (kai σελήνης) 
καὶ τῶν λοιπῶν ἄστρων κατὰ μὲν τὸ πρὸς ἡμᾶς τηλικοῦτάν 
ἐστιν ἡλίκον φαίνεται: κατὰ δὲ τὸ καθ᾽ αὑτὸ ἤτοι μεῖζον 
τοῦ ὁρωμένου 7) μικρῷ ἔλαττον 7) τηλικοῦτον. οὕτω γὰρ καὶ 


5τὰ Tap ἡμῖν πυρὰ ἐξ ἀποστήματος θεωρούμενα κατὰ τὴν 


αἴσθησιν θεωρεῖται. καὶ πᾶν δὲ εἰς τοῦτο τὸ μέρος ἔνστημα 
ῥᾳδίως διαλυθήσεται, ἐάν τις τοῖς ἐναργήμασι προσέχῃ, ὅπερ 
ἐν τοῖς περὶ φύσεως βιβλίοις δείκνυμεν. ἀνατολὰς καὶ δύσεις 
ἡλίου καὶ σελήνης καὶ τῶν λοιπῶν ἄστρων καὶ κατὰ ἄναψιν 


89 4 καὶ (ev) scrpsi: καὶ hbri: κἀν comecit Usener 5 εἰλικρινεῖ 
καὶ] καὶ εἰλικρινεῖ Zeller 6 τινὲς Casaubon: τινα libri 7 ἵ καὶ 
FHP*Z: ἡ BP'QCo 10 διαμονῆς) διαμονὴν Usener ἐφ᾽ ὅσον 
FP*®: ἐφύσον Β΄. ep’ ὁ H(P)QCo 901 divoy P*OCo: δεῖνον 
ΗΡῚ : δεινὸν BFZ 6 (ov) adiecit Aldobrandinus QI 1 (καὶ 
σελήνης) adiecit Usener 2 μὲν τὸ Schneider: μέντοι libri 
3 xa’ αὑτὸ Usener καθ᾽ αὑτὸν Ῥὶ : καθ᾽ αὑτὴν Ο ΄ κατ᾽ αὐτὸ FH'PPZ: 
κατ᾽ αὐτὸν BH* 4 post τηλικοῦτον libri οὐχ ἅμα habent, quod ut 
glossema seclusi. emendaverunt τυχόν Lachmann, τυγχάνει Usener 
8 βιβλίοις] βυβλίοι. Usener 92 2 post dvayw Usener (re) adiecit 


Scholia 


807 post τοῦ κόσμου verba καὶ ὅσα γε δὴ σώζει habent HPQ, 8 post 
ἄμβανεν codd. eidem ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ γῇ καὶ OdAarra: eadem verba 


go 


gi 


92 


H. TO PYTHOCLES 6 


mean a space between worlds; it will he in a place with 

much void, and not in a large empty space quite void, as 

some say: this occurs when seeds of the right kind have Manner of 
rushed in from a single world or imterworld, or from formation 
several: little by little they make junctions and articula- 

tions, and cause changes of position to another place, as 

it may happen, and produce irrigations of the appropriate and endu- 
matter until the period of completion and stability, which ™"°* 
lasts as long as the underlying foundations are capable of 

receiving additions. For it is not merely necessary for False idea of 
a gathering of atoms to take place, nor indeed for a whirl mana nt 
and nothing more to be set in motion, as is supposed, by worlds. 
necessity, in an empty space in which it is possible for 

a world to come into being, nor can the world go on 
increasing until it collides with another world, as one of 

the so-called physical philosophers says. For this is a 
contradiction of phenomena. 

Sun and moon and the other stars were not created by II The 
themselves and subsequently taken in by the world, but josrete 
were fashioned in it from the first and gradually grew in (a) Creation, 
size by the aggregations and whirlings of bodies of minute ᾿ἢ sharers 
parts, either windy or fiery or both, for this is what our (7) Consttu- 
sensation suggests. The size of sun (and moon) and the (Ὁ Size - 
other stars 1s for us what it appears to be; and in reality nearly what 
it is either (slightly) greater than what we see or slightly ar 
less or the same size: for so too fires on earth when 
looked at from a distance seem to the senses. And every 
objection at this point will easily be dissipated, if we pay 
attention to the clear vision, as I show in my books about 
nature. The risings and settings of the sun, moon, and (@) Their 


other heavenly bodies may be due to kindling and extinc- ὀπήν δὰ 


Scholia 


alias alii disponunt codices 
καὶ ὅσα. .. σώζει in textu retinfit Muehll σώζει) fortasse 
συζῇ Usener 
ΟἹ 3 post φαίνεται legitur τοῦτο καὶ ἐν τῇ ia Περὶ dbuoews* “ εἰ yap”, 
φησί, ““τὸ μέγεθος διὰ τὸ διάστημα ἀπεβεβλήκει, πολλῷ μᾶλλον ν τὴν 
χρύαν ", ἀλλ᾽ οὐ γὰρ τούτῳ συμμετρότερον διάστημα οὐθέν ἐστι 
ἀπεβεβλήκει Usener : ἀποβεβλήκει libri ἀλλ᾽ οὐ Usener : ἄλλο 
(ἄλλω B) libri, Muehll, qui verba ἄλλο γὰρ. . οὐθέν ἐστι m 
.  textu retinut συμμετρότερον libri plerique: συμμετρώτερον 
B'Z: συμμετρούμενον Lachmann - ; 


93 


94 


62 Il. ΠΡῸΣ TIT@OKAEA 


γενέσθαι δύνασθαι καὶ κατὰ σβέσιν, τοιαύτης οὔσης περι- 
στάσεως καὶ καθ᾽ ἑκατέρους τοὺς τόπους ὥστε τὰ προειρημένα 


δ ἀποτελεῖσθαι" οὐδὲν γὰρ τῶν φαινομένων ἀντιμαρτυρεῖ. (καὶ 


κατ᾽ ἐκφάνειάν τε ὑπὲρ γῆς καὶ πάλιν ἐπιπροσθέτησιν τὸ 
προειρημένον δύναιτ᾽ ἂν συντελεῖσθαι" οὐδὲ γάρ τι τῶν φαινο- 
μένων ἀντιμαρτυρεῖ. τάς τε κινήσεις αὐτῶν οὐκ ἀδύνατον 
μὲν γίνεσθαι κατὰ τὴν τοῦ ὅλου οὐρανοῦ δίνην, ἢ τούτου μὲν 


1o στάσιν, αὐτῶν δὲ δίνην κατὰ τὴν ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἐν τῇ γενέσει 


τοῦ κόσμου ἀνάγκην ἀπογεννηθεῖσαν ἐπ᾽ ἀνατολῇ: | a) 
τάτῃ θερμασίᾳ κατά twa ἐπινέμησιν τοῦ πυρὸς ἀεὶ ἐπὶ rods 
ἑξῆς τόπους ἰόντος. τροπὰς ἡλίου καὶ σελήνης ἐνδέχεται 
μὲν γίνεσθαι κατὰ λόξωσιν οὐρανοῦ οὕτω τοῖς χρόνοις κατη- 


5 ναγκασμένου: ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ κατὰ ἀέρος ἀντέξωσιν ἢ καὶ 


ὕλης ἀεὶ ἐπιτηδείας ἐχομένως ἐμπιπραμένης, τῆς δ᾽ ἐκλειπούσης" 
ἢ καὶ ἐξ ἀρχῆς τοιαύτην δίνην κατειληθῆναι τοῖς ἄστροις 
τούτοις, ὥσθ᾽ oldy τιν᾽ ἕλικα κινεῖσθαι, πάντα γὰρ τὰ 
τοιαῦτα καὶ τὰ τούτοις συγγενῆ οὐθενὶ τῶν ἐναργημάτων 


τὸ διαφωνεῖ, ἐάν τις ἐπὶ τῶν τοιούτων μερῶν ἐχόμενος τοῦ 


Ὁ. 


δυνατοῦ εἰς τὸ σύμφωνον τοῖς φαινομένοις ἕκαστον τούτων 
δύνηται ἀνάγειν, μὴ φοβούμενος τὰς ἀνδραποδώδεις ἀστρο- 
λόγων τεχνιτείας. | 

Κενώσεις τε σελήνης καὶ πάλιν πληρώσεις καὶ κατὰ 
στροφὴν τοῦ σώματος τούτου δύναιντ᾽ ἂν γίνεσθαι καὶ κατὰ 
σχηματισμοὺς ἀέρος ὁμοίως, ἔτι τε καὶ κατὰ προσθετήσεις 
καὶ κατὰ πάντας τρόπους, καθ᾽ obs καὶ τὰ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν φαινό- 
μενα ἐκκαλεῖται els τὰς τούτου τοῦ εἴδους ἀποδόσεις, ἐὰν 
μή τις τὸν μοναχῇ τρόπον κατηγαπηκὼς τοὺς ἄλλους κενῶς 
ἀποδοκιμάζῃη, οὐ τεθεωρηκὼς τί δυνατὸν ἀνθρώπῳ θεωρῆσαι 

3 δύνασθαι] δυνατὸν Usener κατὰ] seclusit Usener 4 καὶ 


cad ἑκατέρους rovy τόπους] τρόπους Meibom: ut additamentum 
seclusit Usener 5 (xat) addidit Usener 6 ἐπιπροσθέτησιν) ém- 


πρόσθησιν Cobet 93 I post ἀνατολῇ lacunam indicavit Usener 
collato Lucr, v. 519-525 . 2. τάτῃ edd. : τὰ (ra B) τῇ ΒΡ: εἰ 
τατῇ Ο εἶτα τῆι FZ: εἶτα τῇ hibr. cett. σφροδοτάτῃ coniecit 
Usener : ἐπιτηδειοτάτῃ Bignone 6 ἐχομένως Usener: ἐχομένοις 
BP'QCo ἐχομένης FHPPRZ ἐμπιπραμένης HZ: ἐμπιπραμένοις 
FPQCo δ᾽ ἐκλειπούσης ὕβεμεσ: δὲ καταλιπούσης libri: δὲ κατα- 
λειπομένης Muehil 8 οἷόν rw’ Usener : οἷον τε libri 9 οὐθενὶ 
Usener: οὐθὲν ΒΡΟ : οὐδὲν FH 12 ἀνάγειν Schneider : ἐπάγειν 
B: ἀπάγειν libr. cett.: ἐπανάγειν Muehli 13 τεχνιτείας F : 


τεχνιτίας B: τεχνητείας HPQ 941 κενώσεις. .. πληρώσειε] 


93 


94 


il. TO PYTHOCLES 63 


tion, the composition of the surrounding matter at the 
places of rising and setting being such as to lead to these 
results: for nothing in phenomena is against it. Or 
again, the effect in question might be produced by their 
appearance over the top of the earth, and again the inter- 
position of the earth in front of them: for once more 


nothing in phenomena is against it. Their motions may (e) Their 
not impossibly be due to the revolution of the whole ™°tions. 


heaven, or else it may remain stationary, and they may 
revolve owing to the natural impulse towards the east, 
which was produced at the beginning of the world. .... 
by an excessive heat owing to a spreading of the fire 
which is always moving on to the regions nearest in 


succession, The tropics of sun and moon may be caused (/) The 
owing to an obliquity of the whole heaven, which is con- ‘°P** 


strained into this position in the successive seasons; or 
equally well by an outward impulsion of a current of air, 
or because the appropriate material successively catches 
fire, as the former fails ; or again, from the beginning this 
particular form of revolution may have been assigned to 
these stars, so that they move in a kind of spiral. For all 
these and kindred explanations are not at variance with 
any clear-seen facts, if one always clings in such depart- 
ments of inquiry to the possible and can refer each point 
to what 1s tn agreement with phenomena without fearing 
the slavish artifices of the astronomers. 


The wanings of the moon and Its subsequent waxings (g) The Moon. 


might be due to the revolution of its own body, or equally ( 
well to successive conformations of the atmosphere, or 
again to the interposition of other bodies; they may be 
accounted for in all the ways in which phenomena on 
earth invite us to such explanations of these phases ; 
provided only one does not become enamoured of the 
method of the single cause and groundlessly put the others 
out of court, without having considered what it is possible 
κένωσις «.. πλήρωσις Usener κατὰ στροφὴν Gassendi: καταστροφὴν 
hibri 2 δύναιντ᾽ Meibom: δύναιτ᾽ libri 3 κατὰ προσθετήσεις] 
κατ᾽ ἐπιπροσθησεῖς Cobet 6 κενῶς] κενοὺς Fs ὡς κενοὺς Cobet 


7 ob τεθεωρηκὼς Cobet: οὔτε θεωρητικῶς (θεωρητικὼς B?) libri τί 
Usener: rz libri (bis) 


1) its phases ; 


95 


96 


97 


en 


64 Il. ΠΡῸΣ ΠΎΘΟΚΛΕΑ 


καὶ τί ἀδύνατον, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο ἀδύνατα θεωρεῖν ἐπιθυμῶν. 
ἔτι τε ἐνδέχεται τὴν σελήνην ἐξ ἑαυτῆς ἔχειν τὸ φῶς, 
ἐνδέχεται δὲ ἀπὸ τοῦ ἡλίου. [ καὶ γὰρ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν θεωρεῖται 
πολλὰ μὲν ἐξ ἑαυτῶν ἔχοντα, πολλὰ δὲ ἀφ᾽ ἑτέρων. καὶ 
οὐθὲν ἐμποδοστατεῖ τῶν ἐν τοῖς μετεώροις φαινομένων, ἐάν 
τις τοῦ πλεοναχοῦ τρόπου ἀεὶ μνήμην ἔχῃ καὶ τὰς ἀκολούθους 
αὐτοῖς ὑποθέσεις ἅμα καὶ αἰτίας συνθεωρῇ καὶ μὴ ἀναβλέπων 
els τὰ ἀνακόλουθα ταῦτ᾽ ὀγκοῖ ματαίως καὶ καταρρέπῃ ἄλλοτε 
ἄλλως ἐπὶ τὸν μοναχὸν τρόπον. ἡ δὲ ἔμφασις τοῦ προσώπου 
ἐν αὐτῇ δύναται μὲν γίνεσθαι καὶ κατὰ παραλλαγὴν μερῶν 
καὶ κατ᾽ ἐπιπροσθέτησιν, καὶ ὅσοι ποτ᾽ ἂν τρόποι θεωροῖντο 
τὸ σύμφωνον τοῖς φαινομένοις κεκτημένοι. | ἐπὶ πάντων γὰρ 
τῶν μετεώρων τὴν τοιαύτην ἰχνεύειν οὐ προετέο!. ἣν γάρ 
Tis ἦ μαχόμενος τοῖς ἐναργήμασι", οὐδέποτε μὴ δυνήσεται 
ἀταραξίας γνησίου μεταλαβεῖν. 

Ἔκλειψις ἡλίου καὶ σελήνης δύναται μὲν γίνεσθαι καὶ 
κατὰ σβέσιν, καθάπερ καὶ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν τοῦτο θεωρεῖται γινό- 
μενον" καὶ ἤδη κατ᾽ ἐπιπροσθέτησιν ἄλλων τινῶν, ἢ γῆς ἢ 
ἀοράτου τινὸς ἢ ἑτέρου τοιούτου. καὶ ὧδε τοὺς οἰκείους 
ἀλλήλοις τρόπους συνθεωρητέον, καὶ τὰς ἅμα συγκυρήσεις 
τινῶν ὅτι οὐκ ἀδύνατον γίνεσθαι. ἔτι τε τάξις περιόδου, 
καθάπερ ἔνια καὶ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν τῶν τυχόντων γίνεται, λαμ- 
βανέσθω" καὶ 7 θεία φύσις πρὸς ταῦτα μηδαμῇ προσαγέσθω, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἀλειτούργητος διατηρείσθω καὶ ἐν τῇ πάσῃ μακαριότητι. 
ὡς εἰ τοῦτο μὴ πραχθήσεται, ἅπασα ἡ τῶν μετεώρων αἴτιο- 
λογία ματαία ἔσται, καθάπερ τισὶν ἤδη ἐγένετο οὐ δυνατοῦ 

8 ἀδύνατα P!: A δυνατὰ Q: τὰ δυνατὰ PF 9 ἐνδέχεται (per) 
Usener in commentarto 95 5. avrois] αὐτῆς H': αὐτῷ Gassendi 
6 ταῦτ᾽ ὀγκοῖ patraiws B: ταυτὸν κυματαίως PQ: ταὐτὸν κυματέον H 
9 ἐπιπροσθέτησι»] ἐπιπρόσθησιν Cobet ποτ᾽ Usener: πάντα libri 
96 2 ἰχνεύει»] ἴχνευσιν Usener προετέον BPQ. προσθετέον FHZ 
3 τις ἢ Usener: τίσιν P'Q: τίσι P?: τισὶ B: τισι cett. μαχό- 
μένος Gassendi: μαχομένοις ΒΡΙΟΟΟ : βαλλομένοις FH'Z 7 ἤδη] 
ἔτι Meibom: δὴ καὶ Cobet ἐπιπροσθέτησιν FP8Z: ἐπιπρόσθεσιν 
BP'Co: ἐπιπρύόσθησιν Cobet 8 ἀοράτου coniecit Usener (in 
raefatione) : οὐρανοῦ ΠΌΤ σελήνης Woltjer: fortasse (σελήνης ἢ) 
ἀοράτου τινὸς  Scripsi: ἢ τινος libm: ἢ omittendum censutt 
Usener vel in ἡμῖν vertendum 9 συγκυρήσεις BP?H7QCo: 


συγκρίσεις libr. cett. 97 5 ΒΕ. ἡπερὶ PCo: mepiZ αἷτιο- 
λογία ὃ ἘΠ : ἀντιολογία libr. cett. 


Scholia 


96 10 post γίνεσθαι legitur ἐν δὲ τῇ τβ Περὶ φύσεως ταὐτὰ λέγει καὶ 


Il. TO PYTHOCLES 65 


for a man to observe and what is not, and desiring there- 
fore to observe what is impossible. Next the moon may (2) its hght; 
95 have her light from herself or from the sun. For on earth 
too we see many things shining with their own, and many 
with reflected light. Nor is any celestial phenomenon 
against these explanations, if one always remembers the 
method of manifold causes and investigates hypotheses 
and explanations consistent with them, and does not look 
to inconsistent notions and emphasize them without cause 
and so fall back in different ways on different occasions on 
the method of the single cause. The impression of a face (3) the face 
in the moon may be due to the variation of its parts or to " te moo" 
interposition or to any one of many causes which might be 
g6 observed, all in harmony with phenomena. For in the 
case of all celestial phenomena this process of investigation 
must never be abandoned: for if one is in opposition to 
clear-seen facts, he can never have his part in true peace 
of mind. 
The eclipse of sun and moon may take place both owing (4) Eclipses. 
to their extinction, as we see this effect 1s produced on 
earth, or again by the interposition of some other bodies, 
either the earth or some unseen body or something else 
of this sort. And in this way we must consider together 
the causes that suit with one another and realize that it 1s 
not impossible that some should coincide at the same time. 
97 Next the regularity of the periods of the heavenly bodies (Ὁ) Periods. 
must be understood in the same way as such regularity is 
seen in some of the events that happen on earth. And 
do not let the divine nature be introduced at any point into 
these considerations, but let it be preserved free from 
burdensome duties and in entire blessedness. For if 
this principle is not observed, the whole discussion of 
causes in celestial phenomena is in vain, as it has already 
been for certain persons who have not clung to the 


Scholia 
πρός, ἥλιον ἐκλείπειν σελήνης ἐπισκοτούσης, σελήνην δὲ τοῦ τῆς γῆς 
σκιάσματος, ἀλλὰ καὶ κατ ἀναχώρησιν. τοῦτο δὲ καὶ Διογένης ὁ 
᾿Επικούρειος ἐν τῇ ἃ τῶν '᾿Ἐπιλέκτων 
ταὐτὰ Usener: ταῦτα (ταύτην H) libri πρός BHPQ: τὸν 
πρὸς ἘΖ' : τὸν 2 
391 E 


98 


99 


100 


66 II. ΠΡῸΣ TIT@OKAEA’ 


τρόπου ἐφαψαμένοις, εἰς δὲ τὸ μάταιον ἐκπεσοῦσι τὸ καθ᾽ 
ἕνα τρόπον μόνον οἴεσθαι γίνεσθαι, τοὺς δ᾽ ἄλλους πάντας 
τοὺς κατὰ τὸ ἐνδεχόμενον ἐκβάλλειν εἴς τε τὸ ἀδιανόητον 


10 φερομένους καὶ τὰ φαινόμενα, ἃ δεῖ σημεῖα ἀποδέχεσθαι, μὴ 


δυναμένους συνθεωρεῖν. | 

Μήκη νυκτῶν καὶ ἡμερῶν παραλλάττοντα καὶ παρὰ τὸ 
ταχείας ἡλίου κινήσεις γίνεσθαι καὶ πάλιν βραδείας ὑπὲρ 
γῆς, παρὰ τὸ μήκη τόπων παραλλάττοντα (ducvat), καὶ (παρὰ 
τὸ) τόπους τινὰς περαιοῦν τάχιον ἢ βραδύτερον, ὡς καὶ παρ᾽ 
5 ἡμῖν τινα θεωρεῖται, οἷς συμφώνως δεῖ λέγειν ἐπὶ τῶν 
μετεώρων. οἱ δὲ τὸ bv λαμβάνοντες τοῖς τε φαινομένοις 
μάχονται καὶ τοῦ εἰ δυνατὸν ἀνθρώπῳ θεωρῆσαι διαπεπτώ- 
κασιν. 

᾿Επισημασίαι δύνανται γίνεσθαι καὶ κατὰ συγκυρήσεις 


10 καιρῶν, καθάπερ ἐν τοῖς ἐμφανέσι παρ᾽ ἡμῖν ζῴοις, καὶ παρ᾽ 


ἑτεροιώσεις ἀέρος καὶ μεταβολάς: ἀμφότερα γὰρ ταῦτα οὐ 
μάχεται τοῖς φαινομένοις" ἐπὶ δὲ ποίοις παρὰ τοῦτο ἢ τοῦτο 
τὸ αἴτιον γίνεται, οὐκ ἔστι συνιδεῖν. 
Νέφη δύναται γίνεσθαι καὶ συνίστασθαι καὶ παρὰ πιλήσεις 
ἀέρος (κατὰ) πνευμάτων συνώσεις καὶ παρὰ περιπλοκὰς ἀλλη- 
iA fs x , Ν - “ s x 
5 λούχων ἀτόμων καὶ ἐπιτηδείων els τὸ τοῦτο τελέσαι Kal κατὰ 
ῥευμάτων συλλογὴν ἀπό τε γῆς καὶ ὑδάτων! καὶ κατ᾽ ἄλλους 
δὲ τρόπους πλείους αἱ τῶν τοιούτων συστάσεις οὐκ ἀδυνατοῦσι 
- LA 3 ᾽ A » - 
συντελεῖσθαι. ἤδη δ᾽ ἀπ’ αὐτῶν Ff μὲν θλιβομένων, ἡ δὲ 
μεταβαλλόντων ὕδατα δύναται συντελεῖσθαι, 





ἔτι τε πνευμάτων 
καταφορᾷ ἀπὸ ἐπιτηδείων τύπων καὶ δ’ ἀέρος κινουμένων, 
βιαιοτέρας ἐπαρδεύσεως γινομένης amd τινων ἀθροισμάτων 
ἐπιτηδείων εἰς τὰς τοιαύτας ἐπιπέμψεις. 


7 τὸ καθ᾿ τῷ καθ’ ZUsener 104 δεῖ BP: 4 δεῖ (ἢ 55.γ.)}Η : ἃ δῆ : 

ὴ ΕΖ LI συνθεωρεῖν Meibom: σὺν θεῷ χαίρειν» libri 98 3 παρὰ 
τὸ... ἢ βραδύτερον ut glossema seclusit Usener παραλλάττοντα) 
παραλλάττειν Gassend): post παραλλάττοντα plura verba intercidisse 
suspicatus est Bignone (διιέναι) adieci exempli causa (rapa 
τὸ) adieci 4 περαιοῦν Usener : περαιοῦντα libri ἢ βραδύτερον 
post ἡμῖν habent libri; huc transtulit Gassend1 post βραδύτερον 
vereor ne clausula tota interciderit. De toto hoc laco vid. commen- 
tarium 7 εἰ) ἢ Usener 9 γίνεσθαι BP'Q: γενέσθαι FHPPZ 
11 ἑτεροιώσεις Usener: ἑτέροις ὡσεὶ libri μεταβολὰς Kuhn: μετα- 
Θολῆς lib 9911 ἐπὶ Usener. ἔτε FH'P®Z: ἤδη BP'QCo 
4 (nara) adieci: (διὰ) Bignone πνευμάτων συνώσεις (συνώσεως 110 11}} 
ut glossema seclusit Usener, qui in praefatione πνευμάτων συνώσει 
coniecerat . (ἢ) mv. συν. Meibom: (καὶ av. συν. Kuhn 8 dr’ 


08 


99 


00 


11. TO PYTHOCLES 67 


method of possible explanations, but have fallen back on 
the useless course of thinking that things could only 
happen in one way, and of rejecting all other ways in har- 
mony with what is possible, being driven thus to what is 
inconceivable and being unable to compare earthly pheno- 
mena, which we must accept as indications. 
The successive changes in the length of nights and days (/) Length of 
. nights and 
may be due to the fact that the sun’s movements above the gays, 
earth become fast and then slow again because he passes 
across regions of unequal length or because he traverses 
some regions more quickly or more slowly, (or again to 
the quicker or slower gathering of the fires that make the 
sun), as we observe occurs with some things on earth, 
with which we must be in harmony in speaking of celestial 
phenomena. But those who assume one cause fight 
against the evidence of phenomena and fail to ask whether 
it 1s possible for men to make such observations, 

Signs of the weather may occur owing to the coincidence (4) Weather- 
of occasions, as happens with animals we can all see on *'8"* 
earth, and also through alterations and changes in the 
atmosphere. For both these are in accordance with pheno- 
mena. But under what circumstances the cause is pro- 
duced by this or that, we cannot perceive. 

Clouds may be produced and formed both by the con- ΠῚ Meteoro- 
densation of the atmosphere owing to compression by Wo wide 
winds and by the interlacing of atoms clinging to one 
another and suitable for producing this result, and again 
by the gathering of streams from earth and the waters: 
and there are several other ways in which the formation of 
such things may not impossibly be brought about. And (δ) Ran. 
from them again rain may be produced if they are squeezed 
in one part or changed 1n another, or again by a downward 
current of wind moving through the atmosphere from 
appropriate places, a more violent shower being produced 
from certain conglomerations of atoms suited to create 
such downfalls. 


Kuhn: én’ libri 100 I πνευμάτων xarahopa Usener : πνεύματα 
κατὰ ἀποφορὰν hibri: ῥευμάτων κατὰ ἀποφορὰν Bignone 2 καὶ δι 
ἀέρος] δι᾿ ἀέρος P*Z 


E2 


68 It, ΠΡῸΣ NVTOOKAEA 


δ Bporrds ἐνδέχεται γίνεσθαι καὶ κατὰ πνεύματος ἐν τοῖς 
κοιλώμασι τῶν νεφῶν ἀνείλησιν, καθάπερ ἐν τοῖς ἡμετέροις 
ἀγγείοις, καὶ παρὰ πυρὸς πεπνευματωμένον βόμβον ἐν αὐτοῖς, 
καὶ κατὰ ῥήξεις δὲ νεφῶν καὶ διαστάσεις καὶ κατὰ παρατρίψεις 
νεφῶν καὶ κατάξεις πῆξιν εἰληφότων κρυσταλλοειδῇ' καὶ 

το τὸ ὅλον καὶ τοῦτο τὸ μέρος πλεοναχῶς γίνεσθαι λέγειν 
ἐκκαλεῖται τὰ φαινόμενα. | 

οι Καὶ ἀστραπαὶ δ᾽ ὡσαύτως γίνονται κατὰ πλείους τρόπους" 
καὶ γὰρ κατὰ παράτριψιν καὶ σύγκρουσιν νεφῶν ὁ πυρὸς 
ἀποτελεστικὸς σχηματισμὸς ἐξολισθαίνων ἀστραπὴν γεννᾷ" 
καὶ κατ᾽ ἐκριπισμὸν ἐκ τῶν νεφῶν ὑπὸ πνευμάτων τῶν 

δ τοιούτων σωμάτων ἃ τὴν λαμπηδόνα ταύτην παρασκευάζει, 
καὶ κατ᾽ ἐκπιασμόν, θλίψεως τῶν νεφῶν γινομένης εἴθ᾽ ὑπ᾽ 
ἀλλήλων εἴθ᾽ ὑπὸ πνευμάτων" καὶ κατ᾽ ἐμπερίληψιν δὲ τοῦ 
ἀπὸ τῶν ἄστρων κατεσπαρμένον φωτός, εἶτα συνελαυνομένον 
ὑπὸ τῆς κινήσεως νεφῶν τε καὶ πνευμάτων καὶ διεκπίπτοντος 

το διὰ τῶν νεφῶν: ἣ κατὰ διήθησιν (Sea) τῶν νεφῶν τοῦ 
λεπτομερεστάτου φωτός, ἦ ἀπὸ τοῦ πυρὸς νέφη συνεφλέχθαι 
καὶ τὰς βροντὰς ἀποτελεῖσθαι κατὰ τὴν τούτου κίνησιν" καὶ 
κατὰ τὴν τοῦ πνεύματος ἐκπύρωσιν τὴν γινομένην διά τε 

102 συντονίαν φορᾶς καὶ διὰ σφοδρὰν κατείλησιν" | καὶ κατὰ ῥήξεις 
δὲ νεφῶν ὑπὸ πνευμάτων ἔκπτωσίν τε πυρὸς ἀποτελεστικῶν 
ἀτόμων καὶ τὸ τῆς ἀστραπῆς φάντασμα ἀποτελουσῶν" καὶ 
κατ᾽ ἄλλους δὲ πλείους τρόπους ῥᾳδίως ἔσται καθορᾶν ἐχό- 

5 pevoy ἀεὶ τῶν φαινομένων καὶ τὸ τούτοις ὅμοιον δυνάμενον 
συνθεωρεῖν. προτερεῖ δὲ ἀστραπὴ βροντῆς ἐν τοιᾷδέ τινι 
περιστάσει νεφῶν καὶ διὰ τὸ ἅμα τῷ τὸ πνεῦμα ἐμπίπτειν 
ἐξωθεῖσθαι τὸν ἀστραπῆς ἀποτελεστικὸν σχηματισμόν, ὕστερον 
δὲ τὸ πνεῦμα ἀνειλούμενον τὸν βόμβον ἀποτελεῖν τοῦτον" 

1o Kal κατ᾽ ἔκπτωσιν δὲ ἀμφοτέρων ἅμα, τῷ τάχει συντονωτέρῳ 
κεχρῆσθαι πρὸς ἡμᾶς τὴν ἀστραπήν, ὑστερεῖν δὲ τὴν βροντήν, | 

1083 καθάπερ ἐπ᾽ ἐνίων ἐξ ἀποστήματος θεωρουμένων καὶ πληγάς 
τινας ποιουμένων. 

8 διαστάσειςἿ διασπάσεις Usener 9 κατάξεις Froben: τάξεις 
BHPQCo: διαστάσεις Εἰ : τάσεις Usener 1ΟΙ 2 καὶ ante σύγ- 
κρουσιν] ἢ comecit Usener 8 κατεσπαρμένου Schneider : κατε- 
σπειραμένου libri 10 (&a) adiecit Schneider 11 9 Bignone: 


#libri ἢ avd... 12 ἀποτελεῖσθαι ut additamentum seclusit Usener 
συνεφλέχθαι Usener: συνειλέχθαι libri 12 κατὰ Bignone: καὶ κατὰ 


I], TO. PYTHOCLES 69 


Thunder may be produced by the rushing about of wind (¢) Thunder 

in the hollows of the clouds, as happens in vessels on 
earth, or by the reverberation of fire filled with wind 
inside them, or by the rending and tearing of clouds, or 
by the friction and bursting of clouds when they have been 
congealed into a form like ice: phenomena demand that 
we should say that this department of celestial events, just 
like them all, may be caused in several ways. 

101 And lightnings too are produced in several ways: for (¢) Lightning. 
both owing to the friction and collision of clouds a con- 
formation of atoms which produces fire slips out and gives 
birth to the lightning, and owing to wind bodies which give 
rise to this flash are dashed from the clouds : or compression 
may be the cause, when clouds are squeezed either by one 
another or by the wind. Or again it may be that the light 
scattered abroad from the heavenly bodies is taken in by the 
clouds, and then is driven together by the movement of the 
clouds and wind, and falls out through the clouds; or else 
hight composed of most subtle particles may filter through 
the clouds, whereby the clouds may be set on fire by the 
flame and thunder produced by the movement of the fire. 

ιοῶῷ Or the wind may be fired owing to the strain of motion 
and its violent rotation. or clouds may be rent by wind 
and atoms fall out which produce fire and cause the appear- 
ance of lightning. And several other methods may easily 
be observed, if one clings always to phenomena and can 
compare what is akin to these things. Lightning precedes (6) Why 
thunder in such a conformation of the clouds, either because ae 
at the moment when the wind dashes in, the formation of thunder 
atoms which gives rise to lightning is driven out, but after- 
wards the wind whirls about and produces the reverbera- 
tion ; or because they both dash out at the same moment, 
but lightning moves at a higher speed towards us, and 

103 thunder comes after, as in the case of some things 
seen at a distance and producing blows. 
hbri: καὶ Usener.. καὶ κατὰ τ(ὴν σῖξιν καὶ κατὰ τ)ὴν τούτου κίνησιν sup- 
plendum censult Bignone 102 2 ἐκπτωσίν re Usener : ἔκπτωσιν 
τῶν bri 5 ἀεὶ Usener : καὶ libri 10 κατ᾽ ἔκπτωσιν scripsi: 


κατέμπτωσιν B (unde κατ᾽ ἔμπτωσιν edd.): κατέμπρωσιν TP: κατ᾽ 
ἔμπρωσιν ΡἾΓΟΕ 


7° Il. ΠΡῸΣ TITOOKAEA 


Κεραυνοὺς ἐνδέχεται γίνεσθαι καὶ κατὰ πλεέονας πνευμάτων 
συλλογὰς καὶ κατείλησιν ἰσχυράν τε ἐκπύρωσιν καὶ κατάρρηξιν 

5 μέρους καὶ ἔκπτωσιν ἰσχυροτέραν αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ τοὺς κάτω τόπους, 
τῆς ῥήξεως γινομένης διὰ τὸ τοὺς ἑξῆς τόπους πυκνοτέρους 
εἶναι διὰ πίλησιν νεφῶν" καὶ κατ᾽ αὐτὴν δὲ τὴν τοῦ πυρὸς 
ἔκπτωσιν ἀνειλουμένου, καθὰ καὶ βροντὴν ἐνδέχεται γίνεσθαι, 
πλείονος γενομένου καὶ πνευματωθέντος ἰσχυρότερον καὶ 

τὸ ῥήξαντος τὸ νέφος διὰ τὸ μὴ δύνασθαι ὑποχωρεῖν εἰς τὰ 

104. ἑξῆς, τῷ πίλησιν γίνεσθαι ἀεὶ πρὸς ἄλληλα. | καὶ κατ᾽ ἄλλους 
δὲ τρόπους πλείονας ἐνδέχεται κεραυνοὺς ἀποτελεῖσθαι: μόνον 
ὁ μῦθος ἀπέστω: ἀπέσται δέ, ἐάν τις καλῶς τοῖς φαινομένοις 
ἀκολουθῶν περὶ τῶν ἀφανῶν σημειῶται. 

58 Πρηστῆρας ἐνδέχεται γίνεσθαι καὶ κατὰ κάθεσιν νέφους 
εἰς τοὺς κάτω τόπους στυλοειδῶς ὑπὸ πνεύματος ἀθρόου 
ὠσθέντος καὶ διὰ τοῦ πνεύματος πολλοῦ φερομένου, ἅμα καὶ 
τὸ νέφος εἰς τὸ πλάγιον ὠθοῦντος τοῦ ἐκτὸς πνεύματος" 
καὶ κατὰ περίστασιν δὲ πνεύματος εἰς κύκλον, ἀέρος τινὸς 

10 ἐπισυνωθουμένου ἄνωθεν: καὶ ῥύσεως πολλῆς πνευμάτων 
γενομένης καὶ οὐ δυναμένης εἰς τὰ πλάγια διαρρυῆναι διὰ 

105 τὴν πέριξ τοῦ ἀέρος πίλησιν. | καὶ ἕως μὲν γῆς τοῦ πρηστῆρος 
καθιεμένου στρόβιλοι γίγνονται, ὡς ἂν καὶ ἡ ἀπογέννησις 
κατὰ τὴν κίνησιν τοῦ πνεύματος γίνηται: ἕως δὲ θαλάττης 
δῖνοι ἀποτελοῦνται. 

5 Σεισμοὺς ἐνδέχεται γίνεσθαι καὶ κατὰ πνεύματος ἐν τῇ 
γῇ ἀπόληψιν καὶ παρὰ μικροὺς ὄγκους αὐτῆς παράθεσιν καὶ 
συνεχῆ κίνησιν, ὃ τὴν κράδανσιν τῇ γῇ παρασκευάζει. καὶ τὸ 
πνεῦμα τοῦτο ἢ ἔξωθεν ἐμπεριλαμβάνει (ἣ) ἐκ τοῦ πίπτειν 
εἴσω ἐδάφη εἰς ἀντροειδεῖς τόπους τῆς γῆς ἐκπνευματοῦντα 

to τὸν ἐπειλημμένον ἀέρα. (καὶ) κατ᾽ αὐτὴν δὲ τὴν διάδοσιν 


103 4 κατάρρηξιν FH. κατὰ ῥῆξιν BP?QCo 7 διὰ πίλησιν 
Ρ: διὰ πεΐίλησιν Β : διαπείλησιν Ἐ : δι᾽ ἀπείλησιν (Ρ)Η νεφῶν 
ΒΡΙΟ : τῶν νεφῶν cett. κατ᾽ αὐτὴν Usener’ xara ταύτην libri 
104 5 κατὰ κάθεσιν BP?F2Co: κατάθεσιν F?. κατὰ θέσιν ZP* mg. 
6 στυλοειδῶς Usener ἀλλοειδῶς libri 7 πολλοῦ] κύκλῳ Usener 
8 πλάγιον Usener πλησίον libri 105 2 ὡς dy... γίνηται ut glos- 
sema seclusit Usener (qui ὡς ἀναγκαίως. . . δίνησιν . . . γένεται scripsit) 
6 ἀπόληψιν) ἐναπόληψιν suspicatus est Usener 7 δτὴν Usener: 
ὅταν libri κράδανσιν 13? mg.: κράδαστον B. κραδαστὸν cett.: τὸν 
κραδασμὸν Casaubon παρασκευάζει F: παρασκενάζη cett. ὃ (ἢ 
adiecit Meibom 0 εἴσω Diels (vid. Usener, praefat. xx): εἰς libri 
ἐκπνευματοῦντα Usener: ἐκ πνευμάτων hbri 10 ἐπειλημμένον 


II. TO PYTHOCLES ἯΙ 


Thunderbolts may occur because there are frequent (7 a Thunder 
gatherings of wind, which whirls about and is fanned into 
a fierce flame, and then a portion of it breaks off and rushes 
violently on the places beneath, the breaking taking place 
because the regions approached are successively denser 
owing to the condensation of clouds. or as the result of the 
actual outburst of the whirling fire, in the same way that 
thunder may be produced, when the fire becomes too great 
and is too violently fanned by wind and so breaks through 
thecloud, because it cannot retreat to the next regions owing 
to the constant condensation of clouds one on the other. 

1o4 And thunderbolts may be produced in other ways too 
Only superstition must be excluded, as it will, if one 
successfully follows the lead of seen phenomena to gain 
indications about the invisible, 

Cyclones may be produced either by the driving down vi 4Asmo- 
of a cloud into the regions below in the form of a pillar, alle tg 
because it is pushed by the wind gathered inside it and is phenomena 
driven on by the violence of the wind, while at the same (*) Cyclones. 
time the wind outside impels it sideways; or by wind 
forming into circular motion, while mist is simultaneously 
thrust down from above; or when a great rush of wind 
takes place and cannot pass through sideways owing to 

1o5 the surrounding condensation of the atmosphere. And 
when the spout is let down on to the land, whirlwinds are 
produced in all the various ways in which their creation 
may occur owing to the movement of the wind, but if it 
reaches the sea it produces waterspouts. 

Earthquakes may be brought about both because wind (4) Earth- 
is caught up in the earth, so that the earth 1s dislocated in qakes- 
small masses and is continually shaken, and that causes 
it to sway. This wind it either takes into itself from out- 
side, or else because masses of ground fall in into cavernous 
places in the earth and fan into wind the air that 15 im- 
prisoned in them. And again, earthquakes may be brought 
ΡΊΟ mg. Co: ἐπιλημμένον B: πεπιλημένον ἘῊ ΡΖ (καὶδ κατ᾽ αὑτὴν 
Usener: κατὰ ταύτην libri 

Scholia ἢ 


103 II post γίνεσθαι legitur τὸ μὲν οὐδῷ πρὸς ὄρος τι ὑψηλόν, ἐν ᾧ 
μάλιστα κεραυνοὶ πίπτουσιν 


106 


107 


108 


73 Il, ΠΡῸΣ NY@OKAEA 


τῆς κινήσεως ἐκ τῶν πτώσεων ἐδαφῶν πολλῶν καὶ πάλι» 
ἀνταπόδοσιν, ὅταν πυκνώμασι σφοδροτέροις τῆς γῆς ἀπαντήσῃ, 
ἐνδέχεται σεισμοὺς ἀποτελεῖσθαι, | καὶ κατ᾽ ἄλλους δὲ πλείους 
τρόπους τὰς κινήσεις ταύτας τῆς γῆς γίνεσθαι. 
- - +. «* * + 
Τὰ δὲ πνεύματα συμβαίνει γίνεσθαι κατὰ χρόνον ἀλλο- 
φυλίας τινὸς ἀεὶ καὶ κατὰ μικρὸν παρεισδυομένης, καὶ καθ᾽ 
5 ὕδατος ἀφθόνον συλλογήν. τὰ δὲ λοιπὰ πνεύματα γίνεται 
καὶ ὀλίγων πεσόντων εἰς τὰ πολλὰ κοιλώματα, διαδόσεως 
τούτων γινομένης. 
XdAala συντελεῖται καὶ κατὰ πῆξιν ἰσχυροτέραν, πάντοθεν 
δὲ πνευματωδῶν περίστασιν τινῶν καὶ καταμέρισιν" καὶ (κατὰ 


τὸ πῆξιν μετριωτέραν ὑδατοειδῶν τινῶν (καὶ) ὁμοῦ ῥῆξιν, ἅμα 


τήν τε σύνωσιν αὐτῶν ποιουμένην καὶ τὴν διάρρηξιν πρὸς 
τὸ κατὰ μέρη συνίστασθαι πηγνύμενα καὶ κατὰ ἀθροότητα.] 
ἡ δὲ περιφέρεια οὐκ ἀδυνάτως μὲν ἔχει γίνεσθαι πάντοθεν 
τῶν ἄκρων ἀποτηκομένων καὶ ἐν τῇ συστάσει πάντοθεν, ὡς 
λέγεται, κατὰ μέρη ὁμαλῶς περιισταμένων εἴτε ὑδατοειδῶν 
τινων εἴτε πνευματωδῶν. 

5 Xidva δὲ ἐνδέχεται συντελεῖσθαι καὶ ὕδατος λεπτοῦ ἐκχεο- 
μένου ἐκ τῶν νεφῶν διὰ πόρων συμμετρίας καὶ θλίψεις 
ἐπιτηδείων νεφῶν ἀεὶ ὑπὸ πνευμάτων σφοδράς, εἶτα τούτου 
πῆξιν ἐν τῇ φορᾷ λαμβάνοντος διά τινα ἰσχυρὰν ἐν τοῖς 
κατωτέρω τόποις τῶν νεφῶν ψυχρασίας περίστασιν" καὶ κατὰ 


τὸ πῆξιν δ᾽ ἐν τοῖς νέφεσιν ὁμαλῇ ἀραιότητα ἔχουσιν τοιαύτη 


πρόεσις ἐκ τῶν νεφῶν γίνοιτο ἂν πρὸς ἄλληλα θλιβομένων 
ὑδατοειδῶν καὶ συμπαρακειμένων" ἃ οἷονεὶ σύνωσιν ποιούμενα 
χάλαζαν ἀποτελεῖ, ὃ μάλιστα γίνεται ἐν τῷ ἀέρι. | καὶ κατὰ 


12 ἀνταπόδοσιν Gassendi: ἀνταποδίδωσεν libri 106 3 post 
πνεύματα addendum {ταῦτα suspicatus est Usener . § τὰ δὲ 
λοιπὰ] τὸ δὲ λοιπὸν Bignone 6 ὀλέγων Ἐ : ὀλίγον cett.: 
corruptum suspicatus est Usener 9 καὶ καταμέρισιν Sscripsi : 
καὶ κατὰ μέρισιν libri (καταμέρησιν F): xdra μέρισιν Usener (xara) 
adiecit Meibom [10 πῆξιν H: τῆξι» BF PQCo (nai) adieci: (rvev- 
ματωδῶν δέ τινων) Usener ὁμοῦ ῥηξι»}Ἱ ὁμούρησιν Usener 
12 ἀθροότητα Gassendi: ἀθρότητα libri 107 2 ἀποτηκομένων 
Sambucus: ἀποτικομένων B: ἀποπικομένων HPQCO: ἀποπυκνουμένων 
F? 3 κατὰ Aldobrandinus: καὶ τὰ libri ὑὕὑδατοειδῶν] ὑδατοποιῶν F 
6 διὰ πόρων Kuhn: διαφόρων BP!Co: διαφορῶν FP°QZ: διαφόρῶν H 
θλίψεις Usener: θλίψεως Libr 7 ἀεὶ Bignone: καὶ libri: om. 
Usener ὑπὸ πνευμάτων Gassendi: ὑπομνήματος bri σῴφοδράς 


1. TO PYTHOCLES 73 


about by the actual spreading of the movement which 
results from the fall of many such masses of ground and 
the return shock, when the first motion comes into collision 

x06 with more densely packed bodies of earth. There are also 
many other ways in which these motions of the earth may 
be caused. 


» - - * * * 

The winds may be produced when from time to time (c) (?Volca- 
some alien matter is continually and gradually forcing its 2°» 
way in, or owing to the gathering of a vast quantity of 
water. The other winds arise when a few (currents of air) 
fall into many hollow spaces, and cause a spreading of 
wind. 

Hail is produced both by a powerful congelation, when (4) Hail. 
certain windy bodies form together from all sides and split 
up: also by a more moderate congelation of watery bodies 
and their simultaneous division, which causes at one and 
the same time their coagulation and separation, so that 
they cling together as they freeze in their separate parts 

107 as well as in their whole masses. Their circular shape 
may possibly arise because the corners melt off all round 
or because at their conformation bodies, whether watery 
or windy, come together evenly from all directions part by 
part, as is alleged. 

Snow may be produced when fine particles of rain are (e) Snow. 
poured out of the clouds owing to the existence of pores 
of suitable shape and the strong and constant compression 
by winds of clouds of the right kind ; and then the water is 
congealed in its descent owing to some conformation ot 
excessive coldness in the clouds in the lower regions. Or 
else owing to congelation in clouds of uniform thinness an 
exudation of this kind might arise from watery clouds lying 
side by side and rubbing against one another: for they 
produce hail by causing coagulation, a process most fre- 

108 quent in the atmosphere. Or else, owing to the friction of 


Usener: σπορᾶς ibn 9 κατωτέρω Cobet: κατώτερον BHPQ: 
κατωτάτοις ΕΖ 10 ὁμαλῆ BP!Q: ὁμαλὴν cett. ἔχουσιν Meibom: 
ἔχουσαν BP1QCo: ἔχουσα cett. τοιαύτη Z: τοιαύτην cett. 
11 post θλιβομένων (τῶν) inseruit Usener 13 ἀέρι] ἔαρι Usener 


14 11. ΠΡῸΣ NT@OCKAEA 


τρῖψιν δὲ νεφῶν πῆξιν εἰληφότων ἀπόπαλσιν ἂν λαμβάνοι 
τὸ τῆς χιόνος τοῦτο ἄθροισμα. καὶ κατ᾽ ἄλλους δὲ τρόπους 
ἐνδέχεται χιόνα συντελεῖσθαι. 

δ ΦΔρόσος συντελεῖται καὶ κατὰ σύνοδον πρὸς ἄλληλα ἐκ τοῦ 
ἀέρος τῶν τοιούτων, ἃ τῆς τοιαύτης ὑγρασίας ἀποτελεστικὰ 
γίνεται: καὶ κατὰ φορὰν δὲ ἢ ἀπὸ νοτερῶν τόπων ἢ ὕδατα 
κεκτημένων, ἐν οἵοις τόποις μάλιστα δρόσος συντελεῖται, 
εἶτα σύνοδον τούτων εἰς τὸ αὐτὸ λαβόντων καὶ ἀποτέλεσιν 

10 ὑγρασίας καὶ πάλιν φορὰν ἐπὶ τοὺς κάτω τόπους, καθάπερ 
ὁμοίως καὶ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν ἐπὶ πλεόνων τοιαῦτά τινα (θεωρεῖται. | 

109 καὶ πάχνη δὲ μεταβαλλομένων) συντελεῖται τῶν ὃδρόσων, 
τοιούτων τινῶν πῆξίν τινα λαβόντων διὰ περίστασίν τινα 
ἀέρος ψυχροῦ. 

Κρύσταλλος συντελεῖται καὶ κατ᾽ ἔκθλιψιν μὲν τοῦ περι- 

5 φεροῦς σχηματισμοῦ ἐκ τοῦ ὕδατος, σύνωσιν δὲ τῶν σκαληνῶν 
καὶ ὀξυγωνίων τῶν ἐν τῷ ὕδατι ὑπαρχόντων" καὶ κατὰ ἔξωθεν 
δὲ τῶν τοιούτων πρόσκρισιν, ἃ συνελαθέντα πῆξιν τῷ ὕδατι 
παρεσκεύασε, ποσὰ τῶν περιφερῶν ἐκθλίψαντα. 

Ἶρις γίνεται κατὰ πρόσλαμψιν ἀπὸ τοῦ ἡλίου πρὸς ἀέρα 

10 Haroewsh ἢ κατὰ πρόσκρισιν ἰδίαν τοῦ τε φωτὸς καὶ τοῦ 
ἀέρος, ἢ τὰ τῶν χρωμάτων τούτων ἰδιώματα ποιήσει εἴτε 
πάντα εἴτε μονοειδῶς" ἀφ᾽ οὗ πάλιν ἀπολάμποντος τὰ ὅμο- 
ροῦντα τοῦ ἀέρος χρῶσιν τοιαύτην λήψεται, οἵαν θεωροῦμεν, 

πο κατὰ πρόσλαμψιν πρὸς τὰ μέρη. | τὸ δὲ τῆς περιφερείας 
τοῦτο φάντασμα γίνεται διὰ τὸ τὸ διάστημα πάντοθεν ἴσον 
ὑπὸ τῆς ὄψεως θεωρεῖσθαι, ἣ σύνωσιν τοιαύτην λαμβανουσῶν 
τῶν ἐν τῷ ἀέρι ἀτόμων ἢ ἐν τοῖς νέφεσιν ἀπὸ τοῦ αὐτοῦ 

5 ἀέρος ἀποφερομένων περιφέρειάν τινα καθίεσθαι τὴν σύγκρισιν 
ταύτην. 


108 2 ἂν λαμβάνοι τὸ Schneider : ἀναλαμβάνοιτο BP!Q: ἀναλαμβάνοι 


τὸ cett. 7 κατὰ φορὰν] κατ' ἀναφορὰν Bignone κατὰ (ἀπονφορὰν 
Muehl! 8 οἵοις Usener. τοῖς bri: οἷς Meibom 9 post 
ἀποτέλεσιν Bignone παχυτέρας supplevit 11 post τοιαῦτά τινα 


lacunam suspicatus est Gassendi: (θεωρεῖται. καὶ πάχνη δὲ μεταβαλ- 
λομένων) supplevi, (συντελούμενα θεωρεῖται. καὶ πάχνη δὲ οὐ διαφερόν»- 


τως) Usener 109 2 τοιούτων τινῶν Usener: τούτων τινὰ Β 
τούτων cum litura P: τούτων cett. 6 κατὰ] κατὰ (τὴν) Schneider, 
fortasse recte 7 συνελαθέντα Gassendi: συνελασθέντα BHPQ: 
συντελεσθέντα F 9 ἀπὸ τοῦ Scripsi: ὑπὸ τοῦ BHPQ: τοῦ F 


10 κατὰ πρόσκρισιν scripsi: κατ᾽ (κατὰ H) ἀέρος φύσιν libri: κατὰ κρᾶσιν 


Il. TO PYTHOCLES 15 


congealed clouds, these nuclei of snow may find occasion 
to break off. And there are many other ways in which 
snow may be produced. 

Dew may be produced both when such particles as are (/) Dew and 
productive of this kind of moisture issue from the atmo- st 
sphere and meet one another, and also when particles rise 
from moist regions or regions containing water, in which 
dew is most naturally produced, and then meet together 
and cause moisture to be produced, and afterwards fall back 
on the ground below, as (is) frequently (seen) to be the case 

109 in phenomenaon earth aswell. (And frost is produced by 
a change) in the dew-particles, when such particles as we 
have described undergo a definite kind of congelation 
owing to the neighbourhood of a cold atmosphere. 

Ice is caused both by the squeezing out from the water (g) Ice. 
of particles of round formation and the driving together 
of the triangular and acute-angled particles which exist 
already in the water, and again by the addition from 
without of particles of this kind, which when driven 
together produce a congelation in the water, by squeezing 
out a certain number of the round particles. 

The rainbow is caused by light shining from the sun on (4) The 
to watery atmosphere: or else by a peculiar union of light "@"°w- 
and air, which can produce the special qualities of these 
colours whether all together or separately ; from it as it 
reflects back again the neighbouring regions of the air can 
take the tint which we see, by means of the shining of the 

uo —_ light on to its various parts, The appearance of its round Its shape 
shape is caused because it 1s perceived by our sight at 
equal distance from all its points, or else because the 
atoms in the air or those in the clouds which are derived 
from the same air, are pressed together in this manner, 
and so the combination spreads out in a round shape. 


Usener: κατὰ σύμφυσιν Bignone 13 τοιαύτην Usener: ταῦτα 
FZ: ταύτην cett. ΣΙΟ 1 τὸ Gassendi: τὰ libn 4 ἀτόμων 
Meibom: τομῶν libri αὐτοῦ ἀέρος] ἡλίου Usener δ post ἀέρος 
hibr προσφερομένου πρὸς τὴν σελήνην habent (e versu 8 4 post 
ἐποφερομένων libri ἀτόμων habent, sc. lectionem emendatam verbt 
τομῶν (v.4)  καθίεσθαι Meibom: καθεῖσθαι ibn 


Hr 


2 


113 


"6 ll. ΠΡῸΣ MYT@OKAEA 


“Adws περὶ τὴν σελήνην γίνεται καὶ πάντοθεν ἀέρος 
προσφερομένου πρὸς τὴν σελήνην ἢ τὰ ἀπ᾽ αὐτῆς ῥεύματα 
ἀποφερόμενα ὁμαλῶς ἀναστέλλοντος ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον ἐφ᾽ ὅσον 


10 κύκλῳ περιστῆσαι εἰς τὸ νεφοειδὲς τοῦτο καὶ μὴ τὸ παράπαν 


διακρῖναι, 7) καὶ τὸν πέριξ αὐτῆς ἀέρα ἀναστέλλοντος συμ- 
μέτρως πάντοθεν εἰς τὸ περιφερὲς τὸ περὶ αὐτὴν καὶ παχυμερὲς' 
περιστῆσαι. | ὃ γίνεται κατὰ μέρη τινὰ ἤτοι ἔξωθεν βιασαμένου 
τινὸς ῥεύματος 7) τῆς θερμασίας ἐπιτηδείως πόρων ἐπιλαμ- 
βανομένης els τὸ τοῦτο ἀπεργάσασθαι. 
Κομῆται ἀστέρες γίνονται ἤτοι πυρὸς ἐν τόποις τισὶ διὰ 
5 χρόνων τινῶν ἐν τοῖς μετεώροις συντρεφομένου περιστάσεως 
γινομένης, ἢ ἰδίαν τινὰ κίνησιν διὰ χρόνων τοῦ οὐρανοῦ 
ἴσχοντος ὑπὲρ ἡμᾶς, ὥστε τὰ τοιαῦτα ἄστρα ἀναφανῆναι ἣ 
αὐτὰ ἐν χρόνοις τισὶν ὁρμῆσαι διά τινα περίστασιν καὶ εἰς 
τοὺς καθ᾽’ ἡμᾶς τόπους ἐλθεῖν καὶ ἐκφανῆ γενέσθαι. τήν 


ἴοτε ἀφάνισιν τούτων γίνεσθαι παρὰ τὰς ἀντικειμένας ταύταις 


αἰτίας. | 
Twa ἄστρα στρέφεται αὐτοῦ ὃ συμβαίνει οὐ μόνον τῷ τὸ 
μέρος τοῦτο τοῦ κόαμου ἑστάναι, περὶ ὃ τὸ λοιπὸν στρέφεται, 
καθάπερ τινές φασιν, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῷ δίνην ἀέρος ἔγκυκλον 
αὐτῷ περιεστάναι, ἢ κωλυτικὴ γίνεται τοῦ περιπολεῖν ὡς 
5 καὶ τὰ ἄλλα: ἢ καὶ διὰ τὸ ἑξῆς μὲν αὐτοῖς ὕλην ἐπιτηδείαν 
9 2 4 nan 3 5» nn ‘ 
μὴ εἶναι, ἐν δὲ τούτῳ τῷ τόπῳ ἐν ᾧ κείμενα θεωρεῖται. | καὶ 
kar’ ἄλλους δὲ πλείονας τρόπους τοῦτο δυνατὸν συντελεῖσθαι, 
ἐάν τις δύνηται τὸ σύμφωνον τοῖς φαινομένοις συλλογίζεσθαι. 
Τινὰ τῶν ἄστρων πλανᾶσθαι, εἰ οὕτω ταῖς κινήσεσι χρώ- 
μενα συμβαίνει, | τινὰ δὲ μὴ (οὕτω) κινεῖσθαι ἐνδέχεται μὲν 
καὶ παρὰ τὸ κύκλῳ κινούμενα ἐξ ἀρχῆς οὕτω κατηναγκάσθαι, 
ὥστε τὰ μὲν κατὰ τὴν αὐτὴν δίνην φέρεσθαι ὁμαλὴν οὖσαν, 
τὰ δὲ κατὰ τὴν ἅμα τισὶν ἀνωμαλίέαις χρωμένην" ἐνδέχεται 
7 καὶ Usener: καὶ κατὰ libri 9 ἀναστέλλοντος Meibom: ἀνα- 
στέλλοντα libri Io περιστῆσαι εἰς Usener: περὶ τῆς εἰς libri: 
περιστήσῃ Meibom 11 διακρῖναι Usener: διακρίνη libri αὐτῆς 
ἀέρα B: ἀέρα αὐτῆς cett. III 2 ἐπιτηδείως scripsi : ἐπιτη- 
δείων libri 7 ἢ αὐτὰ. I αἰτίας tanquami si repetantur pnora 
seclusit Usener 112 1 ἄστρα στρέφεται scripsi: ἀναστρέφεται 
libri: ἄστρα στρέφεσθαι Usener δ). om, Usener 2 τὸ λοιπὸν} 
τὰ λοιπὰ Schneider 4 αὐτῷ] αὐτοῖς Gassendi 10 συμβαίνει 


FP*(? H’) : συμβαίνειν cett. 113 1 (odrw) adieci: δ᾽ ὁμαλῶς Usener 
pro δὲ μὴ : κινεῖσθαι seclusit Bignone 3 ὁμαλὴν} ὁμαλὴ Usener 


Il. TO PYTHOCLES 1 


A halo round the moon is caused either when air is () The 
carried towards the moon from all sides, or when the air ™0on’s halo. 
checks the effluences carried from the moon so equably 
that it forms them into this cloudy ring all round without 
any gaps or differences, or else when it checks the air 
round the moon uniformly on all sides so as to make that 

ut which encircles it round and thick in texture. This 
comes to pass in different parts either because some current 
outside forces the air or because heat blocks the passages 
in such a way as to produce this effect. 

Comets occur either when fire is collected together in y, Fyrqher 
certain regions at certain intervals of time in the upper air ¢lstal 

: phenomena 
because some gathering of matter takes place, or when at (a) Comets 
certain intervals the heaven above us has some peculiar 
movement, so that stars of this nature are revealed, or 
when they themselves at certain seasons start to move on 
account of some gathering of matter and come into the 
regions within our ken and appear visible. And their 
disappearance occurs owing to the opposite causes to these. 
uz Some stars ‘revolve in their place’ (as Homer says), which (4) Fixed 
comes to pass not only because this part of the world is Stars. 
stationary and round it the rest revolves, as some say, but 
also because a whirl of air is formed in a ring round it, 
which prevents their moving about as do the other stars: 
or else it is because there 1s not a succession of appropriate 
fuel for them, but only in this place in which they are seen 
fixed. And there are many other ways in which this may 
be brought about, if one is able to infer what is in agree- 
ment with phenomena. 
That some of the stars should wander in their course, if (ὦ Planets 
3. indeed it is the case that their movements are such, while a 
others do not move in this manner, may be due to the 
reason that from the first as they moved in their circles 
they were so constrained by necessity that some of them 
move along the same regular orbit, and others along one 
which is associated with certain irregularities: or it may 


4 κατὰ τὴν ἅμα τισὶν] κατά τινα δίνησιν Usener: κατά τιν᾽ ἄλλην τισὶν 
Bignone 


78 Il. ΠΡῸΣ MY@OKAEA 


5 δὲ καὶ καθ᾽ obs τόπους φέρεται οὗ μὲν παρεκτάσεις ἀέρος 
εἶναι ὁμαλὰς ἐπὶ τὸ αὐτὸ συνωθούσας κατὰ τὸ ἑξῆς ὁμαλῶς 
τε ἐκκαούσας, οὗ δὲ ἀνωμαλεῖς ὥστε τὰς θεωρουμένας παραλ- 
λαγὰς συντελεῖσθαι. τὸ δὲ μίαν αἰτίαν τούτων ἀποδιδόναι, 
πλεοναχῶς τῶν φαινομένων ἐκκαλουμένων, μανικὸν καὶ οὐ 

το καθηκόντως πραττόμενον ὑπὸ τῶν τὴν ματαίαν ἀστρολογίαν 
ἐζηλωκότων καὶ εἰς τὸ κενὸν αἰτίας τινῶν ἀποδιδόντων, ὅταν 
τὴν θείαν φύσιν μηθαμῇ λειτουργιῶν ἀπολύωσι. | 

114. Twa ἄστρα ὑπολειπόμενα τινῶν θεωρεῖσθαι συμβαίνει 
καὶ παρὰ τὸ βραδύτερον συμπεριφέρεσθαι τὸν αὐτὸν κύκλον 
περιιόντα, καὶ παρὰ τὸ τὴν ἐναντίαν κινεῖσθαι ἀντισπώμενα 
ὑπὸ τῆς αὐτῆς δίνης" καὶ παρὰ τὸ περιφέρεσθαι τὰ μὲν διὰ 

5 πλείονος τόπου, τὰ δὲ δι᾽ ἐλάττονος, τὴν αὐτὴν δίνην περι- 
κυκλοῦντα. τὸ δὲ ἁπλῶς ἀποφαίνεσθαι περὶ τούτων καθῆκόν 
ἐστι τοῖς τερατεύεσθαί τι πρὸς τοὺς πολλοὺς βουλομένοις. 

Οἱ λεγόμενοι ἀστέρες ἐκπίπτειν καὶ παρὰ μέρος κατὰ 
παράτριψιν ἑαυτῶν δύνανται συντελεῖσθαι καὶ παρὰ ἔκπτωσιν 

10 οὗ ἂν ἡ ἐκπνευμάτωσις γένηται, καθάπερ καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν ἀστραπῶν 

16 ἐλέγομεν" | καὶ κατὰ σύνοδον δὲ ἀτόμων πυρὸς ἀποτελεστικῶν, 
συμφυλίας γενομένης εἰς τὸ τοῦτο τελέσαι, καὶ κίνησιν οὗ 
ἂν ἡ ὁρμὴ ἐξ ἀρχῆς κατὰ τὴν σύνοδον γένηται: καὶ κατὰ 
πνεύματος δὲ συλλογὴν ἐν πυκνώμασί τισιν ὁμιχλοειδέσι 

δ καὶ ἐκπύρωσιν τούτου διὰ τὴν κατείλησιν, εἶτ᾽ ἐπέκρηξιν 

», τῶν περιέχοντων, καὶ ἐφ᾽ ὃν ἂν τόπον ἡ ὁρμὴ γένηται 
τῆς φορᾶς, εἰς τοῦτον φερομένους, καὶ ἄλλοι δὲ τρόποι εἰς 
τὸ τοῦτο τελέσαι ἀμύθητοί εἶσιν. 

Αἱ δ᾽ ἐπισημασίαι αἱ γινόμεναι ἐπί τισι ζῴοις κατὰ συγκύ- 
ro pnua γίνονται τοῦ καιροῦ. οὐ γὰρ τὰ ζῷα ἀνάγκην τινὰ 


5 οὗ μὲν Β: οὐ μὲν ῬΊΟΗΞ: οὐ ΕΗ ΡΕΖ 6 ὁμαλὰς FHPPRZ: 
ὁμαλεῖς ΒΡΟ 7 οὗ δὲ BF : οὐδὲ cett. ἀνωμαλεῖς ΕΡΟ : ἀνομα- 
λεῖς Β: ἀνωμαλῶς Ἡ 11 τινῶν] ἄστρων Usener: πάντων Bignone 
114 3 περιιόντα Froben: περιόντα libri 4 τῆς αὐτῆς] τοιαύτης 
Usener 8 κατὰ παράτριψιν Usener: καὶ παρὰ τρίψιν hbri 
9. ἑαυτῶν] νεφῶν Usener: ἄστρων Bignone, fortasse recte παρὰ 
πυρὸς Usener 10 ἀστραπῶν) ἀστέρων F} 115 2 συμφυλίας ΗΡΟ. 
συμφιλίας ἘΉῊ3Ζ : σ(υμ)φιλίας Β καὶ Usener: καὶ κατὰ libri 
οὗ] οἷ comecit Usener 4.πνεύματος] πνευμάτων... τούτων (5)... 
φερουμένων (7) Muehl} 5 καὶ Usener: κατὰ libri τούτον 

sener : τούτων libri ἐπέκρηξιν FHP: én’ ἔκριξιν Β : ἐπεκρῆψιν 
Q: ἔκρηξιν coni. Usener: ἔκρηξιν (ex) Muehll ‘7 φερομένου 


Π. TO PYTHOCLES 19 


be that among the regions to which they are carried in 
some places there are regular tracts of air which urge them 
on successively in the same direction and provide flame 
for them regularly, while in other places the tracts are 
irregular, so that the aberrations which we observe result. 
But to assign a single cause for these occurrences, when 
phenomena demand several explanations, is madness, and 
is quite wrongly practised by persons who are partisans of 
the foolish notions of astrology, by which they give futile 
explanations of the causes of certain occurrences, and all 
the time do not by any means free the divine nature from 
the burden of responsibilities. 

114 That some stars should be seen to be left behind by (4) Difference 
others is caused because though they move round in the o1speed™ 
same orbit they are carried along more slowly, and also Stars. 
because they really move in the opposite direction though 
they are dragged back by the same revolution: also 
because some are carried round through a greater space 
and some through a lesser, though all perform the same 
revolution, But to give a single explanation of these 
occurrences is only suitable to those who wish to make 
a show to the many. 

What are called falling stars may be produced in part (¢) Fallmg 
by the rubbing of star against star, and by the falling out “δ 
of the fragments wherever an outburst of wind occurs, as 

m5 we explained in the case of lightning-flashes: or else by 
the meeting of atoms productive of fire, when a gathering 
of kindred material occurs to cause this, and a movement 
in the direction of the impulse which results from the 
original meeting; or else by a gathering of wind in certain 
dense and misty formations, and its ignition as it whirls 
round, and then its bursting out of what encloses it and 
its rush towards the spot to which the impulse of its flight 
tends, And there are other ways in which this result may 
be brought about, quite free from superstition. 

The signs of the weather which are given by certain (4) Weather- 
animals result from mere coincidence of occasion. For cio i 
the animals do not exert any compulsion for winter to 


a 


Usener: φερομένης libri 8 ἀμύθητοί] ἀνύσιμοί Usener: ἄμυθοι 
Lortzing 


m6 


8a II, ΠΡῸΣ NYOOKAEA 


προσφέρεται τοῦ ἀποτελεσθῆναι χειμῶνα, οὐδὲ κάἀθηταί ris 
θεία φύσις παρατηροῦσα τὰς τῶν ζῴων τούτων ἐξόδους 
κἄπειτα τὰς ἐπισημασίας ταύτας ἐπιτελεῖ. οὐδὲ γὰρ (dy) 
els τὸ τυχὸν ζῷον κἂν (el) μικρὸν χαριέστερον εἴη, τοιαύτη 
μωρία ἐμπέσοι, μὴ ὅτι els παντελῆ εὐδαιμονίαν κεκτημένον. 
Ταῦτα δὴ πάντα, Πυθόκλεις, μνημόνευσον' κατὰ πολύ τε 
s yap τοῦ μύθου ἐκβήσῃ καὶ τὰ ὁμογενῆ τούτοις συνορᾶν 
δυνήσῃ. μάλιστα δὲ σεαυτὸν ἀπόδος εἰς τὴν τῶν ἀρχῶν 
καὶ ἀπειρίας καὶ τῶν συγγενῶν τούτοις θεωρίαν, ἔτι δὲ 
κριτηρίων καὶ παθῶν, καὶ οὗ ἕνεκεν ταῦτα ἐκλογιζόμεθα. 
ταῦτα γὰρ μάλιστα συνθεωρούμενα ῥᾳδίως τὰς περὶ τῶν 
το κατὰ μέρος αἰτίας συνορᾶν ποιήσει. of δὲ ταῦτα μὴ κατα- 
γαπήσαντες ἦ μάλιστα οὔτ᾽ (ἂν) αὐτὰ ταῦτα καλῶς συνθεω- 
ρήσαιεν οὔτε οὗ ἕνεκεν δεῖ θεωρεῖν ταῦτα περιεποιήσαντο. 


116 1 (ἂν) supplevit Cobet 2 (el) adiecit Usener μικρὸν 
F : μικρῷ cett. 3 ἐμπέσοι Usener: ἐκπέση libri: ἐκπέσοι Cobet 
6 ἀπόδος εἰς BP*QCo: ἀποδώσεις ῬΠΕΖ 9 ῥᾳδίως BF: ῥαδίας 
ure 11 ἢ Kuhn: ἢ ibn οὔτ᾽ (ἂν) Usener: οὔτε BHPQ: 


116 


Il. TO PYTHOCLES 81 


come to an end, nor is there some divine nature which sits 
and watches the outgoings of these animals and then 
fulfils the signs they give. For not even the lowest animal, 
although ‘a small thing gives the greater pleasure’, would 
be seized by such foolishness, much less one who was 
possessed of perfect happiness. 


All these things, Pythocles, you must bear in mind; for Conclusion 


thus you will escape in most things from superstition and 
will be enabled to understand what is akin to them. And 
most of all give yourself up to the study of the beginnings 
and of infinity and of the things akin to them, and also of 
the criteria of truth and of the feelings, and of the purpose 
for which we reason out these things. For these points 
when they are thoroughly studied will most easily enable 
you to understand the causes of the details. But those 
who have not thoroughly taken these things to heart could 
not rightly study them in themselves, nor have they made 
their own the reason for observing them. 


3373 F 


ΠῚ 
ἘΠΙΚΟΥ͂ΡΟΣ MENOIKE!I XAIPEIN 


122 Μήτε νέος tis ὧν μελλέτω φιλοσοφεῖν, μήτε γέρων 
ὑπάρχων κοπιάτω φιλοσοφῶν. οὔτε γὰρ ἄωρος οὐδείς ἐστιν 
οὔτε πάρωρος πρὸς τὸ κατὰ ψυχὴν ὑγιαῖνον. 6 δὲ λέγων 
ἢ μήπω τοῦ φιλοσοφεῖν ὑπάρχειν ἢ παρεληλυθέναι τὴν ὥραν 

ὅμοιός ἐστι τῷ λέγοντι πρὸς εὐδαιμονίαν ἢ μήπω παρεῖναι 
τὴν ὥραν ἣ μηκέτ᾽ εἶναι. ὥστε φιλοσοφητέον καὶ νέῳ καὶ 
γέροντι, τῷ μὲν ὅπως γηράσκων νεάζῃ τοῖς ἀγαθοῖς διὰ τὴν 
xdpw τῶν γεγονότων, τῷ δὲ ὅπως νέος ἅμα καὶ παλαιὸς 
ἢ διὰ τὴν ἀφοβίαν τῶν μελλόντων. μελετᾶν οὖν χρὴ τὰ 

190 ποιοῦντα τὴν εὐδαιμονίαν, εἴ περ παρούσης μὲν αὐτῆς πάντα 
ἔχομεν, ἀπούσης δὲ πάντα πράττομεν εἰς τὸ ταύτην ἔχειν. | 

123 “A δέ σοι συνεχῶς παρήγγελλον, ταῦτα καὶ πρᾶττε καὶ 
μελέτα, στοιχεῖα τοῦ καλῶς ζῆν ταῦτ᾽ εἶναι διαλαμβάνων. 
πρῶτον μὲν τὸν θεὸν ζῷον ἄφθαρτον καὶ μακάριον νομίζων, 
ὡς ἡ κοινὴ τοῦ θεοῦ νόησις ὑπεγράφη, μηθὲν μήτε τῆς 

8 ἀφθαρσίας ἀλλότριον μήτε τῆς μακαριότητος ἀνοίκειον αὐτῷ 
προσάπτε' πᾶν δὲ τὸ φυλάττειν αὐτοῦ δυνάμενον τὴν μετὰ 
ἀφθαρσίας μακαριότητα περὶ αὐτὸν δόξαζε. θεοὶ μὲν γὰρ 
εἰσίν: ἐναργὴς γὰρ αὐτῶν ἐστιν ἡ γνῶσις. οἵους δ᾽ αὐτοὺς 
(ot) πολλοὶ νομίζουσιν, οὐκ εἰσίν' οὐ γὰρ φυλάττουσιν 

το αὐτοὺς οἵους νομίζουσιν. ἀσεβὴς δὲ οὐχ ὁ τοὺς τῶν πολλῶν 
θεοὺς ἀναιρῶν, ἀλλ’ ὁ τὰς τῶν πολλῶν δόξας θεοῖς προσά.- 


122 3 ὑγιαῖνον libr, plerique: ὑγιαίνων B: ὑγιαίνειν cit. Clemens 
4 ἢ ante μήπω] εἰ B: om.Q post ὑπάρχειν habent ὥραν libri: om. 
Usener > (τὴν) ὥραν Cobet 5 μήπω Clemens: μὴ libri 6 μηκέτ᾽ 
Clemens: μηκέτι libri (μὴ F) 8. χάριν] χαρὰν Ritter 128 8 γὰρ] 
μὲν γὰρ ΒΖ 9 (of) supplevit Gassend: νομίζουσιν] νοοῦσιν 
Usener 


ΠῚ 
EPICURUS TO MENOECEUS 


122 Let no one when young delay to study philosophy, nor Introduction. 
when he is old grow weary of his study. For no one can Pees 


come too early or too late to secure the health of his soul. study pmnlo- 

And the man who says that the age for philosophy has *°PY: 

either not yet come or has gone by is like the man who 

says that the age for happiness is not yet come to him, or 

has passed away. Wherefore both when young and old 

a man must study philosophy, that as he grows old he 

may be young in blessings through the grateful recollection 

of what has been, and that in youth he may be old as well, 

since he will know no fear of what is to come. We must 

then meditate on the things that make our happiness, 

seeing that when that is with us we have all, but when it is 

absent we do all to win it. 
123 The things which I used unceasingly to commend to First pnna- 

you, these do and practice, considering them to be 2 A are 
first principles of the good life. First of all believe that of the gods 
god 1s a being immortal and blessed, even as the common ee 
idea of a god 1s engraved on men’s minds, and do not mortaliand 
assign to him anything alien to his immortality or ill-suited Dlesse4, 
to his blessedness : but believe about him everything that 
can uphold his blessedness and immortality. For gods 
there are, since the knowledge of them is by clear vision. 
But they are not such as the many believe them to be: for but ther 
indeed they do not consistently represent them as they Patir= "not 
believe them to be. And the impious man is not he who popularly 
denies the gods of the many, but he who attaches to the Posed. 

F 2 


84 III], ΠΡῸΣ MENOIKEA 


144 πτων. | οὐ yap προλήψεις εἰσὶν ἀλλ᾽ ὑπολήψεις ψευδεῖς 
αἱ τῶν πολλῶν ὑπὲρ θεῶν ἀποφάσεις, ἔνθεν αἱ μέγισται 
βλάβαι τε τοῖς κακοῖς ἐκ θεῶν ἐπάγονται καὶ ὠφέλειαι (τοῖς 
ἀγαθοῖς). ταῖς γὰρ ἰδίαις οἰκειούμενοι διὰ παντὸς ἀρεταῖς 

5 τοὺς ὁμοίους ἀποδέχονται, πᾶν τὸ μὴ τοιοῦτον ὡς ἀλλότριον 
νομίζοντες. 

Συνέθιζε δὲ ἐν τῷ νομέζειν μηδὲν πρὸς ἡμᾶς εἶναι τὸν 
θάνατον: ἐπεὶ πᾶν ἀγαθὸν καὶ κακὸν ἐν αἰσθήσει: στέρησις 
δέ ἐστιν αἰσθήσεως ὁ θάνατος. ὅθεν γνῶσις ὀρθὴ τοῦ μηθὲν 

10 εἶναι πρὸς ἡμᾶς τὸν θάνατον ἀπολαυστὸν ποιεῖ τὸ τῆς ζωῆς 
θνητόν, οὐκ ἄπειρον προστιθεῖσα χρόνον, ἀλλὰ τὸν τῆς 

1258 ἀθανασίας ἀφελομένη πόθον. οὐθὲν γάρ ἐστιν ἐν τῷ Giv 
δεινὸν τῷ κατειληφότι γνησίως τὸ μηθὲν ὑπάρχειν ἐν τῷ 
μὴ Cay δεινόν. ὥστε μάταιος ὁ λέγων δεδιέναι τὸν θάνατον 
οὐχ ὅτι λυπήσει παρών, ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι λυπεῖ μέλλων. ὃ γὰρ 

5 παρὸν οὐκ ἐνοχλεῖ, προσδοκώμενον κενῶς λυπεῖ. τὸ φρικω- 
δέστατον οὖν τῶν κακῶν ὁ θάνατος οὐθὲν πρὸς ἡμᾶς, ἐπειδήπερ 
ὅταν μὲν ἡμεῖς ὦμεν, ὁ θάνατος οὐ πάρεστιν: ὅταν δ᾽ ὁ 
θάνατος παρῇ, τόθ᾽ ἡμεῖς οὐκ ἐσμέν. οὔτε οὖν πρὸς τοὺς 
ζῶντάς ἐστιν οὔτε πρὸς τοὺς τετελευτηκότας, ἐπειδήπερ περὶ 

το οὺς μὲν οὐκ ἔστιν, οἱ δ᾽ οὐκέτ᾽ εἰσίν. 

᾿Αλλ᾽ οἱ πολλοὶ τὸν θάνατον ὅτε μὲν ὡς μέγιστον τῶν 
κακῶν φεύγουσιν, ὅτε δὲ ὡς ἀνάπαυσιν τῶν ἐν τῷ ζῆν (κακῶν 

126 ποθοῦσιν. Ϊ ὁ δὲ σοφὸς οὔτε παραιτεῖται τὸ ζῆν) οὔτε φοβεῖται 
τὸ μὴ Civ: οὔτε γὰρ αὐτῷ προσίσταται τὸ ζῆν οὔτε δοξάζεται 
κακὸν εἶναί re τὸ μὴ ζῆν. ὥσπερ δὲ σιτίον od τὸ πλεῖον 
πάντως ἀλλὰ τὸ ἥδιστον αἱρεῖται, οὕτω καὶ χρόνον οὐ τὸν 

μήκιστον ἀλλὰ τὸν ἥδιστον καρπίζεται. 

Ὃ δὲ παραγγέλλων τὸν μὲν νέον καλῶς ζῆν, τὸν δὲ 
γέροντα καλῶς καταστρέφειν εὐήθης ἐστὶν οὐ μόνον διὰ τὸ 
τῆς ζωῆς ἀσπαστόν, ἀλλὰ καὶ διὰ τὸ τὴν αὐτὴν εἶναι μελέτην 

124 3 βλάβαι τε Usener: βλάβαι αἴτιαι libri: fortasse βλάβαι τοῖς 
αἰτίοις {τοῖς ἀγαθοῖς) supplevit Gassendi 6 νομίζοντες] ut fal- 
sum suspicatus est Usener . ἀποδοκιμάζοντες Kochalsky 11 ἄπειρον 
Aldobrandinus . ἄπορον libri post ἀλλὰ τὸν (ἄπορον) supplevit 
Bignone 125 5 παρὸν HP*Q: παρὼν BFP'Z 10 οὐκέτ᾽ 
Usener in commentario : οὐκέτι libri 12 τῷ] τῷ ex τὸ Correctum 

(κακῶν... τὸ ζῆν) supplevit Usener (excepto quod ποθοῦσιν 


scripsit Casaubon, αἱροῦνται Usener) 126 2 δοξάζεται] δοξάζει 
Richards δὲ Usener: δὲ τὸ libri 4 ἤδιστον] ἥδιον Usener 


124 


1215 


126 


Ill. TO MENOECEUS 88 


gods the beliefs of the many. For the statements of the 
many about the gods are not conceptions derived from 
sensation, but false suppositions, according to which the 
greatest misfortunes befall the wicked and the greatest 
blessings (the good) by the gift of the gods, For men being 
accustomed always to their own virtues welcome those like 
themselves, but regard all that is not of their nature as 
alien. 

Become accustomed to the belief that death is nothing 2. ti 
tous. For all good and evil consists in sensation, but death cotting ἰ ta: 
is deprivation of sensation. And therefore a right under- τρις makes 
standing that death is nothing to us makes the mortality hfe pleasant 
of life enjoyable, not because it adds to it an infinite span pigs ne 
of time, but because it takes away the craving for immor- 
tality. For there is nothing terrible in life for the man 
who has truly comprehended that there is nothing terrible 
in not living. So that the man speaks but idly who says Nor is its 
that he fears death not because it will be painful when it suena 
comes, but because it is painful in anticipation. For that ᾿ 
which gives no trouhle when it comes, 15 but an empty 
pain in anticipation. So death, the most terrifying of ills, 
is nothing to us, since so long as we exist, death is not with 
us; but when death comes, then we do not exist. It it 1s nothing 
does not then concern either the living or the dead, ae τὴ 
since for the former it is not, and the latter are no 
more. 

But the many at one moment shun death as the greatest 
of evils, at another (yearn for it) as a respite from the 
(evils) in life. (But the wise man neither seeks to escape We should 
life) nor fears the cessation of life, for neither does life ΤΕ ὐπὸ δῆς 
offend him nor does the absence of life seem to be any |. Joie , 
evil, And just as with food he does not seek simply the pleasant life, 
larger share and nothing else, but rather the most pleasant, "°t 4 long 
so he seeks to enjoy not the longest period of time, but the 
most pleasant. 

And he who counsels the young man to live well, but To hve well 
the old man to make a good end, is foolish, not merely 2 {0 7sa"™ το 
because of the desirability of life, but also because it is the 


86 ΠῚ. ΠΡῸΣ MENOIKEA 


τοῦ καλῶς ζῆν καὶ τοῦ καλῶς ἀποθνήσκειν, πολὺ δὲ χείρων 
το καὶ ὁ λέγων καλὸν μὲν μὴ φῦναι, 
φύντα δ᾽ ὅπως ὥκιστα πύλας ᾿Αίδαο περῆσαι. | 
17 Εἰ μὲν γὰρ πεποιθὼς τοῦτό φησι, πῶς οὐκ ἀπέρχεται ἐκ 
τοῦ Cav; ἐν ἑτοίμῳ γὰρ αὐτῷ τοῦτ᾽ ἐστίν, εἴ περ ἦν 
βεβουλευμένον αὐτῷ βεβαίως" εἰ δὲ μωκώμενος, μάταιος 
ἐν τοῖς οὐκ ἐπιδεχομένοις. 

5 Μνημονευτέον δὲ ὡς τὸ μέλλον οὔτε ἡμέτερον οὔτε πάντως 
οὐχ ἡμέτερον, ἵνα μήτε πάντως προσμένωμεν ὡς ἐσόμενον 
μήτε ἀπελπίζωμεν ὡς πάντως οὐκ ἐσόμενον. 

*Avadoytoréoy δὲ ὡς τῶν ἐπιθυμιῶν at μέν εἶσι φυσικαί, 
at δὲ κεναί, καὶ τῶν φυσικῶν at μὲν ἀναγκαῖαι, αἱ δὲ φυσικαὶ 
ιομόνον: τῶν δ᾽ ἀναγκαίων αἱ μὲν πρὸς εὐδαιμονίαν εἰσὶν 
ἀναγκαῖαι, al δὲ πρὸς τὴν τοῦ σώματος ἀοχλησίαν, αἱ δὲ 
128 πρὸς αὐτὸ τὸ ζῆν. [τούτων γὰρ ἀπλανὴς θεωρία πᾶσαν 
αἵρεσιν καὶ φυγὴν ἐπανάγειν οἷδεν ἐπὶ τὴν τοῦ σώματος 
ὑγίειαν καὶ τὴν (τῆς ψυχῆς) ἀταραξίαν, ἐπεὶ τοῦτο τοῦ 
μακαρίως ζὴν ἐστι τέλος. τούτου γὰρ χάριν πάντα πράττομεν, 
5ὕπως μήτε ἀλγῶμεν μήτε ταρβῶμεν. ὅταν δὲ ἅπαξ τοῦτο 
περὶ ἡμᾶς γένηται, λύεται πᾶς 6 τῆς ψυχῆς χειμών, οὐκ 
ἔχοντος τοῦ ζῴου βαδίζειν ὡς πρὸς ἐνδέον τι καὶ ζητεῖν 
ἕτερον ᾧ τὸ τῆς ψυχῆς καὶ τὸ τοῦ σώματος ἀγαθὸν συμ- 
πληρώσεται. τότε γὰρ ἡδονῆς χρείαν ἔχομεν, ὅταν ἐκ τοῦ͵ 
ιο μὴ παρεῖναι τὴν ἡδονὴν ἀλγῶμεν- (ὅταν δὲ μὴ ἀλγῶμεν), 
οὐκέτι τῆς ἡδονῆς δεόμεθα. καὶ διὰ τοῦτο τὴν ἡδονὴν ἀρχὴν 
1290 καὶ τέλος λέγομεν εἶναι τοῦ μακαρίως ζῆν. | ταύτην yap 
ἀγαθὸν πρῶτον καὶ συγγενικὸν ἔγνωμεν, καὶ ἀπὸ ταύτης 
καταρχόμεθα πάσης αἱρέσεως καὶ φυγῆς καὶ ἐπὶ ταύτην 
καταντῶμεν ὡς κανόνι τῷ πάθει πᾶν ἀγαθὸν κρίνοντες. 

5 Καὶ ἐπεὶ πρῶτον ἀγαθὸν τοῦτο καὶ σύμφυτον, διὰ τοῦτο 

καὶ οὐ πᾶσαν ἡδονὴν αἱρούμεθα, ἀλλ᾽ ἔστιν ὅτε πολλὰς 
9 χείρων hibr. plerique: χεῖρον B'HZ 1297 1 ἐκ τοῦ] τοῦ Usener 


cos 


5 οὔτε ἡμέτερον P? in margine: om. libri: οὔτε πάντως ἡμέτερον 
epitome Vaticana 128 2 ἐπανάγειν BP?Q: ἐπαναγαγεῖν libr. cett. 
3 (τῆς yuxis) supplevit B?:; om. B!: τοῦ σώματος FHPQZCo 
4 πάντα BHP?!: ἅπαντα FP®QZ 8 τὸ δῃΐε τοῦ] om. BF συμπλη- 
ρώσεται ep. Vat, Usener: συμπληρώσ(η)ται cum litura B?: συμπλη- 
ρώσηται HP'QOCo: συμπληρωθήσεται FZ 10 (ὅταν δὲ μὴ eee) 
supplevit Gassendi: μηδὲν pro μὴ Usener: μηκέτι coniecit Muehi 
129 6 καὶ οὐ BP®Z: καὶ FP1QCo 


197 


128 


129 


Ill. TO MENOECEUS 87 


same training which teaches to live well and to die well. 
Yet much worse still is the man who says it is good not to It 1s foolish 
be born, but eye 

‘once born make haste to pass the gates of Death’. at once 
For if he says this from conviction why does he not pass 
away out of life? For it is open to him to do so, 1f he 
had firmly made up his mind to this. But if he speaks in 
jest, his words are idle among men who cannot receive 
them. 

We must then bear in mind that the future is neither The future 1s 
ours, nor yet wholly not ours, so that we may not altogether ee 
expect it as sure to come, nor abandon hope of it, as if it 
will certainly not come. 

We must consider that of desires some are natural, The moat 
others vain, and of the natural some are necessary and Sg τς of 
others merely natural; and of the necessary some are desires. 
necessary for happiness, others for the repose of the body, 
and others for very life. The right understanding of these 
facts enables us to refer all choice and avoidance to the 
health of the body and (the soul’s) freedom from disturb- Health of 
ance, since this is the aim of the life of blessedness. For anlage, 
it is to obtain this end that we always act, namely, to avoid sou! the 
pain and fear. And when this is once secured for us, all aly of 
the tempest of the soul is dispersed, since the living 
creature has not to wander as though in search of some- 
thing that is missing, and to look for some other thing by 
which he can fulfil the good of the soul and the good of 
the body. For it is then that we have need of pleasure, 
when we feel pain owing to the absence of pleasure; (but 
when we do not fee] pain), we no longer need pleasure. 

And for this cause we call pleasure the beginning and end Hence 

of the blessed life. For we recognize pleasure as the first Pleasure the 
ΐ standard of 

good innate in us, and from pleasure we begin every act the good. 

of choice and avoidance, and to pleasure we return again, 

using the feeling as the standard by which we Judge every 

good. 

And since pleasure is the first good and natural to us, 2. Pleasure 
for this very reason we do not choose every pleasure, but Se ΤΗΣ 
sometimes we pass over many pleasures, when greater but not all 


130 


13: 


132 


88 Ill. ΠΡῸΣ MENOIKEA 


ἡδονὰς ὑπερβαίνομεν, ὅταν πλεῖον ἡμῖν τὸ δυσχερὲς ἐκ τούτων 
ἕπηται" καὶ πολλὰς ἀλγηδόνας ἡδονῶν κρείττους νομίζομεν, 
ἐπειδὰν μείζων ἡμῖν ἡδονὴ παρακολουθῇ πολὺν χρόνον ὑπο- 


10 μείνασι τὰς ἀλγηδόνας. πᾶσα οὖν ἡδονὴ διὰ τὸ φύσιν 


ἔχειν οἰκείαν ἀγαθόν, οὐ πᾶσα μέντοι αἱρετή: καθάπερ καὶ 
ἀλγηδὼν πᾶσα κακόν, οὐ πᾶσα δὲ ἀεὶ φευκτὴ πεφυκυῖα. | 
τῇ μέντοι συμμετρήσει καὶ συμφερόντων καὶ ἀσυμφόρων 
βλέψει ταῦτα πάντα κρίνειν καθήκει. χρώμεθα γὰρ τῷ μὲν 
ἀγαθῷ κατά τινας χρόνους ὡς κακῷ, τῷ δὲ κακῷ τοὔμπαλιν 
ὡς ἀγαθῷ. 

Καὶ τὴν αὐτάρκειαν δὲ ἀγαθὸν μέγα νομίζομεν, οὐχ ἵνα 
πάντως τοῖς ὀλίγοις χρώμεθα, ἀλλ᾽ ὅπως ἐὰν μὴ ἔχωμεν 
τὰ πολλά, τοῖς ὀλίγοις χρώμεθα, πεπεισμένοι γνησίως ὅτι 
ἥδιστα πολυτελείας ἀπολαύουσιν οἱ ἥκιστα ταύτης δεόμενοι, 
καὶ ὅτι τὸ μὲν φυσικὸν πᾶν εὐπόριστόν ἐστι, τὸ δὲ κενὸν 
δνυσπόριστον. οἵ τε λιτοὶ χυλοὶ ἴσην πολυτελεῖ διαίτῃ τὴν 
ἡδονὴν ἐπιφέρουσιν, ὅταν ἅπαν τὸ ἀλγοῦν κατ᾽ ἔνδειαν 
ἐξαιρεθῇ" | καὶ μᾶζα καὶ ὕδωρ τὴν ἀκροτάτην ἀποδίδωσιν 
ἡδονήν, ἐπειδὰν ἐνδέων τις αὐτὰ προσενέγκηται. τὸ συνεθίζειν 
οὖν ἐν ταῖς ἁπλαῖς καὶ οὐ πολυτελέσι διαίταις καὶ ὑγιείας 
ἐστὶ συμπληρωτικὸν καὶ πρὸς τὰς ἀναγκαίας τοῦ βίου χρήσεις 


5 ἄοκνον ποιεῖ τὸν ἄνθρωπον καὶ τοῖς πολυτελέσιν ἐκ διαλειμ- 


μάτων προσερχομένους κρεῖττον ἡμᾶς διατίθησι καὶ πρὸς τὴν 
τύχην ἀφόβους παρασκευάζει, 

Ὅταν οὖν λέγωμεν ἡδονὴν τέλος ὑπάρχειν, οὐ τὰς τῶν 
ἀσώτων ἡδονὰς καὶ τὰς ἐν ἀπολαύσει κειμένας λέγομεν, ὥς 


to τινες ἀγνοοῦντες καὶ οὐχ ὁμολογοῦντες 7 κακῶς ἐκδεχόμενοι 


νομίζουσιν, ἀλλὰ τὸ μήτε ἀλγεῖν κατὰ σῶμα μήτε ταράττεσθαι 
κατὰ ψυχήν" | οὐ γὰρ πότοι καὶ κῶμοι συνείροντες οὐδ᾽ ἀπο- 
λαύσεις παίδων καὶ γυναικῶν οὐδ᾽ ἰχθύων καὶ τῶν ἄλλων, 
ὅσα φέρει πολυτελὴς τράπεζα, τὸν ἡδὺν γεννᾷ βίον, ἀλλὰ 
νήφων λογισμὸς καὶ τὰς αἰτίας ἐξερευνῶν πάσης αἱρέσεως 


11 μέντοι μέντοι (γ᾽) Usener 180 2 βλέψειἾ ἐπιβλέψει Coniecit 
Usener 3 τοὔμπαλιν HP*QCo: τὸ ἔμπαλιν FZ: ὅτ᾽ ἃν πάλιν B 
unde τἄμπαλιν Usener 7 χρώμεθα) ἀρκώμεθα Cobet 10 of τὴ 
οἱ γὰρ Usener: ὅτι τε Muehil πολυτελεῖ ΡΞ ΗΟ Ο(οΖῦ: πολυτέλ(ει 
Fs πολυτέλειαν ΒΗ: Ρ.ΖΙ 11 ἡδονὴν] ἀηδίαν Usener ἅπαν) ἅπαξ 
Usener 1g1 6 προσερχομένους GZ: προσερχομένοις BF HPQCO 


130 


131 


132 


ΠῚ, TO MENOECEUS 89 


discomfort accrues to us as the result of them: and pleasures are 
similarly we think many pains better than pleasures, since ἰὸ δὲ ἕποβεῆ, 
a greater pleasure comes to us when we have endured pains accompanying 
foralong time. Every pleasure then because of its natural P*"" 
kinship to us is good, yet not every pleasure is to be 

chosen: even as every pain also is an evil, yet not all are 

always of a nature to be avoided. Yet by a scale of 
comparison and by the consideration of advantages and We must 
disadvantages we must form our judgement on all these judge by 
matters. For the good on certain occasions we treat as Comparison, 
bad, and conversely the bad as good. 8. Wemint 

And again independence of desire we think a great be content 
good—not that we may at all times enjoy but a fewthings, W''h 5 httle, 
but that, if we do not possess many, we may enjoy the few τον 
in the genuine persuasion that those have the sweetest enjoy luxury 
pleasure in luxury who least need it, and that all that is rey u sg 
natural is easy to be obtained, but that which is superfluous 
is hard. And so pla savours bring us a pleasure equal 
to a luxurious diet, when all the pain due to want is 
removed; and bread and water produce the highest 
pleasure, when one who needs them puts them to his lips. 

To grow accustomed therefore to simple and not luxurious Simple diet 
diet gives us health to the full, and makes a man alert for Segues health 
the needful employments of life, and when after long 

intervals we approach luxuries disposes us better towards 

them, and fits us to be fearless of fortune. 

When, therefore, we maintain that pleasure is the end, ΦῈ ee. 
we do not mean the pleasures of profligates and those that mean sensual 
consist in sensuality, as is supposed by some who are *Joyment, 
either ignorant or disagree with us or do not understand, 
but freedom from pain in the body and from trouble in the 
mind. For it is not continuous drinkings and revellings, δ rine 
nor the satisfaction of lusts, nor the enjoyment of fish and ae oo 
other luxuries of the wealthy table, which produce a the md on 
pleasant life, but sober reasoning, searching out the pluborophy 
motives for all choice and avoidance, and banishing mere 


9 καὶ τὰς Rossi: καὶ τὰς τῶν libri 132 I ἀπολαύσεις] ἀπό- 
λαυσις Usener. 


133 


134 


135 


go 111, ΠΡῸΣ MENOIKEA 


5 καὶ φυγῆς καὶ τὰς δόξας ἐξελαύνων, ἐξ ὧν πλεῖστος τὰς 
ψυχὰς καταλαμβάνει θόρυβος. 

Τούτων δὲ πάντων ἀρχὴ καὶ τὸ μέγιστον ἀγαθὸν φρόνησις. 

διὸ καὶ φιλοσοφίας τιμιώτερον ὑπάρχει φρόνησις, ἐξ ἧς αἱ 

λοιπαὶ πᾶσαι πεφύκασιν ἀρεταί, διδάσκουσα ὡς οὐκ ἔστιν 


10 ἡδέως ζὴν ἄνευ τοῦ φρονίμως καὶ καλῶς καὶ δικαίως (οὐδὲ 


φρονίμως καὶ καλῶς καὶ δικαίως) ἄνευ τοῦ ἡδέως. συμ- 
πεφύκασι γὰρ al ἀρεταὶ τῷ Civ ἡδέως, καὶ τὸ τῆν ἡδέως 
τούτων ἐστὶν ἀχώριστον. ἐπεὶ τίνα νομίζεις εἶναι κρείττονα 
τοῦ καὶ περὶ θεῶν ὅσια δοξάζοντος καὶ περὶ θανάτου διὰ 
παντὸς ἀφόβως ἔχοντος καὶ τὸ τῆς φύσεως ἐπιλελογισμένον 
τέλος, καὶ τὸ μὲν τῶν ἀγαθῶν πέρας ὡς ἔστιν εὐσυμπλήρωτόν 
5τε καὶ εὐπόριστον διαλαμβάνοντος, τὸ δὲ τῶν κακῶν ὡς ἢ 
χρόνους ἣ πόνους ἔχει βραχεῖς, τὴν δὲ ὑπό τινων δεσπότιν 
εἰσαγομένην πάντων ἐγγελῶντος (εἱμαρμένην; sxeae ὧν ἃ 
μὲν κατ᾽ ἀνάγκην γίνεται) & δὲ ἀπὸ τύχης, ἃ δὲ παρ᾽ ἡμᾶς 
διὰ τὸ τὴν μὲν ἀνάγκην ἀνυπεύθυνον εἶναι, τὴν δὲ τύχην 


10 ἄστατον ὁρᾶν, τὸ δὲ παρ᾽ ἡμᾶς ἀδέσποτον, ᾧ καὶ τὸ μεμπτὸν 


καὶ τὸ ἐναντίον παρακολουθεῖν πέφυκεν | (ἐπεὶ κρεῖττον ἦν τῷ 
περὶ θεῶν μύθῳ κατακολουθεῖν 7) τῇ τῶν φυσικῶν εἱμαρμένῃ 
δουλεύειν: ὃ μὲν γὰρ ἐλπίδα παραιτήσεως ὑπογράφει θεῶν 
διὰ τιμῆς, ἢ δὲ ἀπαραίτητον ἔχει τὴν ἀνάγκην) τὴν δὲ 
5 τύχην οὔτε θεόν, ὡς οἱ πολλοὶ νομίζουσιν, ὑπολαμβάνων 
(οὐθὲν γὰρ ἀτάκτως θεῷ πράττεται!) οὔτε (πάντων) ἀβέβαιον 
αἰτίαν ((odx) οἴεται μὲν γὰρ ἀγαθὸν ἢ κακὸν ἐκ ταύτης πρὸς 
τὸ μακαρίως ζὴν ἀνθρώποις δίδοσθαι, ἀρχὰς μέντοι μεγάλων 
ἀγαθῶν ἣ κακῶν ὑπὸ ταύτης χορηγεῖσθαι), | κρεῖττον εἶναι 
νομίζει εὐλογίστως ἀτυχεῖν ἢ ἀλογίστως εὐτυχεῖν (βέλτιον 


5 ἐξ ὧν B: ἀφ᾽ οὗ Ζ: om. libr cett. 9 διδάσκουσα Usener * 
διδάσκουσαι (διδασκουσ[αι) ΗΠ) bri διδασκούσης Rossi 10 (οὐδὲ 
φρονίμως και καλῶς καὶ δικαίως) supplevit Stephanus 133 3 ἐπι- 
λελογισμένον codd. pleriquc: ἐπιλελογισμένον FPPZ 7 ἐγγε- 


λῶντος scripsi: ἀγγέλωντος ΡΟ: ἀγγελῶντος P?Q?: ἀγγέλλον- 
ros BF HZ. ἀνελόντος "ΚΌΒΕΙ. διαγελῶντος Usener (εἱμαρμένην) 
supplevit Usener nonnulla intercidisse manifestum est: extre- 
mam lacunam ὧν ἃ μὲν κατ᾽ ἀνάγκην γίνεται (γίνονται, scripsit) supplevit 
Bignone: καὶ μᾶλλον ἃ μὲν κατ΄ ἀνάγκην γίγνεσθαι λέγοντος post εἷμαρ- 
μένην Usener 134 4 post ἀνάγκην graviter interpunxi, levius 
Usener 5 ὑπολαμβάνων] ὑπολαμβάνοντος Usener 6 (πάντων) 
supplevi. μεγίστων ἀγαθῶν ἢ κακῶν post αἰτίαν Bignone ἀβέβαιονϊἾ 


133 


134 


135 


Ii]. TO MENOECEUS οι 


opinions, to which are due the greatest disturbance of the 
spirit. 

Of all this the beginning and the greatest good is pru-5 The 
dence. Wherefore prudence is a more precious thing Cee 
even than philosophy: for from prudence are sprung all 
the other virtues, and it teaches us that it 1s not possible which teaches 
to live pleasantly without living prudently and honourably nie 
and justly, (nor, again, to live a life of prudence, honour, 
and justice) without living pleasantly. For the virtues are and they 
by nature bound up with the pleasant life, and the pleasant sisasset lite 
life is inseparable from them. For indeed who, think you, The prudent 
is a better man than he who holds reverent opinions con. ™4” 18 supe- 

A Ἢ . rior to all 
cerning the gods, and ts at all times free from fear of death, others 
and has reasoned out the end ordained by nature? He He knows 
understands that the limit of good things is easy to fulfil peotend oa 
and easy to attain, whereas the course of ills is either short 
in time or slight in pain: he laughs at (destiny), whom and 1s not 
some have introduced as the mistress of all things. (He eau 
thinks that with us lies the chief power in determining 
events, some of which happen by necessity) and some by 
chance, and some are within our control ; for while neces- 
sity cannot be called to account, he sees that chance is 
inconstant, but that which 15 in our control is subject to no 
master, and to it are naturally attached praise and blame. 
For, indeed, it were better to follow the myths about the which ts 
gods than to become a slave to the destiny of the natural pean 
philosophers: for the former suggests a hope of placating popular 
the gods by worship, whereas the latter involves a necessity "8" 
which knows no placation As to chance, he does not He regards 
regard it as a god as most men do (for in a god’s acts Sed 
there is no disorder), nor as an uncertain cause (of all tumty for 
things): for he does not believe that good and evil are good, 
given by chance to man for the framing of a blessed life, 
but that opportunities for great good and great evil are but prefers 
afforded by it. He therefore thinks it better to be unfor- pene 


tunate in reasonable action than to prosper in unreason. prosperity 
with folly 


βέβαιον Lewy 7. (ode) supplevit Usener 8 μὴ ante δίδοσθαι 
mseruit Gassendi 135 2 νομίζει scrips: . νομίζειν F . νομίζων 
BHPQ: νομίζοντος Usener βέλτιον] βέλτιστον Usener 


92 Ii]. ΠΡῸΣ MENOIKEA 


γὰρ ἐν ταῖς πράξεσι τὸ καλῶς κριθὲν ζσφαλῆναι μᾶλλον 
ἢ τὸ κακῶς κριθὲν) ὀρθωθῆναι διὰ ταύτη»). 

5 Taira οὖν καὶ τὰ τούτοις συγγενῆ μελέτα πρὸς σεαυτὸν 
ἡμέρας καὶ νυκτὸς πρός (re) τὸν ὅμοιον σεαυτῷ, καὶ οὐδέποτε 
οὔθ᾽ ὕπαρ οὔτ᾽ ὄναρ διαταραχθήσῃ, (ἤσεις δὲ ὡς θεὸς ἐν 
ἀνθρώποις. οὐθὲν γὰρ ἔοικε θνητῷ ζῴῳ ζῶν ἄνθρωπος ἐν 
ἀθανάτοις ἀγαθοῖς. 

3 vip] δ᾽ αὖ Bignone (σφαλῆναι μᾶλλον ἢ τὸ κακῶς κριθὲν) mserur: 
? ὀρθωθῆναι h τὸ μὴ καλῶς κριθὲν) Madvig 5. σεαυτὸν Gassendi;: 


ἑαυτὸν libri 6 Se inseruit Usener τ ζῶν Z5f: ζῶ[νἹ] B®: ζῶον 
HPOCoZ' ζῶον ὁ 


Ill. TO MENOECEUS 93 


For it is better in a man’s actions that what is well chosen 
(should fail, rather than that what is ill chosen) should be 
successful owing to chance. 

Meditate therefore on these things and things akin to Peroraton, 
them night and day by yourself, and with a companion ἀπ ager 
like to yourself, and never shall you be disturbed waking cepts will 
or asleep, but you shall live like a god among men. For gog ainong 
a man who lives among immortal blessings is not like men. 


to a mortal being 


IV 
KYPIAI AOZAI 


139 1. Td μακάριον καὶ ἄφθαρτον οὔτε αὐτὸ πράγματα ἔχει 
οὔτε ἄλλῳ παρέχει, ὥστε οὔτε ὀργαῖς οὔτε χάρισι συνέχεται" 
ἐν ἀσθενεῖ γὰρ πᾶν τὸ τοιοῦτον. 

Il, Ὃ θάνατος οὐδὲν πρὸς ἡμᾶς" τὸ γὰρ διαλυθὲν ἀναι- 

8 σθητεῖ" τὸ δ᾽ ἀναισθητοῦν οὐδὲν πρὸς ἡμᾶς. 

ΠῚ. Ὅρος τοῦ μεγέθους τῶν ἡδονῶν ἡ παντὸς τοῦ ἀλ- 
γοῦντος ὑπεξαίρεσις. ὅπου δ᾽ ἂν τὸ ἡδόμενον ἐνῇ, καθ᾽ ὃν 
ἂν χρόνον ἧ, οὐκ ἔστι τὸ ἀλγοῦν ἢ τὸ λνπούμενον ἢ τὸ 
συναμφότερον. | 

140 ΙΝ. Οὐ χρονίζει τὸ ἀλγοῦν συνεχῶς ἐν τῇ σαρκί, ἀλλὰ 
τὸ μὲν ἄκρον τὸν ἐλάχιστον χρόνον πάρεστι, τὸ δὲ μόνον 
ὑπερτεῖνον τὸ ἡδόμενον κατὰ σάρκα οὐ πολλὰς ἡμέρας συμ- 
βαίνει. αἱ δὲ πολυχρόνιοι τῶν ἀρρωστιῶν πλεονάζον ἔχουσι 

δ τὸ ἡδόμενον ἐν τῇ σαρκὶ ἢ περ τὸ ἀλγοῦν, 

V. Οὐκ ἔστιν ἡδέως ζῆν ἄνευ τοῦ φρονίμως καὶ καλῶς καὶ 
δικαίως (οὐδὲ φρονίμως καὶ καλῶς καὶ δικαίως) ἄνευ τοῦ 
ἡδέως. ὅτῳ δὲ τοῦτο μὴ ὑπάρχει, οὐ (ἢ φρονίμως καὶ καλῶς 
καὶ δικαίως, (καὶ ὅτῳ ἐκεῖνο μὴ) ὑπάρχει, οὐκ ἔστι τοῦτον 

10 ἡδέως ζῆν. 

VI. Ἕνεκα τοῦ θαρρεῖν ἐξ ἀνθρώπων ἦν κατὰ φύσιν 

ἀγαθόν, ἐξ ὧν ἄν ποτε τοῦτο οἷός τ᾽ ἦ παρασκευάζεσθαι. | 


139 3 ἀσθενεῖ ἀσθενείᾳ Sent. Vat. I 8 τὸ λυπούμενον} om. 
τὸ BP'QCo 140 3 συμβαίνει) συμμένει Bywater 7 (οὐδὲ 
φρονίμως καὶ καλῶς καὶ δικαίως) supplevit Gassendi, cf. Diog. Oen. 
54 8 δὲ τοῦτο] δ᾽ ἐν τούτων Usener οὐ (7.669 ὑπάρχει OM, 
Sent. Vat. V ov] οἷον Usener: ἐξ of Bignone ae scrips : (τ 
libri: ὧν Gassendi 9 (καὶ ὅτῳ ἐκεῖνο μὴν supplevi IL ἦν 
Usener: ἢ ibn 12 ἀγαθόν] fortasse ἀγαθά Usener: num adden- 
dum (ταῦτα ζητεῖν) ν τοῦτο] τοῦτό τις Meibom 

Scholia 
139 3 post τὸ τοιοῦτον legitur ἐν ἄλλοις δέ φησι τοὺς θεοὺς λόγῳ 
θεωρητοῦς, obs μὲν κατ' ἀριθμὸν ὑφεστῶτας, obs δὲ κατὰ ὁμοείδειαν ἐκ τῆς 


139 


140 


IV 
PRINCIPAL DOCTRINES 


1. Tue blessed and immortal nature knows no trouble The divine 
itself nor causes trouble to any other, so that it is never "ature. 
constrained by anger or favour. For all such things exist 
only in the weak. 
~ If. Death is nothing to us: for that which is dissolved Death. 
is without sensation; and that which lacks sensation is 
nothing to us. 

111, The limit of quantity in pleasures is the removal of The hmt of 
all that is painful. Wherever pleasure is present, as long Pleasure. 
as it is there, there 1s neither pain of body nor of mind, nor 
of both at once 

IV. Pain does not last continuously in the flesh, but the Bodily pain 
acutest pain is there for a very short time, and even that a ibe 
which just exceeds the pleasure in the flesh does not 
continue for many days at once. But chronic illnesses 
permit a predominance of pleasure over pain in the flesh. 

V. It is not possible to live pleasantly without living connexion of 
prudently and honourably and justly, [nor again to live ara and 
a hfe of prudence, honour, and justice] without living ἡ 
pleasantly. And the man who does not possess the 
pleasant life, is not living prudently and honourably and 
justly, [and the man who does not possess the virtuous 
life], cannot possibly live pleasantly. 

VI. To secure protection from men anything is.’a Protection 
natural good, by which you may be able to attain this 
end. 


Scholia 


συνεχοῦς ἐπιρρύσεως τῶν ὁμοίων εἰδώλων ἐπὶ τὸ αὐτὸ ἀποτετελεσμένων, 
ἀνθρωποειδεῖς 
οὖς . οὖς δὲ] οὐ pev,.. ὡς δὲ Gassendi ὁμοείδειαν 
HPAQCo: δμοειδίαν ΒΖ: ὁμοιοειδίαν Ἐ ἀποτετελεσμένων libri 
laine τετελεσμένων Ε: ἀποτετελεσμένου» Kuhn 
140 11 post κατὰ φύσιν legitur ἀρχῆς καὶ βασιλείας . retynuit Muehll 


96 IV. KYPIAI AOZAI 


141 VII. "Evdofo: καὶ περίβλεπτοί τινες ἐβουλήθησαν γενέσθαι, 
τὴν ἐξ ἀνθρώπων ἀσφάλειαν οὕτω νομίζοντες περιποιήσεσθαι. 
ὥστε εἰ μὲν ἀσφαλὴς ὁ τῶν τοιούτων βίος, ἀπέλαβον τὸ 
τῆς φύσεως ἀγαθόν: εἰ δὲ μὴ ἀσφαλής, οὐκ ἔχουσιν οὗ 

5 ἕνεκα ἐξ ἀρχῆς κατὰ τὸ τῆς φύσεως οἰκεῖον ὠρέχθησαν. 

VIII. Οὐδεμία ἡδονὴ καθ’ ἑαυτὸ κακόν’ ἀλλὰ τὰ τινῶν 
ἡδονῶν ποιητικὰ πολλαπλασίους ἐπιφέρει τὰς ὀχλήσεις τῶν 
ἡδονῶν. | 

142 IX. El κατεπυκνοῦτο πᾶσα ἡδονή, καὶ χρόνῳ καὶ περὶ ὅλον 
τὸ ἄθροισμα ὑπῆρχεν ἢ τὰ κυριώτατα μέρη τῆς φύσεως, οὐκ 
ἄν ποτε διέφερον ἀλλήλων αἱ ἡδοναί. 

X. Εἰ τὰ ποιητικὰ τῶν περὶ τοὺς ἀσώτους ἡδονῶν ἔλυε 

5 τοὺς φόβους τῆς διανοίας τούς τε περὶ μετεώρων καὶ θανάτου 
καὶ ἀλγηδόνων, ἔτι τε τὸ πέρας τῶν ἐπιθυμιῶν (καὶ τῶν 
ἀλγηδόνων ἐδίδασκεν, οὐκ ἄν ποτε εἴχομεν ὅ τι μεμψαίμεθα 
αὐτοῖς, πανταχόθεν ἐκπληρουμένοις τῶν ἡδονῶν καὶ οὐθαμόθεν 
οὔτε τὸ ἀλγοῦν οὔτε τὸ λυπούμενον ἔχουσιν, ὅπερ ἐστὶ τὸ 

10 κακόν. 

XI. Et μηθὲν ἡμᾶς αἱ τῶν μετεώρων ὑποψίαι ἠνώχλουν 
καὶ al περὶ θανάτου, μή ποτε πρὸς ἡμᾶς ἢ τι, ἔτι τε τὸ μὴ 
κατανοεῖν τοὺς ὄρους τῶν ἀλγηδόνων καὶ τῶν ἐπιθυμιῶν, οὐκ 
ἂν προσεδεόμεθα φυσιολογίας. | 

143 XII. Οὐκ ἦν τὸ φοβούμενον λύειν ὑπὲρ τῶν κυριωτάτων 
μὴ κατειδότα τίς ἡ τοῦ σύμπαντος φύσις, ἀλλ᾽ ὑποπτευόμενόν 
τι τῶν κατὰ τοὺς μύθους, ὥστε οὐκ ἦν ἄνευ φυσιολογίας 
ἀκεραίους τὰς ἡδονὰς ἀπολαμβάνειν. 

5 XIII. Οὐθὲν ὄφελος ἦν τὴν κατ᾽ ἀνθρώπους ἀσφάλειαν 
κατασκευάζεσθαι τῶν ἄνωθεν ὑπόπτων καθεστώτων καὶ τῶν 
ὑπὸ γῆς καὶ ἁπλῶς τῶν ἐν τῷ ἀπείρῳ. 

XIV. Τῆς ἀσφαλείας τῆς ἐξ ἀνθρώπων γενομένης μέχρι 


141 6 ἑαυτὸ BHP'QCo: ἑαυτὴν ΕΡΖ κακόν BHPQ: κακή FP°Z 
1421 post ἡδονή, (καὶ μνήμῃ) supplevit Bignone: (καὶ τόνῳν 
Crénert καὶ χρόνω FP®Z: τω. . . χρόνω Bi: τῷ καὶ χρόνω 
B’P'Co: τῷ χρόνῳ Arndt περὶ ὅλον Rossi: περὶ ὁδὸν ἘΡ᾿Ζ: 
περίοδον BHP*QCo 4 ἀσώτους] ἀσωμάτους FZ: εὐσωμάτους 
pi 6 (καὶ τῶν ἀλγηδόνων) ex Diog. Oen. fr. 45 supplevit 
Bignone, cf. XI 7 μεμψαίμεθα)] μεμφάμεθα B: ἐμεμψάμεθα 
Usener 8 ἐκπληρουμένοις Diog. Oen. Usener: εἰσπληρουμένοις 
libri 12 τε τὸ μὴ κατανοεῖν Lachelier: τετόλμηκα νοεῖν libri 


Iv. PRINCIPAL BOCTRINES 97 


141 VII. Some men wished to become famous and con- Fame and 
spicuous, thinking that they would thus win for themselves aegnelen 
safety from other men. Wherefore if the life of such men 
is safe, they have obtained the good which nature craves; 
but if it is not safe, they do not possess that for which 
they strove at first by the instinct of nature. 

VIII. No pleasure is a bad thing in itself: but the Impure 
means which produce some pleasures bring with them Pleasures 
disturbances many times greater than the pleasures. 

142 IX. If every pleasure could be intensified so that it Difference of 
lasted and influenced the whole organism or the most Pleasures 
essential parts of our nature, pleasures would never differ 
from one another. 

Χ. Ifthe things that produce the pleasures of profligates Failure of 
could dispel the fears of the mind about the phenomena of eta 
the sky and death and its pains, and also teach the limits 
of desires (and of pains), we should never have cause to 
blame them: for they would be filling themselves full with 
pleasures from every source and never have pain of body 
or mind, which 1s the evil of life. 

XI. If we were not troubled by our suspicions of the Need of 
phenomena of the sky and about death, fearing that it anes 
concerns us, and also by our failure to grasp the limits of 
pains and desires, we should have no need of natural 
science. 

143 XIU. A man cannot dispel his fear about the most Science saves 
important matters if he does not know what is the nature YS from myth 
of the universe but suspects the truth of some mythical 
story. So that without natural science tt is not possible to 
attain our pleasures unalloyed. 

XIII. There is no profit in securing protection in Protection 
relation to men, if things above and things beneath the ed 
earth and indeed all in the boundless universe remain without 
matters of suspicion. Science: 


XIV. The most unalloyed source of protection from Retirement 
best secures 
protection. 

143 2 ὑποπτενόμενον͵] ὑποπτεύοντι Sent. Vat. XLIX: tromrevovra 
Usener in commentario 
2078 G 


98 IV. KYPIAI AOZAI 


τινὸς δυνάμει τινὶ ἐξοριστικῇ καὶ εὐπορία εἰλικρινεστάτη 
to γίνεται ἡ ἐκ τῆς ἡσυχίας καὶ ἐκχωρήσεως τῶν πολλῶν 
ἀσφάλεια. | 
144 XV. Ὁ τῆς φύσεως πλοῦτος καὶ ὥρισται καὶ εὐπόριστός 
ἐστιν: ὁ δὲ τῶν κενῶν δοξῶν els ἄπειρον ἐκπίπτει. 
XVI. Βραχέα σοφῷ τύχη παρεμπίπτει, τὰ δὲ μέγιστα καὶ 
κυριώτατα ὃ λογισμὸς διῴκηκε καὶ κατὰ τὸν συνεχῇ χρόνον 
5 τοῦ βίου διοικεῖ καὶ διοικήσει. 
XVI. Ὁ δέκαιος ἀταρακτότατος, 6 δ᾽ ἄδικος πλείστης 
ταραχῆς γέμων. 
XVIII. Οὐκ ἐπαύξεται ἐν τῇ σαρκὶ ἡ ἡδονή, ἐπειδὰν ἅπαξ 
τὸ κατ᾽ ἔνδειαν ἀλγοῦν ἐξαιρεθῇ, ἀλλὰ μόνον ποικίλλεται" 
το τῆς δὲ διανοίας τὸ πέρας τὸ κατὰ τὴν ἡδονὴν ἀπεγέννησεν 
ἣ τε τούτων αὐτῶν ἐκλόγισις καὶ τῶν ὁμογενῶν τούτοις, ὅσα 
τοὺς μεγίστους φόβους παρεσκεύαζε τῇ διανοίᾳ. | 


145 XIX. ‘O ἄπειρος χρόνος ἴσην ἔχει τὴν ἡδόνην καὶ ὁ 
πεπερασμένος, ἐάν τις αὐτῆς τὰ πέρατα καταμετρήσῃ τῷ 
λογισμῷ. 


XX. ‘H μὲν σὰρξ ἀπέλαβε τὰ πέρατα τῆς ἡδονῆς ἄπειρα, 
5 καὶ ἄπειρος αὐτὴν χρόνος παρεσκεύασεν. 7 δὲ διάνοια, τοῦ 
τῆς σαρκὸς τέλους καὶ πέρατος λαβοῦσα τὸν ἐπιλογισμόν, 
καὶ τοὺς ὑπὲρ τοῦ αἰῶνος φόβους ἐκλύσασα τὸν παντελῆ βίον 
παρεσκεύασεν, καὶ οὐθὲν ἔτι τοῦ ἀπείρου χρόνον προσεδεή- 
θημεν: ἀλλ᾽ οὔτε ἔφυγε τὴν ἡδονὴν οὔθ᾽ ἡνίκα τὴν ἐξαγωγὴν 
το ἐκ τοῦ ζῆν τὰ πράγματα παρεσκεύαζεν, ὡς ἐλλείπουσά τι τοῦ 
ἀρίστου βίου κατέστρεφεν. | 
146 XXI. ‘O τὰ πέρατα τοῦ βίου κατειδὼς older ὡς εὐπόριστόν 
ἐστι τὸ (τὸ) ἀλγοῦν κατ᾽ ἔνδειαν ἐξαιροῦν καὶ τὸ τὸν ὅλον 
βίον παντελῇ καθιστάν: ὥστε οὐδὲν προσδεῖται πραγμάτων 
ἀγῶνας κεκτημένων. 


9 τινὶ Usener: re hbri, Bignone ἐξοριστεκῃ Meibom: ἐξε- 
ριστικῆ P®Z: ἐξεριστικὴ Fs ἐξαιριστικῆ ΒΡ᾽Ὸ : ἐξερειστικῆ H, unde 
ἐξερειστικὴ Usener: ἐξερειστικῇ Bignone: ἐξέρεισις ἢ coni. Usener 
εὐπορία εἰλικρινεστάτῃη) εὐπορίᾳ εἰλικρινεστάτῃ f: εὐπορίᾳ εἴλικρι- 
νεστέρα = Muehll - ἀἰχαρινεοζνάτῃ, ἐπεξεργαστικω)τάτη Ἐϊρτοηδ 
lo ἐκχωρήσεως ἨΖὅ : ἐγχωρήσεως ΒΕΡΟΟΟοἥΖ'᾽ 12 ἀσφάλειαΪ ἄδεια 
coniecerat Usener 144 3 βραχέα BFP": βραχεῖα ΡΟ τύχη] 
τύχῃ Cobet 4 διῴκηκε Stobaeus: διώκηκε (διώκει 2) libri: διῴκησε 


Usener καὶ] om. Usener 5 τοῦ βίου] om. FCo°Z διοικεῖ 
καὶ διοικήσει ut glossema seclusit Usener 6 ὁ δίκαιος) βίος add. 
Diodorus Sent. Vat. XII It ἐκλόγισις BPQ: ἐκλόγησις FCo®?Z 


145 5 καὶ] κἂν Diels ἄπειρος] ἄπειρζον οὐκ ἄπειρ)ος Bignone παρε- 


144 


145 


146 


IV. PRINCIPAL DOCTRINES 99 


men, which is secured to some extent by a certain force 
of expulsion, is in fact the immunity which results from 
a quiet life and the retirement from the world. 

XV. The wealth demanded by nature is both limited Nature's 
and easily procured; that demanded by idle imaginings “™ 
stretches on to infinity. 

XVI. In but few things chance hinders a wise man, but Chance and 
the greatest and most important matters reason has ordained "8°" 1" lv 
and throughout the whole period of life does and will 
ordain. 

XVII. The just man is most free from trouble, the Justice and 
unjust most full of trouble. anjuatice: 

XVIII. The pleasure in the flesh is not increased, when Limts of 
once the pain due to want is removed, but is only varied : βοάν and 
and the limit as regards pleasure in the mind is begotten pleasure 
by the reasoned understanding of these very pleasures 
and of the emotions akin to them, which used to cause the 
greatest fear to the mind. 

XIX. Infinite time contains no greater pleasure than Infinite time 
limited time, if one measures by reason the limits of coe int 
pleasure. pleasure 

XX. The flesh perceives the limits of pleasure as un- The flesh, 
limited and unlimited time is required to supply it. But resnon, abd 
the mind, having attained a reasoned understanding of the 
ultimate good of the flesh and its limits and having dis- 
sipated the fears concerning the time to come, supplies us 
with the complete life, and we have no further need of 
infinite time: but neither does the mind shun pleasure, 
nor, when circumstances begin to bring about the departure 
from life, does it approach its end as though it fell short in 
any way of the best life. 

XXI. He who has learned the limits of life knows that Pleasure 
that which removes the pain due to want and makes the hee 
whole of life complete is easy to obtain; so that there is no 
need of actions which involve competition. 


oxevacer] ἀρέσκοι dv Usener 7 τὸν παντελῇ] fortasse παντελῆ τὸν 
οἴ ΧΧῚ 8 χρόνου ΒΡῚΟ: βίον FH Co°Z πτροσεδεήθημεν. Ε HCo%Z. 
προσεδέθημεν PQ: προσεδεήθη; (ov) μὴν Usener g off H: οὐδὲ 
B: οὐδ᾽ F 11 κατέστρεφεν) κατέστρεψεν Bywater 146 2 (τὸ) 
supplevit Casaubon 


G 2 


147 


148 


149 


5 


1d0 IV. KYPIAI ΔΌΞΑΙ 


XXH. Td ὑφεστηκὸς δεῖ τέλος ἐπιλογίζεσθαι καὶ πᾶσαν 
τὴν ἐνάργειαν, ἐφ᾽ ἣν τὰ δοξαζόμενα ἀνάγομεν" εἰ δὲ ph, 
πάντα ἀκρισίας καὶ ταραχῆς ἔσται μεστά. 

XXIII. Εἰ μάχῃ πάσαις ταῖς αἰσθήσεσιν, οὐχ Fes οὐδ᾽ 
ἃς ἂν φῇς αὐτῶν διεψεῦσθαι πρὸς τί ποιούμενος τὴν ἀναγωγὴν 


to κρίνῃς. 


5 


10 


XXIV. Εἴ rw’ ἐκβαλεῖς ἁπλῶς αἴσθησιν καὶ μὴ διαιρήσεις 
τὸ δοξαζόμενον κατὰ τὸ προσμένον καὶ τὸ παρὸν ἤδη κατὰ 
τὴν αἴσθησιν καὶ τὰ πάθη καὶ πᾶσαν φανταστικὴν ἐπιβολὴν 
τῆς διανοίας, συνταράξεις καὶ τὰς λοιπὰς αἰσθήσεις τῇ ματαίῳ 
δόξῃ, ὥστε τὸ κριτήριον ἅπαν ἐκβαλεῖς. εἰ δὲ βεβαιώσεις 
καὶ τὸ προσμένον ἅπαν ἐν ταῖς δοξαστικαῖς ἐννοίαις καὶ 
τὸ μὴ τὴν ἐπιμαρτύρησιν, οὐκ ἐκλείψεις τὸ διεψευσμένον, 
ὡς τετηρηκὼς ἔσει πᾶσαν ἀμφισβήτησιν κατὰ πᾶσαν κρίσιν 
τοῦ ὀρθῶς ἣ μὴ ὀρθῶς. | 

XXV. El μὴ παρὰ πάντα καιρὸν ἐπανοίσεις ἕκαστον τῶν 
πραττομένων ἐπὶ τὸ τέλος τῆς φύσεως, ἀλλὰ προκαταστρέψεις 
εἴτε φυγὴν εἴτε δίωξιν ποιούμενος εἰς ἄλλό τι, οὐκ ἔσονταί 
σοι τοῖς λόγοις αἱ πράξεις ἀκόλουθοι. 

XXXVI. Τῶν ἐπιθυμιῶν ὅσαι μὴ ἐπ᾽ ἀλγοῦν ἐπανάγουσιν, 
ἐὰν μὴ συμπληρωθῶσιν, οὐκ εἰσὶν ἀναγκαῖαι ἀλλ᾽ εὐδιάχντον 
τὴν ὄρεξιν ἔχουσιν, ὅταν δυσπόριστον ἢ GY βλάβης ἀπεργα- 
στικαὶ δόξωσιν εἶναι. 

XXVIII. Ὧν ἡ σοφία παρασκευάζεται εἰς τὴν τοῦ ὅλον 
βίου μακαριότητα, πολὺ μέγιστόν ἐστιν ἡ τῆς φιλίας κτῆσις. 

KXVIII. Ἢ αὐτὴ γνώμη θαρρεῖν τε ἐποίησεν ὑπὲρ τοῦ 
μηϑὲν αἰώνιον εἶναι δεινὸν μηδὲ πολυχρόνιον, καὶ τὴν ἐν 
αὐτοῖς τοῖς ὡρισμένοις ἀσφάλειαν φιλίας μάλιστα κατεῖδε 
συντελουμένην. | 

XXIX. Τῶν ἐπιθυμιῷν al μέν εἶσι φυσικαὶ καὶ (ἀναγκαῖαι" 


5. τέλος secludebat Schneider 147 1 ἐκβαλεῖς Cobet: ἐκβά- 
λεις ΗἸ: ἐκβάλλεις codd. cett. 2 κατὰ codd. plerique: καὶ FCotZ 
Usener 4 ματαίῳ Usener: paraw HPQ: ματαία FCo!Z 
5 ἐκβαλεῖς ΖΕ: ἐκβάλλεις codd. ceit. 7 ἐκλείψει.) ἐκλείψει 
Bonnet 8 ὡς τετηρηκὼς ὥστ᾽ ἀνῃρηκὼς vel ἐξῃρηκὼς Usener: 
ὥστε τετηρηκὼς Merbach κατὰ Bignone: καὶ codd. Usener: 
καὶ (ἀνῃρηκὼς) Grussant 148 6 εὐδιάχυτον] ἀδιάχυτον HQ 
 δυσπόριστον BP}: δυσπόριστοι F ἢ (ἢ) Usener: ἢ B: ἢ codd. 
cett. 13 φιλίας] Φιλίαις Usener: φιλίᾳ vir doctus apud Madvig 
κατεῖδε Madvig: κατεῖναι libri 149 I φυσικαὶ καὶ ζάναγκαξαι" 


149 


148 


149 


IV. PRINCIPAL DOCTRINES του 


XXII. We must consider both the real purpose and all The tests of 
the evidence of direct perception, to which we always refer ™°T#! action. 
the conclusions of opinion; otherwise, all will be full of 
doubt and confusion 

XXIII. If you fight against all sensations, you will have Rejection of 
no standard by which to judge even those of them which 41} sensations. 
you say are false. 

XXIV. If you reject any single sensation and fail to Rejection of a 
distinguish between the conclusion of opinion as to the angle ϑρηδᾶς 
appearance awaiting confirmation and that which is actually failure to 
given by the sensation or feeling, or each intuitive ap- lee δυο ς 
prehension of the mind, you will confound al] other sensa- opinion. 
tions as well with the same groundless opinion, so that 
you will reject every standard of judgement. And if 
among the mental images created by your opinion you 
affirm both that which awaits confirmation and that which 
does not, you will not escape error, since you will have 
preserved the whole cause of doubt in every judgement 
between what 1s right and what is wrong, 

XXV. If on each occasion instead of referring your Necessity of 
actions to the end of nature, you turn to some other nearer aici 
standard when you are making a choice or an avoidance, standard. 
your actions will not be consistent with your principles. 

XXXVI. Of desires, al] that do not Jead to a sense of Unnecessary 
pain, if they are not satisfied, are not necessary, but in- το 
volve a craving which is easily dispelled, when the obyect 
is hard to procure or they seem likely to produce harm. 

XXVIII. Of all the things which wisdom acquires to Value of 
produce the blessedness of the complete life, far the greatest fendsh'P 
is the possession of friendship. 

XXVUI. The same conviction which has given us con- Fnendship 
fidence that there 1s nothing termble that lasts for ever or Neege deaag 
even for Jong, has also seen the protection of friendship 
most fully completed in the limited evils of this life. 


XXI1X. Among desires some are natural (and necessary, Cisateanen 
of desires 


al δὲ φυσικαὶ μὲν) οὐκ ἀναγκαῖαι (δῶ supplevit Bignone ex Sent. 


Vat. XX. φυσικαὶ καὶ οὐκ ἀναγκαῖαι libri: φυσικαὶ καὶ (avayxaiat’ ai 
δὲ φυσικαὶν καὶ οὐκ ἀναγκαῖαι Stephanus 


102 Iv. KYPIAI AOZAI 


al δὲ φυσικαὶ μὲν) οὐκ ἀναγκαῖαι (δέ): al δὲ οὔτε φυσικαὶ 
οὔτε ἀναγκαῖαι ἀλλὰ παρὰ κενὴν δόξαν γινόμεναι. 
XXX. Ἐν αἷς τῶν φυσικῶν ἐπιθυμιῶν, μὴ ἐπ᾽ ἀλγοῦν 
δ δὲ ἐπαναγουσῶν, ἐὰν μὴ συντελεσθῶσιν, ὑπάρχει ἣ σπουδὴ 
σύντονος, παρὰ κενὴν δόξαν αὗται γίνονται, καὶ οὐ παρὰ τὴν 
ἑαυτῶν φύσιν ob διαχέονται ἀλλὰ παρὰ τὴν τοῦ ἀνθρώπου 
κενοδοξίαν. | 
150 ΧΧΧΙ. Τὸ τῆς φύσεως δίκαιον ἐστὶ σύμβολον τοῦ cvp- 
φέροντος εἰς τὸ μὴ βλάπτειν ἀλλήλους μηδὲ βλάπτεσθαι. 
XXXIE. Ὅσα τῶν ζῴων μὴ ἐδύνατο συνθήκας ποιεῖσθαι 
τὰς ὑπὲρ τοῦ μὴ βλάπτειν ἄλληλα μηδὲ βλάπτεσθαι, πρὸς 
5ταῦτα οὐθὲν ἣν δίκαιον οὐδὲ ἄδικον: ὡσαύτως δὲ καὶ τῶν 
ἐθνῶν ὅσα μὴ ἐδύνατο ἢ μὴ ἐβούλετο τὰς συνθήκας ποιεῖσθαι 
τὰς ὑπὲρ τοῦ μὴ βλάπτειν μηδὲ βλάπτεσθαι. 
XXXII. Οὐκ ἦν τι καθ᾽ ἑαυτὸ δικαιοσύνη, ἀλλ᾽ ἐν ταῖς 
μετ᾽ ἀλλήλων συστροφαῖς καθ᾽ ὁπηλίκους δή ποτε ἀεὶ τόπους 
10 συνθήκη τις ὑπὲρ τοῦ μὴ βλάπτειν ἢ βλάπτεσθαι. | 
151i XXXIV. ‘H ἀδικία οὐ καθ᾽ ἑαυτὴν κακόν, ἀλλ’ ἐν τῷ 
κατὰ τὴν ὑποψίαν φόβῳ, εἰ μὴ λήσει τοὺς ὑπὲρ τῶν τοιούτων 
ἐφεστηκότας κολαστάς. 
XXXV. Οὐκ ἔστι τὸν λάθρᾳ τι ποιοῦντα ὧν συνέθεντο 
5 πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰς τὸ μὴ βλάπτειν μηδὲ βλάπτεσθαι, πιστεύειν 
ὅτι λήσει, κἂν μυριάκις ἐπὶ τοῦ παρόντος λανθάνῃ. μέχρι 
γὰρ καταστροφῆς ἄδηλον εἰ καὶ λήσει. 
XXXVI. Κατὰ μὲν (τὸ) κοινὸν πᾶσι τὸ δίκαιον τὸ αὐτό. 
συμφέρον γάρ τι ἦν ἐν τῇ πρὸς ἀλλήλους κοινωνίᾳ κατὰ 
10 δὲ τὸ ἴδιον χώρας καὶ ὅσων δή ποτε αἰτίων οὐ πᾶσι συνέπεται 
τὸ αὐτὸ δίκαιον εἶναι. 
152 XXXVII. Τὸ μὲν ἐπιμαρτυρούμενον ὅτι συμφέρει ἐν ταῖς 


post φυσικῶν fortasse μὲν Usener 150 4 ἄλληλα Gassendi . 
ἀλλὰ ῬΒΕ ΗΖ: ἀλλὰ. .Ῥ; ἀλλ᾽ ἂν H!: ἄλλα Usener 5 ἦν 
Usener: BHP'Q: ἦ οὐδὲ Ῥῆ: ἐστιν οὐδὲ Ἐ(οἾΖ 151 4 ποιοῦν- 


ra] κινοῦντα Madvig 6 ἐπὶ Sent. Vat. VI Menagius: dma 
BQP!?: ὑπὸ FP®Co%Z 8 (τὸν supplevit Gassendi 

Scholia 
149 3 post ἐρῶ τοῖς degitur φυσικὰς καὶ ἀναγκαίας ἡγεῖται ὁ 
"Emixovpos τὰς 


ἮΝ vos ἀπολυούσας, ὡς ποτὸν ἐπὶ Yous" φυσικὰς δὲ 
οὐκ ἀναγκαίας δὲ τὰς ποικιλλούσας μόνον τὴν ἡδονήν, μὴ Phone δὲ 
τὸ ἄλγημα, ὡς πολυτελῆ σιτία' οὔτε δὲ φυσικὰς οὔτε ἀναγκαίας, ὡς 


150 


151 


152 


IV. PRINCIPAL DOCTRINES 103 


some natural) but not necessary, and others neither natural 
nor necessary, but due to idle imagination. 

XXX. Wherever in the case of desires which are Imagination 
physical, but do not lead to a sense of pain, if they are aa 
not fulfilled, the effort is intense, such pleasures are due 
to idle imagination, and it is not owing to their own nature 
that they fail to be dispelled, but owing to the empty 
imaginings of the man. 

XXXI. The justice which arises from nature is a pledge Nature of 
of mutual advantage to restrain men from harming one Justice 
another and save them from being harmed. 

XXXII. For all living things which have not been able No justice 
to make compacts not to harm one another or be harmed, ae 
nothing ever is either just or unjust; and hkewise too for 
all tribes of men which have been unable or unwilling to 
make compacts not to harm or be harmed. 

XXXIII. Justice never is anything in itself, but in the Justice not an 
dealings of men with one another in any place whatever cated 
and at any time it 1s a kind of compact not to harm or be 
harmed. 

XXXIV, Injustice is not an evil in itself, but only in Injustice 
consequence of the fear which attaches to the apprehension 
of being unable to escape those appointed to punish such 
actions. 

XXXYV. It is not possible for one who acts in secret The fear of 
contravention of the terms of the compact not to harm or “ecto”. 
be harmed, to be confident that he will escape detection, 
even if at present he escapes a thousand times. For up 
to the time of death it cannot be certain that he will indeed 
escape. 

XXXVI. In its general aspect justice is the same for Vanabilty ot 
all, for it is a kind of mutual advantage in the dealings of UStc* 
men with one another: but with reference to the individual 
peculiarities of a country or any other circumstances the 
same thing does not turn out to be just for all. 

XXXVII. Among actions which are sanctioned as just Test of just 


Scholia 


στεφάνους καὶ ἀνδριάντων ἀναθέσεις 


ἀλγηδόνος Weil: ἀλγηδόνας τι δὲ post οὐκ ἀναγκαίας om. ΕΓΟἾΖ 


153 


154 


104 IV. ΚΎΡΙΑΙ ΔΟΞΑΙ 


χρείαις τῆς πρὸς ἀλλήλους κοινωνίας τῶν νομισθϑέντων εἶναι 
δικαίων, ἔχει τὸ τοῦ δικαίον ἐνέχυρον, ἐάν τε τὸ αὐτὸ πᾶσι 
γένηται, ἐάν τε μὴ τὸ αὐτός ἐὰν δὲ νόμον θῆταί ris, μὴ 
5 ἀποβαίνῃ δὲ κατὰ τὸ συμφέρον τῆς πρὸς ἀλλήλους κοινωνίας, 
οὐκέτι τοῦτο τὴν τοῦ δικαίον φύσιν ἔχει. κἂν μεταπίπτῃ 
τὸ κατὰ τὸ δίκαιον συμφέρον, χρόνον δέ τινα εἰς τὴν 
πρόληψιν ἐναρμόττῃ, οὐδὲν ἧττον ἐκεῖνον τὸν χρόνον ἦν 
δίκαιον τοῖς μὴ φωναῖς κεναῖς ἑαυτοὺς συνταράττουσιν ἀλλ᾽ 


10 εἰς τὰ πράγματα βλέπουσιν. | 


XXXVIII. Ἔνθα μὴ καινῶν γενομένων τῶν περιεστώτων 
πραγμάτων ἀνεφάνη μὴ ἐναρμόττοντα εἰς τὴν πρόληψιν τὰ 
νομισθέντα δίκαια ἐπ᾿ αὐτῶν τῶν ἔργων, οὐκ ἦν ταῦτα δίκαια. 
ἔνθα δὲ καινῶν γενομένων τῶν πραγμάτων οὐκέτι συνέφερε 


τὰ αὐτὰ δίκαια κείμενα, ἐνταῦθα δὲ τότε μὲν ἦν δίκαι᾽, ὅτε 


συνέφερεν εἰς τὴν πρὸς ἀλλήλους κοινωνίαν τῶν συμπολιτενο- 
μένων' ὕστερον δ᾽ οὐκ ἣν ἔτι δίκαια, ὅτε μὴ συνέφερεν. | 
XXXIX. Ὃ τὸ μὴ θαρροῦν ἀπὸ τῶν ἔξωθεν ἄριστα 
συστησάμενος οὗτος τὰ μὲν δυνατὰ ὁμόφυλα κατεσκευάσατο" 
τὰ δὲ μὴ δυνατὰ οὐκ ἀλλόφυλά γε' ὅσα δὲ μηδὲ τοῦτο 
δυνατὸς ἦν, ἀνεπίμικτος ἐγένετο, καὶ ἐξωρίσατο ὅσα τοῦτ᾽ 


5 ἐλυσιτέλει πράττειν. 


XL. “Ὅσοι τὴν δύναμιν ἔσχον τοῦ τὸ θαρρεῖν μάλιστα 
ἐκ τῶν ὁμορούντων παρασκευάσασθαι, οὗτοι καὶ ἐβίωσαν 
μετ᾽ ἀλλήλων ἥδιστα τὸ βεβαιότατον πίστωμα ἔχοντες, καὶ 
πληρεστάτην οἰκειότητα ἀπολαβόντες οὐκ ὠδύραντο ὡς πρὸς 


10 ἔλεον τὴν τοῦ τελευτήσαντος προκαταστροφήν. 


152 2 τῶν νομισθέντων εἶναι δικαίων seclusit Usener additamentum 
suspicans capiti sententiae destinatum 3 τὸ τοῦ F . τὸν τοῦ HPQ 
Usener ἐνέχυρον scripsi: εἶναι HP'Q: χώραν εἶναι BF " τὸ ἐν τοῦ 
δικαίου χώρᾳ Muehll: alu alia 4 νόμον Usener: μόνον libri 
Q ἀλλ᾽ εἰς ra Usener: ἀλλὰ πλεῖστα libri: ἀλλ᾽ ἁπλῶς εἰς τὰ Kochalsky 
1531 καινῶν Aldobrandinus: κενῶν hbri: κοινῶν Ζ5 2 ἐναρ- 
μόττοντα Usencr (cf. XXXVII. 8) : ἁρμόττοντα libri 4 καινῶν 
Gassendi: καὶ τῶν Β: κενῶν HPQ 5 δὲ BHPQ: δὴ F 
154 1 τὸ μὴ] τὸ μὲν Usener (in commentano) 2 συστησάμενος] 
συστειλάμενος Usener (in commentario) 3 ὅσα δὲ Usener : ὅσα 
γε HPQ: ὅσα FCotZ 4 ἐξωρίσατο Stephanus: ἐξορίσατο H : ἐξη- 
ρίσατο BF PQ° ἐξηρέσατο Usener: ἐξηρείσατο Muehll τοῦτ᾽ HPQ: 
τούτω B: τοῦ F: τούτων Usener: τοῦτο Stephanus 5 ἐλυσιτέλει 


153 


154 


IV. PRINCIPAL DOCTRINES τοῦ 


by law, that which is proved on examination to be οἵ ee under 
advantage in the requirements of men’s dealings with one Poca 
another, has the guarantee of justice, whether it is the 

same for all or not. But ifa man makes a law and it does 

not turn out to lead to advantage in men’s dealings with 

each other, then it no longer has the essential nature of 

justice. And even if the advantage in the matter of justice 

shifts from one side to the other, but for a while accords 

with the general concept, it is none the less just for that 

period in the eyes of those who do not confound them- 

selves with empty sounds but look to the actual facts. 

XXXVIII. Where, provided the circumstances have The same 
not been altered, actions which were considered just, have tines just, 
been shown not to accord with the general concept in sometimes 
actual practice, then they are not just. But where, when "JUS 
circumstances have changed, the same actions which were 
sanctioned as just no longer lead to advantage, there 
they were just at the time when they were of advantage 
for the dealings of fellow-citizens with one another, but 
subsequently they are no longer just, when no longer of 
advantage. 

XXXIX. The man who has best ordered the element The ordering 
of disquiet arising from external circumstances has made ae Me 
those things that he could akin to himself and the rest at 
least not alien: but with all to which he could not do even 
this, he has refrained from mixing, and has expelled from 
his life all which it was of advantage to treat thus. 

XL. As many as possess the power to procure Com- The 
plete immunity from their neighbours, these also live most ar 
pleasantly with one another, since they have the most 
certain pledge of security, and after they have enjoyed the 
fullest intimacy, they do not lament the previous departure 
of a dead friend, as though he were to be pitied. 


HPQ: λυσιτελὲς B: λυσιτελῆ F Usener 6 τοῦ τὸ Meibom: τοῦ re 
BP: τον ΕΓ οΖ 7 ae οὕτω codd. cett. Usener 8 ἥδιστα 
τὸ Usener: ἥδιστον τὸν B: ἥδιστον. P: ἥδιστον καὶ Qi ἥδιστον 


FHCoz 9 πρὸς ἔλεον B: πρὸς σὲ δέον HP'Q: ἔλεον ΕἼ(οΖ 


V 


FRAGMENTA EPICUREA 
A. 


SENTENTIAE VATICANAE 
᾿Επικούρου ἸΠΤροσφώνησις 


I. = Κύριαι Δόξαι I. 

II. = Κύριαι Δόξαι II. 

IIL. = Κύριαι Δόξαι IV. 

*IV. Πᾶσα ἀλγηδὼν εὐκαταφρόνητος' ἣ yap σύντονον 
ἔχουσα τὸ πονοῦν σύντομον ἔχει τὸν χρόνον, ἣ δὲ χρονί- 
fovea περὶ τὴν σάρκα ἀβληχρὸν ἔχει τὸν πόνον. 

V. = Κύριαι Δόξαι V. 

VI. = Κύριαε Δόξαι XXXV. 

VII. ᾿Αδικοῦντα λαθεῖν μὲν δύσκολον, πίστιν δὲ λαβεῖν 
ὑπὲρ τοῦ λαθεῖν ἀδύνατον. 

VITE = Κύριαι Δόξαι XV. 

IX. Κακὸν ἀνάγκη, ἀλλ᾽ οὐδεμία ἀνάγκη ζῆν μετὰ ἀνάγκης. 

[X. Metrodorus. Μέμνησο ὅτι θνητὸς ὧν τῇ φύσει καὶ 
λαβὼν χρόνον ὡρισμένον ἀνέβης τοῖς περὶ φύσεως διαλο- 
γισμοῖς ἐπὶ τὴν ἀπειρίαν καὶ τὸν αἰῶνα καὶ κατεῖδες 

τά τ᾽ ἐόντα τά τ᾽ ἐσσόμενα πρό τ᾽ ἐόντα. 

ΧΙ. Τῶν πλείστων ἀνθρώπων τὸ μὲν ἡσύχαζον ναρκᾷ, τὸ 
δὲ κινούμενον λυττᾷ. 

XII. = Κύριαε Δόξαι XVII. 

XIII. = Κύριαι Δόξαι XXVII. 

XIV. Γεγόναμεν ἅπαξ, δὶς δὲ οὐκ ἔστι γενέσθαι" δεῖ δὲ 
τὸν αἰῶνα μηκέτ᾽ εἶναι’ σὺ δὲ οὐκ ὧν τῆς αὔριον (κύριος) 


Sigla : V = Cod. Vaticanus Graecus 1950 


IV 1 σύντονον» Usener: σύντομον V IX τ ἀνάγκη) (ζῆν ev) ἀνάγ 
Hartel X 1 ὅτι] Mevéorpare δίοτι Clem. Alex by τῇ φύσα 
gis C.A. 42 .λαβὼ»] λαχὼν Gomperz χρόνον] Blov ς. Ἂν τοῖς 


V 


FRAGMENTS 
A. 
VATICAN COLLECTION 


‘Epicurus’ Exhortation’ 


IV. All bodily suffering is negligible: for that which 
causes acute pain has short duration, and that which 
endures long in the flesh causes but mild pain. 


VII. It is hard for an evil-doer to escape detection, but 
to obtain security for escaping is impossible. 


IX. Necessity is an evil, but there is no necessity to 
live under the control of necessity. 

[X. Remember that you are of mortal nature and have 
a limited time to live and have devoted yourself to discus- 
sions on nature for all time’ and eternity and have seen 
‘things that are now and are to come and have been’.] 

XI. For most men rest is stagnation and activity madness. 


XIV. We are born once and cannot be born twice, but 
for all ttme must be no more. But you, who are not 
(master) of to-morrow, postpone your happiness: life is 


- > Kareides] τῇ Ψυχῇ ἕως ἐπὶ τὸν αἰῶνα καὶ τὴν ἀπειρίαν τῶν πραγμάτων 
κατεῖδες καὶ C. A. 4 τά τ' ἐόντα om. ςζ. Α. XIV 2 κύριος om. 
Ν. supplendum ex Stobaeo 


108 V. FRAGMENTA EPICUREA 


ἀναβάλλῃ τὸ χαῖρον: ὁ δὲ βίος μελλησμῷ παραπόλλυται καὶ 
εἷς ἕκαστος ἡμῶν ἀσχολούμενος ἀποθνήσκει. 

*XV. Ἤθη ὥσπερ τὰ ἡμῶν αὐτῶν ἴδια τιμῶμεν, ἄν τε 
χρηστὰ ἔχωμεν καὶ ὑπὸ τῶν ἀνθρώπων ζηλώμεθα, ἄν τε μή" 
οὕτω χρὴ (ra) τῶν πέλας, ἂν ἐπιεικεῖς Gow. 

*XVI. Οὐδεὶς βλέπων τὸ κακὸν αἱρεῖται αὐτό, ἀλλὰ δελεα- 
σθεὶς ὡς ἀγαθῷ πρὸς τὸ μεῖζον αὐτοῦ κακὸν ἐθηρεύθη. 

*XVII. Οὐ νέος μακαριστὸς ἀλλὰ γέρων βεβιωκὼς καλῶς" 
ὁ γὰρ νέος (ἐν) ἀκμῇ πολὺς ὑπὸ τῆς τύχης ἑτεροφρονῶν 
πλάζεται: ὁ δὲ γέρων καθάπερ ἐν λιμένι τῷ γήρᾳ καθώρμικεν 
τὰ πρότερον δυσελπιστούμενα τῶν ἀγαθῶν ἀσφαλεῖ κατα- 
κλείσας χάριτι. 

“XVIII ᾿Αφαιρουμένης προσόψεως καὶ ὁμιλίας καὶ συνανα- 
στροφῆς ἐκλύεται τὸ ἐρωτικὸν πάθος. 

*XIX Τοῦ γεγονότος ἀμνήμων ἀγαθοῦ γέρων τήμερον 
γεγένηται. 

XX = Κύριαι Δόξαι ΧΧΙΧ 

ΧΧῚ Οὐ βιαστέον τὴν φύσιν ἀλλὰ πειστέον: πεισόμεθα 
δὲ τάς {τ ἀναγκαίας ἐπιθυμίας ἐκπληροῦντες τάς τε φυσικὰς 
ἂν μὴ βλάπτωσι, τὰς δὲ βλαβερὰς πικρῶς ἐλέγχοντες. 

XXII. = Κύριαι Δόξαι XIX. 

*XXILL. Πᾶσα φιλία δι᾽ ἑαυτὴν αἱρετή: ἀρχὴν δ᾽ εἴληφεν 
ἀπὸ τῆν. ὠφελείας. 

"XXIV Ενύπνια οὐκ ἔλαχε φύσιν θείαν οὐδὲ μαντικὴν 
δύναμιν, ἀλλὰ γίνεται κατὰ ἔμπτωσιν εἰδώλων. 

*"EXV. Ἢ πενία μετρουμένη τῷ τῆς φύσεως τέλει μέγας 
ἐστὶ πλοῦτος" πλοῦτος δὲ μὴ δριζόμενος μεγάλη ἐστι πενία. 

ἘΧΧΥῚ. Δεῖ διαλαβεῖν ὅτι καὶ ὁ πολὺς λόγος καὶ ὁ βραχὺς 
εἰς τὸ αὐτὸ συντείνει τέλος. 

*SXVII. Ἐπὶ μὲν τῶν ἄλλων ἐπιτηδευμάτων μόλις τελειω- 


3 τὸ χαῖρον] τὸν καιρόν Stobaeus 4 εἷς} διὰ τοῦτο Stobaeus 
XV τ τιμῶμεν] τιμώμενα Wotke 2 ζηλώμεθα Wilamowitz : ζηλού- 
μεθα Vi ζηλούμενα Weil ost ἄν re μῇ lacunam suspicatus est 
Wotke 3 xen] χρῆσις Usener τὰ) supplevit el ἂν 
ἐπιεικεῖς Usener: ἀνεπιεικῶς V AV1 1 βλέπων Wotke: S\érrov 
ν 2 ἀγαθῶ V: ἀγαθὸν Usener πρὸς τὸ] προσὸν Usener : 
πρός τι Cronert. αὐτοῦ] ἂν τοῦ Usener XVII 2 νέος (év) ἀκμῇ 


scrips: yvéos ἀκμὴ Vi νέος ἀκμὴν Cronert: ἔντος ἀκμῆς Usener 
παλὺ»}, πολλὰ Hartel 5 χάριτι χάρακι Hartel XIX 1 ἀμνήμων 

ἀμνημονῶν Wilamowitz ἀγαθοῦ Hartel: dyadés V τήμερομ], 
αὐθημερὸν coniecit Usener: τὴν φρόνησιν Gomperz ΧΧΙ 1 πεισό- 


Vv. FRAGMENTS τόρ 


‘wasted in procrastination and each one of us dies without 
allowing himeelf leisure. 

XV. We value our characters as something peculiar to 
ourselves, whether they are good and we are esteemed 
by men, or not; so ought we to value the characters of 
others, if they are well-disposed to us. 

XVI. No one when he sees evil deliberately chooses it, 
but 1s enticed by it as being good in comparison with 
a greater evil and so pursues it. 

XVII. It is not the young man who should be thought 
happy, but an o!d man who has !ived a good life. For the 
young man at the height of his powers is unstable and is 
carried this way and that by fortune, hke a headlong 
stream But the old man has come to anchor in old age as 
though in port, and the good things for which before he 
hardly hoped he has brought into safe harbourage in his 
grateful recollections. 

AVIII. Remove sight, association and contact, and the 
passion of love is at an end. 

XIX. Forgetting the good that has been he has become 
old this very day 


ΧΧΙ. We must not violate nature, but obey her; and 
we shall obey her if we fulfil the necessary desires and 
also the physical, if they bring no harm to us, but sternly 
reject the harmful. 


XXII. All friendship 1s desirable 1n itself, though it 
starts from the need of help 

XXIV. Dreams have no divine character nor any pro- 
phetic force, but they originate from the influx of images. 

AXV. Poverty, when measured by the natural purpose 
of life, is great wealth, but unlimited wealth is great 
poverty. 

XXVI. You must understand that whether the discourse 
be long or short it tends to the same end. 

XXVII. In all other occupations the fruit comes pain- 
μεθα ΒΟΙ͂ΡΒΙ : πείσομεν V 2 τάς (τὴ Usener: ras V XXIII 1 ai- 


per Usener: ἀρετήν XXV 2 ἐστὶ) ἐπὶν XXXVI 2 συντείνει 
Hartel . συντίνεε V 


110 V. FRAGMENTA EPICUREA 


θεῖσιν ὁ καρπὸς ἔρχεται, ἐπὶ δὲ φιλοσοφίας συντρέχει τῇ γνώσει 
τὸ τερπνόν: οὐ γὰρ μετὰ μάθησιν ἀπόλαυσις, ἀλλὰ ἅμα μάθη- 
σις καὶ ἀπόλαυσις. 

*XXVIII. Οὔτε τοὺς προχείρους εἰς φιλίαν οὔτε τοὺς ὀκνη- 
ροὺς δοκιμαστέον" δεῖ δὲ καὶ παρακινδυνεῦσαι χάριν φιλίας. 

“ΧΧΙΧ. Παρρησίᾳ γὰρ ἔγωγε χρώμενος φυσιολογῶν χρη- 
σμωδεῖν τὰ συμφέροντα πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις μᾶλλον ἂν βουλοίμην 
κἂν μηδεὶς μέλλῃ συνήσειν, ἢ συγκατατιθέμενος ταῖς δόξαις 
καρποῦσθαι τὸν πυκνὸν παραπίπτοντα παρὰ τῶν πολλῶν 

5 ἔπαινον. 

ΙΧΧΧ. Metrodorus. ᾿Ετοιμάζονταί τινες διὰ βίου τὰ πρὸς 
τὸν βίον, οὐ συνορῶντες ὡς πᾶσιν ἡμῖν θανάσιμον ἐγκέχυται 
τὸ τῆς γενέσεως φάρμακον. 

ΧΧΧΙ. Πρὸς μὲν τἄλλα δυνατὸν ἀσφάλειαν πορίσασθαι, 
χάριν δὲ θανάτου πάντες ἄνθρωποι πόλιν ἀτείχιστον οἰκοῦμεν. 

*X XXII. ‘O τοῦ σοφοῦ σεβασμὸς ἀγαθὸν μέγα τῶν σεβο- 
μένων ἐστί. 

ΧΧΧΠῚ. Σαρκὸς φωνὴ τὸ μὴ πεινῆν, τὸ μὴ διψῆν, τὸ μὴ 
ῥιγοῦν. ταῦτα γὰρ ἔχων τις καὶ ἐλπίζων Skew κἂν (Au) ὑπὲρ 
εὐδαιμονίας μαχέσαιτο. 

*XXXIV. Οὐχ οὕτως χρείαν ἔχομεν τῆς χρείας παρὰ τῶν 
φίλων ὡς τῆς πίστεως τῆς περὶ τῆς χρείας. 

*XXXV. Οὐ δεῖ λυμαίνεσθαι τὰ παρόντα τῶν ἀπόντων 
ἐπιθυμίᾳ, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπιλογίζεσθαι ὅτι καὶ ταῦτα τῶν εὐκταίων ἦν. 

[XXXVI. Ὁ Ἐπικούρου βίος τοῖς τῶν ἄλλων συγκρινόμενος 
ἕνεκεν ἡμερότητος καὶ αὐταρκείας μῦθος ἂν νομισθείη.) 

*XXXVII. ᾿Ασθενὴς ἡ φύσις ἐστὶ πρὸς τὸ κακόν, οὐ πρὸς 
τὸ ἀγαθόν: ἡδοναῖς μὲν γὰρ σώζεται, ἀλγηδόσι δὲ διαλύεται. 

“XXXVI Μικρὸς παντάπασιν, ᾧ πολλαὶ αἰτίαι εὕὔλογοι 
εἰς ἐξαγωγὴν βίου. 

*KXXXIX. Οὔθ᾽ 6 τὴν χρείαν ἐπιζητῶν διὰ παντὸς φίλος 
οὔθ᾽ ὃ μηδέποτε συνάπτων: ὃ μὲν γὰρ καπηλεύει τῇ χάριτι 


XXVIT 3 μάθησιν Wotke: μάθησις. V dpa Wotke: pera V 
AXVII 2 χάριν χήριν bis V XXIX 1 φυσιολογῶν χρησμωδεῖν 
Usener: φυσιολογῶ χρησμῶ. Δεῖ V : vator χρησμωδεῖν Crénert 
XXXII I cep Usener : σεβαστοεν τ σεβαστὸς (λόγος) a ey 
ἀγαθὸν μέγα Usener: ἀγαθῶν μετὰ τῶν σεβο seg σεβομέ 
Usener XXXII 2 κἂν (4c) Hartel; καὶ V rs <XVI III x as 
xpos} οἰκτρὸς Usener 


V. FRAGMENTS 111 


fully after completion, but in philosophy pleasure goes 
hand in hand with knowledge; for enjoyment does not 
follow comprehension, but comprehension and enjoyment 
are simultaneous. 

XXVIII. We must not approve either those who are 
always ready for friendship, or those who hang back, but 
for friendship’s sake we must even run risks. 

XXIX. In investigating nature T would prefer to speak 
openly and like an oracle to give answers serviceable to 
all mankind, even though no one should understand me, 
rather than to conform to popular opinions and so win 
the praise freely scattered by the mob. 

[XXX. Some men throughout their lives gather together 
the means of life, for they do not see that the draught 
swallowed by all of us at birth is a draught of death.} 

AXXI. Against all else it is possible to provide security, 
but as against death all of us mortals alike dwell in an 
unfortified city. ᾿ 

XXXII. The veneration of the wise man is a great 
blessing to those who venerate him. 

XXXII. The flesh cries out to be saved from hunger, 
thirst and cold. For if a man possess this safety and 
hope to possess it, he might rival even Zeus in happiness, 

AXXIV. It is not so much our friends’ help that helps 
us as the confidence of their help. 

XXXV. We should not spoil what we have by desiring 
what we have not, but remember that what we have too 
was the gift of fortune. 

[ XXXVI. Epicurus’ life when compared to other men’s 
in respect of gentleness and self-sufficiency might be 
thought a mere legend. } 

XXXVII. Nature is weak towards evil, not towards 
good: because it is saved by pleasures, but destroyed by 
pains. 

XXXVIII. He is a little man in all respects who has 
many good reasons for quitting life. 

XXXIX. He is no friend who is continually asking for 
help, nor he who never associates help with friendship. 


112 ν. FRAGMENTA EPICUREA 
τὴν ἀμοιβήν, ὃ δὲ ἀποκόπτει τὴν περὶ τοῦ μέλλοντος εὐελ- 


πιστίαν. 

*XL. Ὃ λέγων πάντα κατ᾽ ἀνάγκην γίνεσθαι οὐδὲν ἐγκαλεῖν 
ἔχει τῷ λέγοντε μὴ πάντα κατ᾽ ἀνάγκην γίνεσθαι" αὐτὸ γὰρ 
τοῦτό φησι κατ᾽ ἀνάγκην γίνεσθαι. 

*XLI, Τελᾶν Gua δεῖν καὶ φιλοσοφεῖν καὶ οἰκονομεῖν καὶ 
τοῖς λοιποῖς οἰκειώμασε χρῆσθαι καὶ μηδαμῇ λήγειν τὰς ἐκ τῆς 
ὀρθῆς φιλοσοφίας φωνὰς adlevras. 

*XLIL. Ὃ αὐτὸς χρόνος καὶ γενέσεως τοῦ μεγίστου ἀγαθοῦ 
καὶ ἀπολαύσεως. 

*XLIII. Φιλαργυρεῖν ἄδικα μὲν ἀσεβές, δίκαια δὲ αἰσχρόν" 
ἀπρεπὲς γὰρ ῥυπαρῶς φείδεσθαι καὶ μετὰ τοῦ δικαίου. 

*XLIV. Ὁ σοφὸς εἰς τὰ ἀναγκαῖα συγκαθεὶς μᾶλλον ἐπί- 
στάται μεταδιδόναι ἣ μεταλαμβάνειν: τηλικοῦτον αὐταρκείας 
εὗρε θησαυρόν. 

*XLV Οὐ κόμπου οὐδὲ φωνῆς ἐργαστικοὺς οὐδὲ τὴν περι- 
μάχητον παρὰ τοῖς πολλοῖς παιδείαν ἐνδεικνυμένους φυσιολογία 
παρασκευάζει, ἀλλὰ σοβαροὺς καὶ αὐτάρκεις καὶ ἐπὶ τοῖς ἰδίοις 
ἀγαθοῖς, οὐκ ἐπὶ τοῖς τῶν πραγμάτων μέγα φρονοῦντας. 

*XLVI. Τὰς φαύλας συνηθείας ὥσπερ ἄνδρας πονηροὺς 
πολὺν χρόνον μέγα βλάψαντας τελείως ἐκδεώκωμεν. 

{XLVII. Metrodorus. ΤΠροκατείλημμαί σε, ὦ τύχη, καὶ 
πᾶσαν σὴν παρείσδυσιν ἐνέφραξα. καὶ οὔτε σοὶ οὔτε ἀλλῇ 
οὐδεμίᾳ περιστάσει δώσομεν ἑαυτοὺς ἐκδότους. ἀλλ᾽ ὅταν 
ἡμᾶς τὸ χρεὼν ἐξάγῃ, μέγα προσπτύσαντες τῷ ζῆν καὶ τοῖς 

5 αὐτῷ κενῶς περιπλαττομένοις ἄπιμεν ἐκ τοῦ Civ μετὰ καλοῦ 
παιῶνος ἐπιφωνοῦντες ὡς εὖ ἡμῖν βεβίωται. 

*XLVIII. Πειρᾶσθαι τὴν ὑστέραν τῆς προτέρας κρείττω. 
ποιεῖν, ἕως ἂν ἐν 5686 ὦμεν! ἐπειδὰν δ᾽ ἐπὶ πέρας ἔλθωμεν, 
ὁμαλῶς εὐφραίνεσθαι. 


XL 3 post γίνεσθαι γέλων εχ γελᾶν ad initium = sententiae 
sequentis addidit Usener ΧΙ] 1 γελᾶν om. Usener. 
μελετᾶν Cronert δεῖν Wotke δέον V: δεῖ Leopold 
2 λήγειν Usener: Aéyew V 3 ὀρθῆς Hartel: ὀργῆο V 
XLII 2 ἀπολαύσεως Usener : ἀπολύσεως V XLIII 2 φείδεσθαι 
Wotke: dade... V XLIV 1 συγκαθεὶς Usener: συγκριθεὶς 
Vv: κλεισθεὶς Gomperz ἐπίσταται Usener: παρίσταται V 
XLV I heovac] (κενῇ) φωνῆς Usener 3 σοβαροὺ»͵ ep Usener : 
ἀθορύβους Gomperz. ἀσοβάρους Leopold XLVI 2 μέγα 
βλάψαντας Hartel: μεταβλάψαντας Vi: μεγάλα βλάψαντας Usener 
MLVIL 2 σὴν] {τὴνλ σὴν coniecit Usener 5 περιπλαττομέ- 
vows] περιπλεκομένοις Usener 6 παιῶνος Usener: πλείονος V 


V. FRAGMENTS 113 


For the former barters kindly feeling for a practical return 
and the latter destroys the hope of good in the future. 

XL. The man who says that all things come to pass by 
necessity cannot criticize one who denies that all things 
come to pass by necessity: for he admits that this too 
happens of necessity. 

XLI, We must laugh and philosophize at the same time 
and do our household duties and employ our other facul- 
ties, and never cease proclaiming the sayings of the true 
philosophy. 

XLII. The greatest blessing is created and enjoyed at 
the same moment. 

XLII. The love of money, if unjustly gained, is 
impious, and, if justly, shameful; for it is unseemly to be 
merely parsimonious even with justice on one’s side. 

XLIV. The wise man when he has accommodated him- 
self to straits knows better how to give than to receive: 
so great is the treasure of self-sufficiency which he has 
discovered. 

XLV. The study of nature does not make men produc- 
tive of boasting or bragging nor apt to display that culture 
which is the object of rivalry with the many, but high- 
spirited and self-sufficient, taking pride in the good things 
of their own minds and not of their circumstances. 

XLVI. Our bad habits, like evil men who have long 
done us great harm, let us utterly drive from us. 

XLVII. I have anticipated thee, Fortune, and en- 
trenched myself against all thy secret attacks. And we 
will not give ourselves up as captives to thee or to any 
other circumstance; but when it is time for us to go, 
spitting contempt on life and on those who here vainly 
cling to it, we will leave life crying aloud in a glorious 
triumph-song that we have lived well. 

XLVI. We must try to make the end of the journey 
better than the beginning, as long as we are journeying , 
but when we come to the end, we must be happy and 
content. 


XLVUI 1 ὑστέραν. . - προτέρας] ὑστεραίαν . . . προτεραίας Usener 
2 ἐν ὁδῷ Wotke: ἐν 8 ὁδῷ Ν : ἐν rpoddm Bignone: ἐν εὐόδῳ Cronert 


2078 H 


114 V. FRAGMENTA EPICUREA 


HLIX. = Κύριαι Δόξαι XII. 

L. = Κύριαι Δόξαι VIIL 

“1.1. Πυνθάνομαί cov τὴν κατὰ σάρκα κίνησιν ἀφϑονώτερον 
διακεῖσθαι πρὸς τὴν τῶν ἀφροδισίων ἔντευξιν. σὺ δὲ ὅταν 
μήτε τοὺς νόμους καταλύῃς μήτε τὰ καλῶς ἔθη κείμενα κινῇς 
μήτε τῶν πλησίον τινὰ λυπῇς μήτε τὴν σάρκα καταξαίνῃς 

5 Mite τὰ ἀναγκαῖα καταναλίσκῃς, χρῶ ὡς βούλει τῇ σεαυτοῦ 
προαιρέσει. ἀμήχανον μέντοι γε τὸ μὴ οὐχ ἑνί γέ τινι τούτων 
συνέχεσθαι: ἀφροδίσια γὰρ οὐδέποτε ὥνησεν᾽ ἀγαπητὸν δὲ 
εἰ μὴ ἔβλαψεν. 

*LIL "Ἢ φιλία περιχορεύει τὴν οἰκουμένην κηρύττουσα δὴ 
πᾶσιν ἡμῖν ἐγείρεσθαι ἐπὶ τὸν μακαρισμόν. 

*LIII. Οὐδενὶ φθονητεόν: ἀγαθοὶ γὰρ οὐκ ἄξιοι φθόνου, 
πονηροὶ δὲ ὅσῳ ἂν μᾶλλον εὐτυχῶσι, τοσούτῳ μᾶλλον αὑτοῖς 
λυμαίνονται. 

LIV. Οὐ προσποιεῖσθαι δεῖ φιλοσοφεῖν, ἀλλ᾽ ὄντως φιλοσο- 
φεῖν" οὐ γὰρ προσδεόμεθα τοῦ δοκεῖν ὑγιαίνειν, ἀλλὰ τοῦ κατ᾽ 
ἀλήθειαν ὑγιαίνειν. 

*LV. Θεραπεντέον τὰς συμφορὰς τῇ τῶν ἀπολλυμένων 
χάριτι καὶ τῷ γινώσκειν ὅτι οὐκ ἔστιν ἄπρακτον ποιῆσαι τὸ 
γεγονός. 

*LVI-LVII ᾿Αλγεῖ μὲν ὃ σοφὸς οὗ μᾶλλον στρεβλούμενος 
ζαὐτὸς ἢ ὁρῶν στρεβλούμενον, τὸν φίλον ... ὁ βίος αὐτοῦ 
πᾶς δι᾽’ ἀπιστίαν συγχυθήσεται καὶ ἀνακεχαιστισμένος ἔσται. 

“LVIIL. Ἑκλυτέον ἑαυτοὺς ἐκ τοῦ περὶ τὰ ἐγκύκλια καὶ 
πολιτικὰ δεσμωτηρίου. 

*LIX. Απληστον οὐ γαστήρ, ὥσπερ οἱ πολλοί φασιν, ἀλλὰ 
δόξα ψευδὴς ὑπὲρ τοῦ γαστρὸς ἀορίστου πληρώματος. 

LX. Πᾶς ὥσπερ ἄρτι γεγονὼς ἐκ τοῦ ζῆν ἀπέρχεται. 

*LXI. Καλλίστη καὶ ἡ τῶν πλησίον ὄψις, τῆς πρώτης συγ- 
yevelas ὁμονοούσης, 7 πολλὴν εἰς τοῦτο ποιουμένη σπουδήν. 

LI 1 ἀφθονώτερον Usener- ἀφθονᾶτγν 2 ἀφροδισίων Usener - 
ἀφροδίσιον V ὅταν Usener: 6reV 3 καταλύῃς Wotke: καταλύεις 
V ἔθη Hartel ἔθει Ψ 4 .πλησίον Wotke: πλησίων V 5 κατανα- 
λέσκῃς Wotke: καταναλίσκεις V?* καταγιγνώσκεις Vt 6 τὸ 
Usener: τῶ V LII 1 ἡ φιλία] ἡ φιλοσοφία Hartel: ᾿Ἡλίον 
σφαῖρα coniecit Usener 2 μακαρισμόν] μακάριον βίον Weal 
LIII 2 εὐτυχῶσι Wotke. ἐντυχῶσι V αὑτοῖς Wotke : αὐτοῖς V 
LV 3 γεγονός Usener: γένος V LVI-LVII ut unam senten- 


tiam lacunosam habet V: separavit Wotke I στρεβλούμενος τὸν 
φίλον) αὐτὸς ἢ ὁρῶν στρεβλούμενον supplevit Usener: στρεβλουμένον 


V. FRAGMENTS .- aT 


LI. You tell me that the stimulus of the flesh makes you 
teo prone to the pleasures of love. Provided that you do 
not break the laws or good customs and do not distress 
any of your neighbours or do harm to your body or 
squander your pittance, you may indulge your inclination 
as you please. Yet it is rmpossible not to come up against 
one or other of these barriers: for the pleasures of love 
never profited a man and he is lucky if they do him no 
harm. 

LII. Friendship goes dancing round the world proclaim: 
ing to us all to awake to the praises of a happy life. 

LIII. We must envy no one: for the good do not 
deserve envy and the bad, the more they prosper, the 
more they injure themselves. 

LIV. We must not pretend to study philosophy, but 
study it in reality: for 1t is not the appearance of health 
that we need, but real health. 

LV. We must heal our misfortunes by the grateful 
recollection of what has been and by the recognition that 
it is impossible to make undone what has been done. 

LVI-LVII. The wise man is not more pained when 
being tortured (himself, than when seeing) his friend (tor- 
tured): (but if his friend does him wrong), his whole life 
will be confounded by distrust and completely upset. 

LVIII. We must release ourselves from the prison of 
affairs and politics. 

LIX. It is not the stomach that is insatiable, as is 
generally said, but the false opinion that the stomach needs 
an unlimited amount to fill it. 

LX. Every man passes out of life as though he had just 
been born. 

LXI. Most beautiful too 1s the sight of those near and 
dear to us, when our original kinship makes us of one 
mind; for such sight 1s a great incitement to this end. 
τοῦ φίλον (ex cad. pal. gr. Heid. 129) (xat ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ τεθνήξεται" εἴ 
yap προήσεται) τὸν φίλον Bignone: post τὸν φίλον fortasse supplen- 
dum εἰ δὲ ἀδικήσει αὐτὸν ὁ φίλος LVIII 2 δεσμωτηρίου Usener: 
δεσμωτήρια V LIX 2 {τῆς) γαστρὸς supplevit Usener 
LXI τ πλησίον Wotke: πλησίων V ὄψις.) σύναψις contecit 
Usener 2 ἡ scripsi: ἡ εἰς vel Vi: ἢ Weil καὶ Hartel: xels (det) 


Bignone ποιουμένη] ποιουμένης Usener 
Η 2 


446 V. FRAGMENTA EPICUREA 


*LXII. El yap κατὰ τὸ δέον ὀργαὶ γίγνονται τοῖς γεννήσασι 
πρὸς τὰ ἔκγονα, μάταιον δήπουθέν ἐστι τὸ ἀντιτείνειν καὶ μὴ 
παραιτεῖσθαι συγγνώμης τυχεῖν" εἰ δὲ μὴ κατὰ τὸ δέον ἀλλὰ 
ἀλογώτερον, γελοῖον πάνυ τὸ προσεκκαίειν τὴν ἀλογίαν θυμο- 

5 κατοχοῦντα, καὶ μὴ ζητεῖν μεταθεῖναι κατ᾽ ἄλλους τρόπους 
εὐγνωμονοῦντα. 

*LXIII. "Ἔστι καὶ ἐν λιτότητι μεθόριος, ἧς ὁ ἀνεπιλόγιστος 
παραπλήσιόν τι πάσχει τῷ δι’ ἀοριστίαν ἐκπίπτοντι. 

*LXIV. ᾿Ακολουθεῖν δεῖ τὸν παρὰ τῶν ἄλλων ἔπαινον 
αὐτόματον, ἡμᾶς δὲ γενέσθαι περὶ τὴν ἡμῶν ἰατρείαν. 

*LXV. Μάταιόν ἐστι παρὰ θεῶν αἰτεῖσθαι ἅ τις ἑαυτῷ χορη- 
γῆσαι ἱκανός ἐστι. 

*LXVI. Συμπαθῶμεν τοῖς φίλοις od θρηνοῦντες ἀλλὰ 
φροντίζοντες. 

*LXVII. ᾿Ελεύθερος βίος οὐ δύναται κτήσασθαι χρήματα 
πολλὰ διὰ τὸ τὸ πρᾶγμα (μὴ) ῥάδιον εἶναι χωρὶς θητείας ὄχλων 
ἣ δυναστῶν, ἀλλὰ ζσὺν) συνεχεῖ δαψιλείᾳ πάντα κέκτηται ἂν 
δέ ποὺ καὶ τύχῃ χρημάτων πολλῶν, καὶ ταῦτα ῥᾳδίως ἂν εἰς 

5 τὴν τοῦ πλησίον εὔνοιαν διαμετρήσαι. 

*LXVIIIL Οὐδὲν ἱκανὸν ᾧ ὀλίγον τὸ ἱκανόν. 

*LXIX. Τὸ τῆς ψυχῆς ἀχάριστον λίχνον ἐποίησε τὸ ζῷον 
εἰς ἄπειρον τῶν ἐν διαίτῃ ποικιλμάτων. 

LKX. Μηδέν σοι ἐν βίῳ πραχθείη ὃ φόβον παρέξει σοι, εἰ 
γνωσθήσεται τῷ πλησίον. 

*LXXI. Πρὸς πάσας τὰς ἐπιθυμίας προσακτέον τὸ ἐπερώ- 
τημα τοῦτο" τί μοι γενήσεται ἂν τελεσθῇ τὸ κατὰ τὴν ἐπιθυ- 
μίαν ἐπιζητούμενον, καὶ τί ἐὰν μὴ τελεσθῇ ; 

1ΧΧῚ]. = Κύριαι Δόξαι XIII 

*LXXIII. Καὶ τὸ γεγενῆσθαί τινας ἀλγηδόνας περὶ σῶμα 
λυσιτελεῖ πρὸς φυλακὴν τῶν ὁμρειδῶν. 

*LKXIV. Ἔν φιλολόγῳ συζητήσει πλεῖον ἤνυσεν 6 ἡττηθείς, 
καθ᾽ ὃ προσέμαθεν. 


LXII 2 ἔκγονα Wotke : ἔγγονα V 4 πάνυ Weil: wav Vi: πάντως 
Muehll: σιγᾶν Usener προσεκκαίειν Weil: πρὸς ἔκκλησιν Vi: πρὸς 
ἔκκλισιν Usener: πρὸς ἔκκαυσιν Gomperz post ἀλογίαν Usener 
Gyo» inseruit θυμοκατοχοῦντα Crénert: θυμωκατοχοῦντα V: θυμῷ 
κατασχόντα Usener: θυμῷ κατέχοντα Weil 6 εὐγνωμονοῦντα 
Cronert : wopovourras V LXIII τ λιτότητι peOdptos Usener : 
λεπτότητι καθάριος Vz λεπτότητι καθαριότης Muehll. LXVIL1 ἐλεύ- 
ΣΝ Τλευθέριος coniecit Usener κτήσασθαι χρήματα Hartel: χρήσα- 


V. FRAGMENTS . 117 


LXII. Now if parents are justly angry with their 
children, it is certainly useless to fight against it and not 
to ask for pardon; byt if their anger is unjust and irra- 
tional, it is quite ridiculous to add fuel to their irrational 
passion by nursing one’s own indignation, and not to 
attempt to turn aside their wrath in other ways by 
gentleness. 

LXIII. Frugality too has a limit, and the man who dis- 
regards it is in like case with him who errs through excess. 

LXIV. Praise from others must come unasked: we 
must concern ourselves with the healing of our own lives. 

LXV. It is vain to ask of the gods what a man is capable 
of supplying for himself. 

LXVI. Let us show our feeling for our lost friends not 
by lamentation but by meditation. 

LXAVII. A free hfe cannot acquire many possessions, 
because this is not easy to do without servility to mobs or 
monarchs, yet it possesses all things in unfailing abun- 
dance; and if by chance it obtains many possessions, it is 
easy to distribute them so as to win the gratitude of 
neighbours. 

LXVIII. Nothing is sufficient for him to whom what is 
sufficient seems little. 

LXIX. The ungrateful greed of the soul makes the 
creature everlastingly desire varieties of dainty food. 

LXX. Let nothing be done in your hfe, which will cause 
you fear if it becomes known to your neighbour. 

LXXI. Every desire must be confronted with this 
question : what will happen to me, if the object of my desire 
is accomplished and what if it is not ? 


LXXIII. The occurrence of certain bodily pains assists 
us in guarding against others like them. 

LXXIV. Ina philosophical discussion he who is worsted 
gains more in proportion as he learns more. 


σθαι κτήματα Ψ 4. {μὴ) supplevit Usener θητείας Hartel: θηλείας 
ν 3 (σὺν) πως Usener: (ev) Hartel syed] πάνζτα τὰ 


συμφέρονγτα coniecit Bignone 5 διαμετρήσαι Wotke : διαμετρῆσαι 
ν LXVITT 1 τὸ] num οὐχ ? LXIX 1 λίχνον V5: Ἀέχνον V3 
LXX 1 βίῳ) (τῷ) βίῳ coniecit Usener LXXIIE 1 γεγενῆσθαι 
Wotke : γενέσθαί (sic) V 


118 ν, FRAGMENTA EPICUREA 


*LXXV. Els τὰ παρῳκηχότα ἀγαθὰ ἀχάριστος φωνὴ 7 
λέγουσα “ Τέλος ὅρα μακροῦ Blov”. 

*LXXVI. Τοιοῦτος εἶ γηράσκων ὁποῖον ἐγὼ παραινῶ, καὶ 
διέγνωκας ὁποῖόν ἐστι τὸ ἑαυτῷ φιλοσοφῆσαι καὶ οἷον τὸ τῇ 
Ἑλλάδι" συγχαίρω σοι. 

*LXXVII. Τῆς αὐταρκείας καρπὸς μέγιστος ἐλευθερία. 

*LXXVIII. ‘O γενναῖος περὶ σοφίαν καὶ φιλίαν μάλιστὰ 
γίγνεται' ὧν τὸ μέν ἐστι θνητὸν ἀγαθόν, τὸ δ᾽ ἀθάνατον. 

*LXXIX. Ὃ ἀτάραχος ἑαυτῷ καὶ ἑτέρῳ ἀόχλητος. 

*LXXX. "Eorw πρώτη σωτηρίας μοῖρα τῆς ἡλικίας τήρησις 
καὶ φυλακὴ τῶν πάντα μολυνόντων κατὰ τὰς ἐπιθυμίας τὰς 
οἱστρώδεις. 

*LXXXI. Οὐ λύει τὴν τῆς ψυχῆς ταραχὴν οὐδὲ τὴν ἀξιό- 
λογον ἀπογεννᾷ χαρὰν οὔτε πλοῦτος ὑπάρχων ὁ μέγιστος 
οὔθ᾽ ἡ παρὰ τοῖς πολλοῖς τιμὴ καὶ περίβλεψις οὔτ᾽ ἄλλο τι 
τῶν παρὰ τὰς ἀδιορίστους αἰτίας. 


LXXVI i τοιοῦτος] {ὅτι τοιοῦτος Usener παραινῷ Wotke . 
wepava Via διέγνωκας Usener: δὴ ἔγνωκας ν τὸ post οἷον Hartel : 
των LXXVIII 2 θνητὸν Hartel " ug s LXXX 1 ἔστιν 
πρώτη Hartel : γενναίῳ Muehil: P(velT).. LXXXI τ οὐδὲ 
τὴν] οὐδέ rw’ Usener 4 ἀδιορίστους ecaee: ἀζυρὶ σίτου. V 


V. FRAGMENTS 119 


LXXV. Ungrateful towards the blessings of the past 
is the saying, ‘ Wait till the end of a long life’. 

LXXVI. You are in your old age just such as I urge 
you to be, and you have seen the difference between 
studying philosophy for oneself and proclaiming it to 
Greece at large: I rejoice with you. 

LXXVII. The greatest fruit of self-sufficiency is 
freedom. 

LXXVIII. The noble soul occupies itself with wisdom 
and friendship: of these the one is a mortal good, the other 
immortal. 

LXXIX. The man who is serene causes no disturbance 
to himself or to another. 

LXXX. The first measure of securnty is to watch over 
one’s youth and to guard against what makes havoc of all 
by means of pestering desires. 

LXXXI. The disturbance of the soul cannot be ended 
nor true joy created either by the possession of the greatest 
wealth or by honour and respect in the eyes of the mob 
or by anything else that 1s associated with causes of 
unlimited desire. 


£20 V. FRAGMENTA EPICUREA 


B. 
CERTORUM LIBRORUM RELIQUIAE. 


1. Περὶ Αἱρέσεων καὶ Φυγῶν. 
τ. Ἡ μὲν γὰρ ἀταραξία καὶ ἀπονία καταστηματικαί elaw™ 
ἡδοναί: ἡ δὲ χαρὰ καὶ ἡ εὐφροσύνη κατὰ κίνησιν ἐνεργείᾳ 
βλέπονται. 


11, Διαπορέαι. 


a. Πράξει τινὰ ὁ σοφὸς ὧν οἱ νόμοι ἀπαγορεύουσιν, εἰδὼς 
ὅτι λήσει ; οὐκ εὔοδον τὸ ἁπλοῦν ἔστι κατηγόρημα. 


\ ? 7 
11. Mexpa Ezreropun. 
3. Μαντικὴ οὖσα ἀνύπαρκτος, εἰ καὶ ὑπαρκτή, οὐδὲν παρ᾽ 
ἡμᾶς ἡγητέα τὰ γινόμενα. 


Ιν. Πρὸς Θεόφραστον. 


4. ᾿Αλλὰ καὶ χωρὲς τούτου τοῦ μέρους οὐκ οἶδα ὅπως δεῖ τὰ 
ἐν σκότει ταῦτα ὄντα φῆσαι χρώματα ἔχειν. 


ν. Συμπόσιον. 


5. Polyaenus. Οὔ φῃς εἶναι, ὦ ᾿Επίκουρε, τὰς ὑπὸ τοῦ 
οἴνου διαθερμασίας ; (ὑπέλαβέ τις) οὐ τὸ καθόλου θερμαντικὸν 
ἀποφαίνεσθαι τὸν οἶνον εἶναι. (καὶ μετὰ σμικρόν") φαίνεται 
μὲν γὰρ τὸ καθόλου οὐκ εἶναι θερμαντικὸς ὃ οἷνος. τοῦδε δέ 

δτινος ὁ τοσοῦτος εἶναι θερμαντικὸς ἂν ῥηθείη. 

6. Διὸ δὴ καθόλου μὲν οὐ ῥητέον τὸν οἶνον εἶναι θερμαντικόν, 
τῆς δὲ τοιαύτης φύσεως καὶ τῆς οὕτω διακειμένης θερμαντικὸν 
τὸν τοσοῦτον, ἢ τῆσδε τὸν τοσοῦτον εἶναι ψυκτικόν. ἔνεισι 


1 courant. τ Χ, δ 136 1 post καὶ Usenerginseruit 2 évepyeiq] 
coal 2 Plut. adv. Col. 34, p. 1127a 3 Diog 

ΤΑΝ χ, δ 135 I wap’ pas] πρὸς ἡμᾶς Meibom: παρ(ζὰ τὸ παρ᾽ ὴ as 
Bignone 4 Plut. adv. Cof. 7, p. trtoc 5 Plut. adv. 26. 


V. FRAGMENTS rat 


B. 
REMAINS ASSIGNED TO CERTAIN BOOKS. 


1. Concerning Choice and Avoidance. 


1. Freedom from trouble in the mind and from pain in 
the body are static pleasures, but joy and exultation are 
considered as active pleasures involving motion. 


π. Problems. 
2. Will the wise man do things that the laws forbid, 
knowing that he will not be found out? A simple answer. 
is not easy to find. 


mi. Lhe Shorter Summary. 


3. Prophecy does not exist, and even if it did exist, 
things that come to pass must be counted nothing to us. 


Iv. Against Theophrastus. 


4. But even apart from this argument I do not know 
how one should say that things in the dark have colour. 


Vv. Symposium. 


5. Polyaenus: Do you, Epicurus, deny the existence of 
the warmth produced by wine? (Some one interrupted :) 
It does not appear that wine is unconditionally productive 
of heat. 

(And a little later :) It seems that wine is not uncon- 
ditionally productive of heat, but wine of a certain quantity 
might be said to produce heat in a certain body. 

6. Therefore we must not speak of wine as uncondition- 
ally productive of heat, but rather say that a certain 
quantity of wine will produce heat in a certain body which 
iS in a certain disposition, or that a different quantity 


Pp. 11o9e 2 ὑπέλαβέ ris] ὑπέλαβε “τίς. . Usener 3 ἀποφαί- 
ver Oa} ἀποφαίνεται Usener 


ras V. FRAGMENTA EPICUREA 


yap τοιαῦται ἐν τῷ ἀθροίσματι φύσεις" ἐξ ὧν ἂν ψυχρὸν 

Β συσταίη, el, δέον γε, ἑτέραις παραζυεῖσαι ψυχρασίας φύσιν 
ἀποτελέσειαν" ὅθεν ἐξαπατώμενοι οἱ μὲν ψυκτικὸν τὸ καθόλου 
φασὶν εἶναι τὸν οἶνον, οἱ δὲ θερμαντικόν. 

4. Πολλάκις οὐδ’ ἦλθεν εἰς τὸ σῶμα θερμαντικὴν ἐπιφέρων 
ἢ Ψψυκτικὴν δύναμιν ὁ οἶνος, ἀλλὰ κινηθέντος τοῦ ὄγκου καὶ 
γενομένης τῶν σωμάτων μεταστάσεως αἱ ποιοῦσαι τὸ θερμὸν 
ἄτομοι νῦν μὲν συνῆλθον els ταὐτὸ καὶ παρέσχον ὑπὸ πλήθους 

δ θερμότητα καὶ πύρωσιν τῷ σώματι, νῦν δ᾽ ἐκπεσοῦσαι 
κατέψυξαν. 

8. Συνουσί ὥνησε μὲν οὐδέποτε, ἀγαπητὸν δ᾽ εἰ μὴ 
ἔβλαψε. 

9. Θαυμαστὸν δή, εἰ σὺ μὲν οὐδὲν ἐξεέργον διὰ τὴν ἡλικίαν, 
ὡς αὐτὸς ἃν φήσαις, τῶν κατὰ σεαυτὸν ἁπάντων νέος ὧν 
πρεσβυτῶν ἀνδρῶν» καὶ ἐνδόξων πολὺ ἐν τῇ ῥητορικῇ δυνάμει 
ὑπερέχειν . . . θαυμαστὸν δή φημι, εἰ σὺ μὲν οὐδὲν ἐξείργου 

δ διὰ τὴν ἡλικίαν ἐν τῇ ῥητορικῇ δυνάμει προέχειν, ὃ δοκεῖ 
τριβῆς εἶναι καὶ συνηθείας πολλῆς, τοῦ δὲ θεωρῆσαι τὰ πράγ- 
ματα, ὡς ἔχει, διὰ τὴν ἡλικίαν ἔστιν ἐξείργεσθαι, οὗ μᾶλλον 
ἂν δόξαι ἐπιστήμη αἰτία εἶναι ἤπερ τριβὴ καὶ συνήθεια. 


νι. Περὲ Τέλους. 


το. Οὐ γὰρ ἔγωγε ἔχω τί νοήσω τἀγαθόν, ἀφαιρῶν μὲν τὰς 
διὰ χυλῶν ἡδονάς, ἀφαιρῶν δὲ τὰς δι᾿ ἀφροδισίων, ἀφαιρῶν δὲ 
τὰς δι᾿ ἀκροαμάτων, ἀφαιρῶν δὲ καὶ τὰς διὰ μορφῆς κατ᾽ ὄψιν 
ἡδείας κινήσεις. 

1x. Τὸ γὰρ εὐσταθὲς σαρκὸς κατάστημα καὶ τὸ περὶ ταύτης 
πιστὸν ἔλπισμα τὴν ἀκροτάτην χαρὰν καὶ βεβαιοτάτην ἔχει 
τοῖς ἐπιλογίζεσθαι δυναμένοις. 

12. Τιμητέον τὸ καλὸν καὶ τὰς ἀρετὰς καὶ τὰ τοιουτότροπα, 
ἐὰν ἡδονὴνο παρασκευάζῃ" ἐὰν δὲ μὴ παρασκευάζῃ, χαίρειν 
ἐατέον. 


5 εἰ, δέον v4 sic interpunxi: εἰς δέον τε Wyttenbach: εἰ (eis) δέον 
γε Bignone : at ye Usener ἡ Plut. adv. Col. 6, p. τὸ ἃ 
6 Diog. Laert. x, §118 q.v. 9 Philodem. περὶ pyrop. ὕπομν. ii, col, x 
Serge Voll. Rhet. i, 102) 1 δὴ om. pap. 2 ὡς Sudhaus: re 


: ὅτε Gomperz 7 οὗ Sudhaus: οὐ pap. to Athen. xii 
546. ε : (cf. Diog. Laert. x, 3 ) I ἔχω τέ νοήσω Diog. Laert. : δύναμαι 
νοῆσαι Athen. 3ixar ὄψιν ἡδείας κινήσεις Om. Diog. Laett. 


τι Plut. contr. Ep. beat. pa p. 1089d 12 Athen. xii. 54! f 


V. FRAGMENTS 53 


will produce cold in a different body. For in the compound 
body of wine there are certain particles out of which cold 
might be produced, if, as need arises, united with different 
particles they could form a structure which would cause 
cold. So that those are deceived who say that wine is 
unconditionally heating or cooling. 

4. Wine often enters the body without exerting any 
power either of heating or of cooling, but when the struc- 
ture is disturbed and an atomic re-arrangement takes 
place, the atoms which create heat at one time come 
together and by their number give heat and inflammation 
to the body, at another they retire and so cool tt. 

8. Sexual intercourse has never done a man good, and 
he is lucky if it has not harmed him. 

9. It is strange indeed that you were not at all impeded 
by your youth, as you would say yourself, from attaining, 
young as you were, a distinction in the art of rhetoric far 
above all your contemporaries, even the experienced and 
famous, It is strange indeed, I say, that you were not at 
all impeded by your youth from winning distinction 1n the 
art of rhetoric, which seems to require much practice and 
habituation, whereas youth can be an impediment to the 
understanding of the true nature of the world, towards 
which knowledge might seem to contribute more than 
practice and habituation. 


vi. On the end of Life. 


το. I know not how I can conceive the good, if I with- 
draw the pleasures of taste, and withdraw the pleasures of 
love, and withdraw the pleasures of hearing, and withdraw 
the pleasurable emotions caused to sight by beautiful 
form. 

ar. The stable condition of well-being in the body and 
the sure hope of its continuance holds the fullest and 
surest joy for those who can rightly calculate it. 

12. Beauty and virtue and the like are to be honoured, 
if they give pleasure ; but if they do not give pleasure, we 
must bid them farewell. 


124 ν. FRAGMENTA EPICUREA 


vu. Περὲ Φύσεως. 
Lib. I. 
13. ‘H τῶν ὅλων φύσις σώματά ἐστι καὶ κενόν. 
14. ‘H τῶν ὄντων φύσις σώματά ἐστι καὶ τόπος. 
Lib. ΧΙ. 
15. Εἰ γὰρ τὸ μέγεθος διὰ τὸ διάστημα ἀπεβεβλήκει, πολλῷ 
μᾶλλον ἂν τὴν χρόαν' ἄλλο γὰρ τούτῳ συμμετρότερον διά- 
στημα οὖθέν ἐστι. 


INCERTORUM LIBRORUM FRAGMENTA. 


16. "“Aropdéy ἐστι σῶμα στερεὸν ἀμέτοχον κενοῦ παρεμ- 
πλοκῆς" κενόν ἐστι φύσις ἀναφής. 

τὴ. ᾿Αλλ’ ἔτωσαν" εἶχε γὰρ ἐκεῖνος ὠδίνων τὴν ἀπὸ τοῦ 
στόματος καύχησιν τὴν σοφιστικήν, καθάπερ καὶ ἄλλοι πολλοὶ 
τῶν ἀνδραπόδων». 


Cc, 
EPISTOLARUM FRAGMENTA. 
18.°O [ἐ]ὰν δ ανοῶν)ται, περ(γ)ίνοντίαι) τῶ[ν] κατὰ τὴν 
[ἔνδειαν καί] πεϊν»αν κακῶν. 

19. Κἂν πόλ[ε)μ[ος ἦι), δεινὸν οὐκ ἃ[»] θέσθαι θεῶν εἵλείω» 
ὄντων. καθαρὰν tiv ζωὴν] διηχέναι xali διάξειν σὺν αὐτῶι} 
Μάτρωνι θεῶν εἥλεων ὄντων. 

ao. Λέγε δή μοι, Πολύαιν᾽, οἶσθ᾽ ἅπερ ἡμῖν μεγάλη χαρὰ 
γεγένηται ; 

EPISTULAE AD PLURES DATAE. 

IIpos τοὺς ἐν Μυτιλήνῃ φιλοσόφους. 


21. Ταῦτα ἤγαγεν αὐτὸν εἰς ἔκστασιν τοιαύτην, ὥστε μοι 
λοιδορεῖσθαι καὶ ἀποκαλεῖν διδάσκαλον. 


τῷ Sext.Emp. adv. Do, iil. 333 14 Plut. adv. Col.t I, p.Liize 
15 Schol. ad EA. ad Pyth. (Diog. Laert. x, § 91) 1 ἀπεβεβλήκει edd. : 
ἀποβεβλήκει libri 2 ἄλλο (ἄλλω B)) ἀλλ᾽ οὐ Usener 16 Schol. 
ad Dionys. Thr. p. 660, 25 Bekk. 17 Diog. Laert. x, § 7 
I ἀλλ' ἴτωσαν Usener: ἀλλ᾽ εἴτως ἀλλ᾽ BP4Q: alu libri alia: ἀλλ᾽ εἴ 
τις ἄλλος Stephanus εἶχε γὰρ ἐκεῖνος Usener : εἶχε γὰρ κεῖνος libri : 
εἶχε κἀκεῖνος Stephanus 18 Philodem. de Divittis, ΨΩ" iti, 85: 
restituit Gomperz 4Ἧ4 κακῶν Gomperz : «aide. ν apogr. 19 Philo- 
dem. περὶ εὖσ. VH" ii. 107: restituit Gomperz 1 ἂν θέσθαι Usener : 


V. FRAGMENTS 125 


vir. On Nature. 


Book I. 


13. The nature of the universe consists of bodies and 
void. 
14. The nature of ali existing things is bodies and 
space. 
Book XI 
15. For if it (se. the sun) had lost its size through the 
distance, much more would it have lost its colour: for 


there is no other distance better adapted for such loss than 
that of the sun. 


FROM UNCERTAIN WORKS. 
16. The atom is a hard body free from any admixture 
of void; the void is intangible existence. 
17. Away with them all: for he (Nausiphanes), hke 


many another slave, was in travail with that wordy brag- 
gart, sophistic. 


Cc. 
REMAINS OF LETTERS. 
18. If they have this in mind, they are victorious over 
the evils of want and poverty 
19. Even if war comes, he would not count it terrible, 
if the gods are propitious. He has led and will lead a 


pure life in Matro’s company, by favour of the gods. 


20, Tell me, Polyaenus, do you know what has been 
a great joy to us? 


LETTERS TO SEVERAL PERSONS. 
To the philosophers in Mytilene. 


21. This drove him to such a state of fury that he 
abused me and ironically called me master. 


άθεσθαι apogr.: ἔσεσθαι Gomperz 20 Theo Progymn, 2,t 1, 
Pp. 169 Walz. οἶσθ᾽ ἅπερ ἡμῖν Cronert: συναπέριμεν libri. ἔστιν ἃ 
πρὶν μὲν Usener 2 γεγένηται Cronert: γένηται libri at Diog. 
Laert.x, ὃ 8 2 διδάσκαλον] δύσκολον proposuit Usener: {μου 
ἑαυτόν, adiecit Kochalsky . 


126 V. FRAGMENTA EPICUREA 


a2. Oluat δ᾽ ἔγωγε τοὺς βαρυστόνους καὶ μαθητήν με δόξειν 
τοῦ πλεύμονος εἶναι, μετὰ μειρακίων τινῶν κραιπαλώντων 
ἀκούσαντα. 

Καὶ γὰρ πονηρὸς ἄνθρωπος ἦν καὶ ἐπιτετηδευκὼς τοιαῦτα ἐξ 
ὧν οὐ δυνατὸν εἷς σοφίαν ἐλθεῖν. 


EPISTULAE AD SINGULOS DATAE. 
Πρὸς ᾿Ανάξαρχον. 

23. Ἐγὼ δ᾽ ἐφ᾽ ἡδονὰς συνεχεῖς παρακαλῶ καὶ οὐκ ἐπ᾽ 
ἀρετὰς κενὰς καὶ ματαίας καὶ ταραχώδεις ἐχούσας τῶν καρπῶν 
τὰς ἐλπίδας. 

Πρὸς ᾿Απελλήν. 

24. Μακαρίζω σε, ὦ ᾽᾿ΑἈπελλῆ, ὅτι καθαρὸς πάσης αἰκίας ἐπὶ 

φιλοσοφίαν ὥρμησας. 


Πρὸς Θεμίσταν. 


25. Olds τέ εἰμι, ἐὰν μὴ ὑμεῖς πρός με ἀφίκησθε, αὐὖ- 
τὸς τρικύλιστος, ὅπου ἂν ὑμεῖς καὶ Θέμιστα παρακαλῆτε, 
ὠθεῖσθαι. 

IIpds ᾿Ιδομενέα. 

26 Πέμπε οὖν ἀπαρχὰς ἡμῖν εἰς τὴν τοῦ ἱεροῦ σώματος 
θεραπείαν ὑπέρ τε αὑτοῦ καὶ τέκνων: οὕτω γάρ μοι λέγειν 
ἐπέρχεται. 

21 ἾὯ πάντα τἀμὰ κινήματα τερπνὰ νομίσας ἐκ νέου. 

28 Εἰ βούλει πλούσιον ΓΙ}υθοκλέα ποιῆσαι, μὴ χρημάτων 
προστίθει, τῆς δὲ ἐπιθυμίας ἀφαίρει. 

29 ᾿Εζμλώσαμεν τὴν αὐτάρκειαν οὐχ ὅπως τοῖς εὐτελέσι 
καὶ λιτοῖς πάντως χρώμεθα, ἀλλ᾽ ὅπως θαρρῶμεν πρὸς αὐτά. 

30. Τὴν μακαρίαν ἄγοντες καὶ ἅμα τελευτῶντες ἡμέραν τοῦ 
βίου ἐγράφομεν ὑμῖν ταυτί: στραγγουρικά τε “παρηκολούθει 
καὶ δυσεντερικὰ πάθη ὑπερβολὴν οὐκ ἀπολείποντα τοῦ ἐν 


az Sext. Emp. adv. Math 1.3 4 ἄνθρωπος Usener: ἄνθρωπος 
edd. 28 Plut. adv. Col. τ, p. 1117 a 24. Athen. x01, Ὁ. 588 a 
(cf. Plut. contr. Ep. beat. 12, Ὁ. 1094 4) I ὦ ᾿Απελλὴ ex Plut. sup- 
fevit Usener ὦ οὗτος hbri αἰκίας Bignone: αἰτίας bri: παιδείας 
achsmuth 25 Diog. Laert. x, ἧς 2 ὅπου] ὅποι Cobet 


Vv. FRAGMENTS 127 


a2. | suppose that those grumblers will believe me to be 
a disciple of The Mollusc and ta have listened to his 
teaching in company with a few bibulous youths. For 
indeed the fellow was a bad man and his habits such as 
could never lead to wisdom. 


LETTERS TO INDIVIDUALS. 
To Anaxarchus. 


23. But I summon you to continuous pleasures and not 
to vain and empty virtues which have but disturbing hopes 


of results. 
To Apelles. 


24. 1 congratulate you, Apelles, in that you have ap- 
proached philosophy free from all contamination. 


To Themusta. 


25. If you two don’t come to me, I am capable of arriv- 
ing with a hop, skip, and jump, wherever you and Themista 
summon me. 

To Idomeneus. 


26. Send us therefore offerings for the sustenance of 
our holy body on behalf of yourself and your children . 
this 1s how it occurs to me to put It. 

27. O thou who hast from thy youth regarded all my 
promptings as sweet. 

28. If you wish to make Pythocles rich, do not give him 
more money, but diminish his desire. 

29. We think highly of frugality not that we may always 
keep to a cheap and simple diet, but that we may be free 
from desire regarding 1t. 

30 On this truly happy day of my life, as I am at the 
point of death, I write this to you. The disease in my 
bladder and stomach are pursuing their course, lacking 
nothing of their natural severity: but against all this is the 


26 Plut. adv Col. 18, p. 1117 ἃ a7 Theo Progymn. 2, t. 1, 
P 169 Walz. 28 Stobaeus ἄγρα xv 24 1 χρημάτων VAB? 

χρήματα B?; χρήμασι Meineke ag Stob. Florié. xvu. 14 
2 πάντως B: πάντων AV 30 Diog. Laert. x, ὃ 22 1 τελευτῶντες] 


τελευταίαν Davis ex Cic. de Fin. ii. 30. 96 2 παρηκολούθει 
Stephanus: παρηκολουθήκει libri 


128 Vv. FRAGMENTA EPICUREA 


éavrots μεγέθους" ἀντιπαρετάττετο δὲ πᾶσι gotros τὸ κατὰ 

5 Ψυχὴν χαῖρον ἐπὶ τῇ τῶν γεγονότων ἡμῖν διαλογισμῶν μνήμῃ. 
σὺ δὲ ἀξίως τῆς ἐκ μειρακίου παραστάσεως πρὸς ἐμὲ καὶ 
φιλοσοφίαν ἐπιμελοῦ τῶν παίδων Μητροδώρου. 


Πρὸς Κωλώτην. 


31. ‘Qs σεβομένῳ γάρ σοι τὰ τότε ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν λεγόμενα 
προσέπεσεν ἐπιθύμημα ἀφυσιολόγητον τοῦ περιπλακῆναι ἡμῖν 
γονάτων ἐφαπτόμενον καὶ πάσης τῆς εἰθισμένης ἐπιλήψεως 
γίνεσθαι κατὰ τὰς σεβάσεις τινῶν καὶ λιτάς" ἐποίεις οὖν καὶ 

5 ἡμᾶς ἀνθιεροῦν σὲ αὐτὸν καὶ ἀντισέβεσθαι. 
"Αφθαρτός μοι περιπάτει καὶ ἡμᾶς ἀφθάρτους διανοοῦ. 


Πρὸς Λεόντιον. 


42 Παιὰν ἄναξ, φίλον Λεοντάριον, οἵου κροτοθορύβου ἡμᾶς 
ἐνέπλησας ἀναγνόντας σου τὸ ἐπιστόλιον. 


Πρὸς Π.ἊΟυθοκλέα. 


33. Παιδείαν δὲ πᾶσαν, μακάριε, φεῦγε τἀκάτιον ἀράμενος. 
84, Καθεδοῦμαι προσδοκῶν τὴν ἱμερτὴν καὶ ἰσόθεόν σου 
εἴσοδον. 


EPISTULAE AD INCERTOS DATAE 


Ad puerum aut puellam. 


35. ᾿ΑἸφείγμεθα els Λάμψακον ὑγιαίνοντες ἐγὼ καὶ ΠΠυθοκλῆς 
cali “Ἑρμ]αρχος καὶ Κίτή]σιππος, καὶ ἐκεῖ κατειλήφαμεν ὑγίι)αί- 
vovras Θεμίσταν καὶ τοὺς λοιποὺς [φίλο[ζυ]ς. εὖ δὲ ποιεῖτ]ς 
καὶ σὺ efi ὑἸγιαίνεις καὶ ἡ pldlupyn [olov, καὶ πάπαι καὶ 

5 Μάτρω[ν], πάντα πε[ίθη[ι, ὥσπ]ερ καὶ ἔϊμπροσθεν. εὖ γὰρ 
ἴσθι, ἡ αἰτία, ὅτι καὶ ἐγὼ καὶ olf] λοιποὶ πάντες σε μέγα 
φιλοῦμεν, ὅτι τούτοις πείθῃ πάντα. 


7 φιλοσοφίαν ἔ" φιλοσοφίας libri 8: Plut. adv. Col.17, p. 1117 
2 τοῦ Usener : τὸ libri 4 τινῶν Usener: τιμῶν libri: θεῶν Wytten- 
bach 32 Diog. Laert. x, ὃ 5 2 ἐνέπλησας Suidas + ἐνέπλησεν 
(ἐνέπλησε B) libri 33 Diog. Laert.x,§6 1 φεῦγε τἀκάτιον ἀρά- 
pevos Gassendi: φεύγετε κατιδιαραμεν B: φεῦγε τε κατε δι “7. ἐ ραμεν 


V. FRAGMENTS 180 


joy in my heart δὲ the recollection of my conversations 
with you. Do you, as I might expect from your devotion 
from boyhood to me and to philosophy, take good care of 
the children of Metrodorus. 


To Colotes. 


31. In your feeling of reverence for what I was then 
saying you were seized with an unaccountable desire to 
embrace me and clasp my knees and show me all the signs 
of homage paid by men in prayers and supplications to 
others ; so you made me return all these proofs of venera- 
tion and respect to you. 


Go on thy way as an immortal and think of us too as 
immortal. 


To Leontion. 


32. Lord and Saviour, my dearest Leontion, what a 


hurrahing you drew from us, when we read aloud you 
dear letter. 


To Pythocles. 


33. Blest youth, set sail in your bark and flee from every 
form of culture. 

34. I will sit down and wait for your lovely and godiike 
appearance. 


LETTERS TO UNCERTAIN PERSONS. 


To a boy or girl. 


35. We have arrived at Lampsacus safe and sound, 
Pythocles and Hermarchus and Ctesippus and I, and 
there we found Themusta and our other friends all well. 
I hope you too are well and your mamma, and that you 
are always obedient to pappa and Matro, as you used to 
be. Let me tell you that the reason that I and all the rest 
of us love you 1s that you are always obedient to them. 


(in mg. */,at) Ps φεύγετε κατι διέραμεν QOH 34 Diog. Laert. 
%Y 5 35 Vol. Herc. 176, col.18 restituit Gomperz 4 σου 
Usener: καὐτῇ Gomperz 6 αἰτία Gomperz NATIA pap. 


fo78 τ 


130 V. FRAGMENTA EPICUREA 


Epistula supremorum dierum. 


36. Ἑ), βδόμῃ yap ἡμέρᾳ ὅτε ταῦτ᾽ ἔγραφον, οὐχί! ἀπο)- 
κεχ[ώρη κί εἰν [δὴ] [κ]Ἰατίὰ τὴ»] οὔρησιν [ἐμοὶ οὐθὲν καὶ ἀλγη- 
δόνες ἐνῆσαν τῶν ἐπὶ τὴν τελευταίαν ἡμέραν ἀγουσῶν. σὺ 
οὖν, ἄν τι γένηται, τὰ παιδία τὰ Μητροδώρου διοίκησον τέτταρα 

5 ἢ πέντ᾽ ἔτη μηθὲν πλεῖον δαπανῶν ἤ περ νῦν εἰὶς ἐϊμὲ δαπανᾷς 
κατ᾽ ἐνιαυτόν. 


Incertarum epistularum fragmenta. 


37 Βρυάζω τῷ κατὰ τὸ σωμάτιον ἡδεῖ, ὕδατι καὶ ἄρτῳ 
χρώμενος, καὶ προσπτύω ταῖς ἐκ πολυτελείας ἡδοναῖς οὐ 
δι᾿ αὐτάς, ἀλλὰ διὰ τὰ ἐξακολουθοῦντα αὐταῖς δυσχερῆ. 

38 ᾿Επιμελοῦ γάρ, καθάπερ σοι καὶ ἀπαλλαττομένῳ ἔλεγον, 
καὶ ᾿Απολλοδώρου [τοῦ] ἀδελ]φοῦ. οὐ γὰρ κακὸς ὧν παρ[ἐχ]ει 
μοί[ι) φρονίδα, εἴ τι πράττει, ὧν οὐ βούλεται. 

89. Πέμψον μοι τυροῦ κυθριδίου, ἵν᾽ ὅταν βούλωμαι TOAUTE- 
λεύσασθαι δύνωμαι. 

40. Δαιμονίως τε καὶ μεγαλοπρεπῶς ἐπεμελήθητε ἡμῶν τὰ 
περὶ τὴν τοῦ σίτου κομιδήν, καὶ οὐρανομήκη σημεῖα ἐνδέδειχθε 
τῆς πρὸς ἐμὲ εὐνοίας. 

41 [Τὴν σύνταξιν ἣν . .. συνε]τάξατο ἐμαυτῶ[ι «jay ἐν 
Ὑπερβ[ορ)είοις Gow ἀποστε[λε]ῖν, ταύτην καὶ μόνην ἐπιτάττω. 
[é]xaréy yap Kali εἸΐκοσι [δ]ρ[ αχ)μὰϊς μόν)ας κατ᾽ ἐνιαυτὸν 
βούλομα[ι] παρ᾽ ἑκατέρου λαμβάνειν. 

5 “Hveyxé μοι Κτήσιππος τὴν κα[τ] ἐ[ν]ιαυτὸν σύνταξ[ι)ν ἣν 
ἀπέστειλας ὑπέρ τε τοῦ πατρὸς καὶ σεαυτοῦ. 

42 Τιμίαν μὲν ἕξει ἀντίδοσιν τὴν [ὑπ᾽ ἐμοῦ δοθεῖσαν αὐτῷ 
πα[ιδιάν]. 

43 Οὐδέποτε ὠρέχθην τοῖς πολλοῖς ἀρέσκειν. ἃ μὲν γὰρ 
ἐκείνοις ἤρεσκεν, οὐκ ἔμαθον: ἃ δ᾽ ἤδειν ἐγώ, μακρὰν ἦν τῆς 
ἐκείνων αἰσθήσεως. 

44. ᾿Αφυσιολόγητον μηδὲν ἡγοῦ βοώσης τῆς σαρκὸς βοᾶν 
τὴν ψυχήν. σαρκὸς δὲ φωνή: μὴ πεινῆν, μὴ διψῆν, μὴ 

36 Philodem. πράγματ. V7" 1.128: restituerunt Spengel Gomperz 
37 Stob. Flori. xvii. 34 38 Pap. Herc. 176, col. 8 39 Diog. 
Laert.x, § 11 1 κυθριδίου] κυθρίδιον ἔ. Κυθνίου Menagius 40 Plut. 
contr. Ep. beat. 15, p 1097 € I δαιμονίως Usener : δαΐως libri . δαψε- 


λῶς Cobet 41 Philodem. πράγματ ΜΗ 1 127 42 Philo- 
dem. πραγματ. VH? 1. 118 1 ἀντίδοσιν scripsi: αἰνοῦσαν pap. 


V. FRAGMENTS 131 


Letter written in his last days. 


46. Seven days before writing this the stoppage became 
complete and I suffered pains such as bring men to their 
last day. If anything happens to me, do you look after 
the children of Metrodorus for four or five years, but do 
not spend any more on them than you now spend each 
year on me. 


Letters to unknown recipients. 


37. 1 am thrilled with pleasure in the body, when 1 live 
on bread and water, and I spit upon luxurious pleasures 
not for their own sake, but because of the inconveniences 
that follow them. 

38. As I said to you when you were going away, take 
care also of his brother Apollodorus. He 1s not a bad 
boy, but causes me anxiety, when he does what he does 
not mean to do. 

39. Send me some preserved cheese, that when I hke 
I may have a feast. 

40. You have looked after me wonderfully generously 
in sending me food, and have given proofs heaven-high of 
your good will to me. 

41. The only contribution I require is that which. . 
ordered the disciples to send me, even if they are among 
the Hyperboreans. I wish to receive from each of you 
two a hundred and twenty drachmae a year and no more. 

Ctesippus has brought me the annual contribution which 
you sent for your father and yourself. 

42. He will have a valuable return in the instruction 
which I have given him. 

43. I was never anxious to please the mob. For what 
pleased them, I did not know, and what I did know, was 
far removed from their comprehension. 

44. Think it not unnatural that when the flesh cries 
aloud, the soul cries too. The flesh cries out to be saved 
from hunger, thirst, and cold. It is hard for the soul to 


43 Gnomolog. cod. Par. 1168, f. 115r 3 αἰσθήσεως edd. 
δισθέσεως Par. 44 Porph. ad Marc. 30, p. 209, 7 Nauck 


12 


883 V. FRAGMENTA EPICUREA 


ῥιγοῦν. καὶ ταῦτα τῇ ψυχῇ χαλεπὸν μὲν κωλῦσαι, ἐπισφαλὲς 
δὲ παρακοῦσαι τῆς παραγγειλάσης φύσεως αὐτῇ διὰ τῆς προσ 
5 φυοῦς αὐτῇ αὐταρκείας καθ᾽ ἡμέραν. 

45. Ὁ οὖν τῇ φύσει παρακολουθῶν καὶ μὴ ταῖς κεναῖς 
δόξαις ἐν πᾶσιν αὐτάρκης" πρὸς γὰρ τὸ τῇ φύσει ἀρκοῦν πᾶσα 
κτῆσίς ἔστι πλοῦτος, πρὸς δὲ τὰς ἀορίστους ὀρέξεις καὶ ὁ 
μέγιστος πλοῦτός ἐστιν (οὐ πλοῦτος ἀλλὰ πενία). 

46. Eq’ ὅσον δ᾽ ἂν ἀμηχανῇς, λήθῃ τῆς φύσεως ἀμηχανεῖς" 
σαυτῷ γὰρ ἀορίστους φόβους καὶ ἐπιθυμίας προσβάλλεις. 

47. = Sent. Vat. XIV. 

48. Κρεῖττον δέ σοι θαρρεῖν ἐπὶ στιβάδος κατακειμένῃ i 
ταράττεσθαι χρυσῆν ἐχούσῃ κλίνην καὶ πολυτελῆ τράπεζαν. 

492. .. φέρων τὴν ἐπιστολὴν παρὰ cold] καὶ τὸν διαλο- 
γισμὸν ὃν ἐπεπόησο περὶ τῶν ἀνθρώπων ὅσοι μήτε τὴν 
ἀναλογίαν τὴν κατὰ τὰ φαινόμενα ely τοῖς ἀοράτοις οδσα)ν 
ἠδύναντο συνιδεῖν μήτε τὴν συμφωνίαν τὴν ταῖς αἰσθήσεσιν 

5 ὑπάρχουσαν πρὸς τὰ ἀοράτα καὶ πάλιν] ἀντιμαρτύρ[η]σιν.. 

50 Ἡδὺ ἡ φίλου μνήμη τεθνηκότος. 

BI Μὴ φεῦγε μικρὰ χαρίζεσθαι" δόξεις γὰρ καὶ πρὸς τὰ 
μεγάλα τοιοῦτος εἶναι. 

52. ᾿Εχθροῦ δεηθέντος μὴ ἀποστραφῇς τὴν ἀξίωσιν" πλὴν 
ἀσφαλίζου σεαυτόν: οὐδὲν γὰρ κυνὸς διαφέρει. 


D 
INCERTAE SEDIS FRAGMENTA. 


De Sapientia et Sapiente. 


53 = Sent. Vat. LIV. 

54 Κενὸς ἐκείνου φιλοσόφου λόγος, ὑφ᾽ οὗ μηδὲν πάθος 
ἀνθρώπου θεραπεύεται: ὥσπερ γὰρ ἰατρικῆς οὐδὲν ὄφελος μὴ 
τὰς νόσους τῶν σωμάτων ἐκβαλλούσης, οὕτως οὐδὲ φιλοσοφίας, 
εἶ μὴ τὸ τῆς ψυχῆς ἐκβάλλει πάθος. 


3 τῇ ψυχῇ Nauck: τὴν ψυχὴν cod. 45 Porph. “σα Marc, 27, 
pe 207, 31 Nauck 4 ἐστιν] οὐ πλοῦτος ἀλλὰ πενία adiecit 
ignone: ἐστι πενία Usener 46 Porph ad Marc. 29, p. 209, 1 
2 σαντῷ edd.: αὑτὸν cod. 47 Stob Filorz. xvi. 28 48 Porph 
ad Marc. 29, P.209,3 I κατακειμένῃ . ἐχούσῃ] κατακειμένῳ.... ἔχοντι 
Usener 49 Philodem apaypar V#!* 1. 126 secundum ectionem 
Cronert 50 Plut. contr. Ep. beat. 28, Ὁ. 1105d δι Maximus 


V. FRAGMENTS 133 


repress these cries, and dangerous for it to disregard 
nature’s appeal to her because of her own wonted indepen- 
dence day by day. 

45 The man who follows nature and not vain opinions 
is independent in all things. For tn reference to what 1s 
enough for nature every possession 1s riches, but in 
reference to unlimited desires even the greatest wealth 
is (not riches but poverty). 

46. In so far as you are in difficulties, it is because you 
forget nature; for you create for yourself unlimited fears 
and desires. 


48. It 1s better for you to be free of fear lying upon 
a pallet, than to have a golden couch and a rich table and 
be full of trouble. 

49. .. . remembering your letter and your discussion 
about the men who are not able to see the analogy between 
phenomena and the unscen nor the harmony which exists 
between sensations and the unseen and again the contra- 
diction . 

50. Sweet 1s the memory of a dead friend. 

51. Do not avoid conferring small favours for then you 
will seem to be of like character towards great things. 

52. If your enemy makes a request to you, do not turn 
from his petition. but be on your guard, for he is hke 
a dog. 


D. 
FRAGMENTS FROM UNCERTAIN SOURCES, 
On philosophy. 


54. Vain is the word of a philosopher which does not 
heal any suffering of man. For just as there is no profit 
in medicine if it does not expel the diseases of the bedy, 
so there is no profit in philosophy either, if τὸ does not 
expel the suffering of the mind 
Gnomol. c. 8 52 Maximus Gnaomol c. 66 54 Porph. ad 


Marc 31, Ὁ. 209, 23 Nauck (cf δῖον Flor. Ixxxu. 6) 3 éxfah- 
λούσης Stob.: θεραπεύειν cod. 4 πάθος] κακόν Stob, 


134 V. FRAGMENTA EPICUREA 


Physica. 

65. Οὐδὲν ξένον ἐν τῷ παντὶ ἀποτελεῖται παρὰ τὸν ἤδη 
γεγενημένον χρόνον ἄπειρον. 

66. Οὐ γὰρ μᾶλλον εὐδαίμονας καὶ ἀδιαλύτους νοήσομεν 
μὴ φωνοῦντας [μη]δ᾽ [ἀλ]λήλοις διαλεγομένους, ἀλλὰ τοῖς 
ἐνεοῖς ἀνθρώποις ὁμοίους. 

57. Ἡμζεῖς γοῦν) θύωμεν [ὁσίως καὶ καλῶς οὗ [καθ]ήκει, 
καὶ xlada@[s] πάντα πράττωμεν [xa}ra τοὺς νόμους μ[η]θὲ[ » 
ταῖς δόξαις αἰὑ]τοὺς ἐν τοῖς περὶ τῶν ἀρίστων κ[αὶ] σεμνοτά- 
των διαταράττοντες" [ἔτι] δὲ καὶ δίκαιοι. ὦϊμεν ἀφ᾽ ἧς 

δ ἔλε[γον δόξης: οὕτω γὰρ [ἐν]δέχεται φυσ[ικῶς] ζῆν... 

58. Εἰ ταῖς τῶν ἀνθρώπων εὐχαῖς 6 θεὸς κατηκολούθει, 
θᾶττον (ἃν) ἀπώλλυντο πάντες ἄνθρωποι, συνεχῶς πολλὰ καὶ 
χαλεπὰ κατ᾽ ἀλλήλων εὐχόμενοι. 


Ethica. 


69. ᾿Αρχὴ καὶ ῥίζα παντὸς ἀγαθοῦ ἡ τῆς γαστρὸς ἡδονή" 
καὶ τὰ σοφὰ καὶ τὰ περιττὰ ἐπὶ ταύτην ἔχει τὴν ἀναφοράν. 

60 Τότε χρείαν ἔχομεν τῆς ἡδονῆς, ὅταν ἐκ τοῦ μὴ παρεῖναι 
αὐτὴν ἀλγῶμεν: ὅταν δὲ τοῦτο μὴ πάσχωμεν ἐν αἰσθήσει 
καθεστῶτες, τότε οὐδεμία χρεία τῆς ἡδονῆς" οὐ γὰρ ἡ τῆς 
φύσεως ἡδονὴ τὴν ἀδικίαν ποιεῖ ἔξωθεν, ἀλλ᾽ ἡ περὶ τὰς 

g κενὰς δόξας ὄρεξις. 

61. Τὸ γὰρ ποιοῦν ἀνυπέρβλητον» γῆθος τὸ Trap’ αὐτὸϊ 
πεφυγμένον μέγα κακόν: καὶ αὕτη φύσις ἀγαθοῦ, ἄν τις ὀρθῶς 
ἐπιβάλῃ, ἔπειτα σταθῇ, καὶ μὴ κενῶς περιπατῇ περὶ ἀγαθοῦ 
θρυλῶν. 

62. "Αμεινόν ἐστιν ὑπομεῖναι τούσδε τινὰς τοὺς πόνους, 
ὅπως ἡσθῶμεν ἡδονὰς μείζους" συμφέρει τῶνδέ τινων ἀπέ- 
χέσθαι τῶν ἡδονῶν ἵνα μὴ ἀλγῶμεν ἀλγηδόνας χαλεπωτέρας. 

63 Μηδὲ αἰτιώμεθα τὴν σάρκα os τῶν μεγάλων κακῶν 
αἰτίαν μηδ᾽ εἰς τὰ πράγματα τρέπωμεν τὰς δυσφορίας. 

55 Plut. Strom. fr. 8 56 Philodem de Viet. deor VA vi 13 
57 Philodem. περὶ εὐσεβ ΚΕ" 1. 108, 9 restiturtt Gomperz I καὶ 
καλῶς SCYips!: xa . adw charta: καὶ réAka Gomperz 5 ζῆν 
Gomperz: τὴν charta 58 Gnomolog. cod. Par. 1168, f. ΤΟΥ 
2 ἂν οἵη. Par. ἀπώλλυντο edd : ἀπώλλοιντο Par. 5q Athen. xn, 


Ρ. 546f Go Stob. Flort/. xvi. 35 4 ἡδονὴ] ἔνδεια Usener. 
φωνὴ Cronert : ῥοπὴ Bignone 61 Plut. contr. Ep. beaé 7, p.1ogia 


VY. FRAGMENTS 135 
Physics. 


55. Nothing new happens in the universe, 1f you con- 
sider the infinite time past. 

56. We shall not be considering them any happier or 
less destructible, if we think of them as not speaking nor 
conversing with one another, but resembling dumb men. 

57. Let us at least sacrifice piously and rightly where it 
1s customary, and let us do all things rightly according to 
the laws not troubling ourselves with common beliefs in 
what concerns the noblest and holiest of beings. Further 
let us be free of any charge in regard to their opinion 
For thus can one live in conformity with nature .. . 

58. If God lstened to the prayers of men, all men would 
quickly have perished: for they are for ever praying for 
evil against one another. 


Ethics. 


59. The beginning and the root of all good is the pleasure 
of the stomach ; even wisdom and culture must be referred 
to this. 

60. We have need of pleasure when we are in pain from 
its absence: but when we are not feeling such pain, though 
we are In a condition of sensation, we have no need of 
pleasure. For the pleasure which arises from nature does 
not produce wickedness, but rather the longing connected 
with vain fancies. 

61 That which creates joy insuperable 1s the complete 
removal of a great evil. And this 1s the nature of good, if 
one can once grasp it rightly, and then hold by it, and not 
walk about babbling idly about the good. 

62 It is better to endure these particular pains so that 
we may enjoy greater joys. It is well to abstain from 
these particular pleasures in order that we may not suffer 
more severe pains. 

63. Let us not blame the flesh as the cause of great evils, 
nor blame circumstances for our distresses. 

1 wap αὐτὸ) nap’ αὑτοῦ Reiske πάραυτα Usener: κατ᾽ αὐτὸ Bignone 
3 ἐπιβάλῃ Usener: ἐπιβάλλῃ libri 6a Aristocles apud Euseb, 


Pracp. evang χιν. 21, 3, Pp. 769a 63 Porph. ad Marc. 29, 
Pp 208, 25 Nauck 


σι 


136 ν. FRAGMENTA EPICUREA 


64. Ol μεγάλοι πόνοι συντόμως ἐξάγουσιν, of δὲ χρόνιοι 
μέγεθος οὐκ ἔχουσιν. 

65 ‘O γὰρ πόνος ὁ ὑπερβάλλων συνάψει Oavdry. 

66 “Epwrt φιλοσοφίας ἀληθινῆς πᾶσα ταραχώδης καὶ ἐπί- 
movos ἐπιθυμία ἐκλύεται. 

67. Χάρις τῇ μακαρίᾳ Φύσει ὅτι τὰ ἀναγκαῖα ἐποίησεν 
εὐπόριστα, τὰ δὲ δυσπόριστα οὐκ ἀναγκαῖα. 

68. Οὐ σπάνιόν γε εὑρεῖν ἄνθρωπον (πένητα) πρὸς τὸ τῆς 
φύσεως τέλος καὶ πλούσιον πρὸς τὰς κενὰς δόξας. οὐδεὶς 
γὰρ τῶν ἀφρόνων οἷς ἔχει ἀρκεῖται, μᾶλλον δὲ οἷς οὐκ ἔχει 
ὀδυνᾶται. ὥσπερ οὗν of πυρέττοντες διὰ κακοήθειαν τῆς 
ζνόσουδ ἀεὶ διψῶσι καὶ τῶν ἐναντιωτάτων ἐπιθυμοῦσιν, οὕτω 
καὶ οἱ τὴν ψυχὴ» κακῶς ἔχοντες διακειμένην πένονται πά»- 
τῶν ἀεὶ καὶ εἰς πολυτρόπους ἐπιθυμίας ὑπὸ λαιμαργίας ἐμ- 
πίπτουσιν. Ἶ 

69 “Qe ὀλίγον οὐχ ἱκανόν, ἀλλὰ τούτῳ γε οὐδὲν ἱκανόν. 

4o Πλουσιώτατον αὐτάρκεια πάντων. 

"1 Φοβούμενος ὁ πολὺς τὸ λιτὸν τῆς διαίτης διὰ τὸν 
φόβον ἐπὶ πράξεις πορεύεται τὰς μάλιστ᾽ dy τοῦτον παρα- 
σκεναζούσας. 

72 T[loAAot τοῦ πλούτου τυχόντες οὐ τὴν ἀπαλλαγὴν τῶν 
κακῶν εὖμον ἀλλὰ μεταβολὴν μειζύνων. 

13 Ἔξ ἐργασίας θηριώδους οὐσίας μὲν πλῆθος σωρεύεται, 
βίος δὲ ταλαίπωρος συνίσταται. 

74 “TH γὰρ διὰ φύβον τις κακοδαιμονεῖ ἢ δι’ ἀόριστον καὶ 
κενὴν ἐπιθυμίαν: & τις χαλινῶν δύναται τὸν μακάριον ἑαυτῷ 
περιποιῆσαι λογισμύν. 

45 Οὐκ ἀπορεῖν τούτων πόνος ἐστίν, ἀλλὰ φέρειν μᾶλλον 
τὸν ἀνόνητον ἐκ τῶν κενῶν δοξῶν πόνον. 

16 Ἢ ταπεινὴ ψυχὴ τοῖς μὲν εὐημερήμασιν ἐχαυνώθη, ταῖς 
δὲ συμφοραῖς καθῃρέθη. 

11. Καὶ τὰ παρὰ τῆς τύχης μικρότερα (ἡ φύσις) διδάσκει 


64 Plut. de Poet. aud 14, Ὁ. 36 Ὁ 65 Plut. contr. Ep. beat. 23, 
p-. tlo3d 66 Porph. ad ἤΖζΖαγε. 31, p. 209, 21 67 Stob. Alore/. 


Χν 23 68 Porph ad Marc.27, p 208, 2 Nauck I ov} om. 
Usener πένητα supplevit Usener* om. cod. 5 νόσου supplevit 
Mai: om. cod. 6g Aehan Var. hist iv. 13 70 Clem Alex. 


Strom. vi. 2, p. 266, 38 71 Porph. ad ἤζαγε 28, p 208,15 Nauck 
7a Porph. ad Marc 28, p. 208, 23 Nauck I τὴν] τιν᾽ Usener 
73 Porph. ad Afarc. 28, p. 209, 5 Nauck I θηριώδους Nauck 


Vv. FRAGMENTS 137 


64. Great pains quickly put an end to hfe ; long-enduring 

ains are not severe. 

65. Excessive pain will bring you to death. 

66. Through love of true philosophy every disturbing 
and troublesome desire 1s ended. 

67. Thanks be to blessed Nature because she has made 
what is necessary easy to supply, and what is not easy 
unnecessary. 

68. It is common to find a man who 1s (poor) in respect 
of the natural end of hfe and rich in empty fancies. For 
of the fools none is satisfied with what he has, but is 
grieved for what he has not. Just as men with fever 
through the malignance of their (disease) are always thirsty 
and desire the most injurious things, so too those whose 
mind 1s in an evil state are always poor in everything and 
in their greed are plunged into ever-changing desires. 

69 Nothing satisfics the man who 15 not satisfied with 
a little. 

70. Self-sufficiency is the greatest of all riches, 

71. Most men fear frugality and through their fear are 
led to actions most likely to produce fear. 

2. Many men when they have acquired riches have 
not found the escape from their ills but only a change to 
greater ills. 

73. By means of occupations worthy of a beast abun- 
dance of riches 1s heaped up, but a miserable hfe results. 

74. Unhappiness comes either through fear or through 
vain and unbridled desire Lut if a man curbs these, he 
can win for himself the blessedness of understanding. 

45. It is not deprivation of these things which !s pain, 
but rather the bearing of the useless pain that arises from 
vain fancies 

76. The mean soul is puffed up by prosperity and cast 
down by misfortune. 

77. (Nature) teaches us to pay little heed to what fortune 
θρνηνώδους cod. 74 Porph ad Marc. 29, Ὁ. 208, 30 Nauck 
75 Porph. ad Afarc. 31, p. 209,19 Nauck I mévos] κακὸν coniecit 
Usener 76 Gnomolog. cod. Par 1168, f. 115, ἄς. 77 Porph 


ad Marc. 30, p. 209,12 Nauck =I παρὰ τῆς τύχης Usener: περὶ τῆς 
ψυχῆς cod. 


138 ν. FRAGMENTA EPICUREA 


νομίζειν, καὶ εὐτυχοῦντας μὲν γινώσκειν ἀτυχεῖν, δυστυχοῦντας 
δὲ μὴ παρὰ μέγα τίθεσθαι ὃν τὸ εὐτυχεῖν, καὶ δέχεσθαι μὲν 
ἀθορύβως τὰ παρὰ τῆς τύχης ἀγαθά, παρατετάχθαι δὲ πρὸς τὰ 

5 παρ᾽ αὐτῆς δοκοῦντα εἶναι κακά’ ὡς ἐφήμερον μὲν πᾶν τὸ τῶν 
πολλῶν ἀγαθόν ἐστι καὶ κακόν, σοφία δὲ οὐδαμῶς τύχῃ 
κοινωνεῖ. 

78. Ὃ τῆς αὔριον ἥκιστα δεόμενος ἥδιστα πρόσεισι πρὸς 
τὴν αὔριον. 

79. Προσπτύω τῷ καλῷ καὶ τοῖς κενῶς αὐτὸ θαυμάζουσιν, 
ὅταν μηδεμίαν ἡδονὴν ποιῇ. 

80 Δικαιοσύνης καρπὸς μέγιστος ἀταραξία. 

81. Οἱ νόμοι χάριν τῶν σοφῶν κεῖνται, οὐχ ὅπως μὴ 
ἀδικῶσιν ἀλλ᾽ ὅπως μὴ ἀδικῶνται. 

82. Κὰν λαθεῖν δύνωνται, πίστιν περὶ τοῦ λαθεῖν λαβεῖν 
ἀδύνατόν ἐστιν: ὅθεν ὁ {περὶ τοῦ μέλλοντος ἀεὶ φόβος 
ἐγκείμενος οὐκ ἐᾷ χαίρειν οὐδὲ θαρρεῖν ἐπὶ τοῖς παροῦσι. 

83 Οὐ παρόντος οὐδενὸς ὁ κεκτημένος [τὸ τοῦ] γένους 
τέϊλ]ος [πα]ρα[πλησίω]ς ἐστὶν ἀγαθ ὅς]. 

84 Οὐκ ἔστιν ἄφοβον εἶναι φοβερὸν φαινόμενον. 

85 Τὸ εὔδαιμον καὶ μακάριον» οὐ χρημάτων πλῆθος οὐδὲ 
πραγμάτων ὄγκος οὐδ᾽ ἀρχαί twes ἔχουσιν οὐδὲ δυνάμεις, ἀλλ᾽ 
ἀλυπία καὶ πραότης παθῶν καὶ διάθεσις ψυχῆς τὸ κατὰ φύσιν 
ὁρίζυσα. 

86. Λάθε βιώσας. 

8) Λέγειν δεῖ πῶς ἄριστα τὸ τῆς φύσεως τέλος συντη- 
ρήσει, καὶ πῶς τις ἑκὼν εἶναι μὴ πρύσεισιν ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἐπὶ τὰς 
τῶν πληθῶν ἀρχάς. 


3 παρὰ Usener* περὶ cod. ὃν Usener ὧν cod. 5 ante ws 
cod. καὶ habet: delevit Nauck 6 καὶ κακόν ex Gnomol. Byz. 
supplevit Usener: om.cod. post δὲ cod. καὶ ἐπιστήμη habet * om 
Usener τύχῃ Usener: τύχης cod. 78 Plut de 7rang anim, 
16,p 474¢c 79 Athen. xu, p 5478 80 Clem Alex. Strom. 
νι. 2, p 266, 39 81 Stob πο» 43, 139 8a Plut. contr 
Ep. beat. 6, Ὁ τορος 83 Script. Epic. Incert ΚΑ" vn. 21, col. 
XXVIII 84 Gneomol cod. Par 1168, f 115 u, etc. 85 Plut. de 
Poet. aud c. 14, p.37a 86 Plut. εἰ καλῶς εἴρηται τὸ λάθε βιώσας, 
p. 1128 sq. 87 Plut. adv Co/ 31, p. 1125 


V. FRAGMENTS 139 


brings, and when we are prosperous to understand that we 
are unfortunate, and when we are unfortunate not to regard 
prosperity highly, and to receive unmoved the good things 
which come from fortune and to range ourselves boldly 
against the seeming evils which it brings: for all that the 
many regard as good or evil is fleeting, and wisdom has 
nothing in common with fortune 

78, He who least needs to-morrow, will most gladly go 
to meet to-morrow. 

79. I spit upon the beautiful and those who vainly 
admire it, when it does not produce any pleasure. 

80. The greatest fruit of justice 15 serenity. 

81. The laws exist for the sake of the wise, not that they 
may not do wrong, but that they may not suffer it. 

82. Even if they are able to escape punishment, it 1s 
impossible to win security for escaping: and so the fear of 
the future which always presses upon them does not suffer 
them to be happy or to be free from anxiety in the present 

83. The man who has attained the natural end of the 
human race will be equally good, even though no one 1s 
present. 

84. A man who causes fear cannot be free from fear. 

85. The happy and blessed state belongs not to abun- 
dance of riches or dignity of position or any office οἵ 
power, but to freedom from pain and moderation in feelings 
and an attitude of mind which imposes the hmits ordained 
by nature. ᾿ 

86. Live unknown. 

87. We must say how best a man will maintain the 
natural end of hfe, and how no one will willingly at first 
aim at public office. 


VI 
VITA EPICURI 


’Enixoupos Νεοκλέους καὶ Χαιρεστράτης, ᾿Αθηναῖος, τῶν 
δήμων Γαργήττιος, γένους τοῦ τῶν Φιλαιδῶν, ὥς φησι 
Μητρόδωρος ἐν τῷ Περὶ εὐγενείας. τοῦτον φασὶν ἄλλοι τε 
καὶ Ἡρακλείδης ἐν τῇ Σωτίωνος ἐπιτομῇ κληρουχησάντων 

5 ᾿Αθηναίων τὴν Σάμον ἐκεῖθι τραφῆναι: ὀκτωκαιδεκέτη δ᾽ ἐλθεῖν 
εἰς ᾿Αθήνας, Ξενοκράτους μὲν ἐν ᾿Ακαδημείᾳ, ᾿Αριστοτέλους δ᾽ 
ἐν Χαλκίδι διατρίβοντος. τελευτήσαντος δὲ ᾿Αλεξάνδρου τοῦ 
Μακεδόνος καὶ τῶν ᾿Αθηναίων ἐκπεσόντων ὑπὸ Περδίκκου 
μετελθεῖν εἰς Κολοφῶνα πρὸς τὸν πατέρα. | χρόνον δέ τινα 
διατρίψαντα αὐτόθι καὶ μαθητὰς ἀθροίσαντα πάλιν ἐπανελθεῖν 
els ᾿Αθήνας ἐπὶ ᾿Αναξικράτους: καὶ μέχρι μὲν τινὸς κατ᾽ 
ἐπιμιξίαν τοῖς ἄλλοις φιλοσοφεῖν, ἔπειτα ἰδίᾳ ἀπο(φαί- 

Βνεσθαὴ τὴν ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ κληθεῖσαν aipeow συστήσαντα. 
ἐφάψασθαι δὲ φιλοσοφίας αὐτός φησιν ἔτη γεγονὼς τετταρεσ- 
καίδεκα. ᾿Απολλόδωρος δ᾽ ὁ ᾿Επικούρειος ἐν τῷ πρώτῳ 
περὶ τοῦ ᾿Ππικούρον βίου φησὶν» ἐλθεῖν αὐτὸν ἐπὶ φιλοσοφίαν 
καταγνόντα τῶν γραμματιστῶν, ἐπειδὴ μὴ ἐδυνήθησαν ἑρμη- 

1o νεῦσαι αὐτῷ τὰ περὶ τοῦ nap’ Ἡσιόδῳ χάους. φησὶ δ᾽ 
Ἕρμιππος γραμματοδιδάσκαλον αὐτὸν γεγενῆσθαι, ἔπειτα 
μέντοι περιτυχύντα τοῖς Δημοκρίτου βιβλίοις, ἐπὶ φιλοσοφίαν 
ζξαι | διὸ καὶ τὸν Τίμωνα φάσκειν περὶ αὐτοῦ 

ὕστατος αὖ φυσικῶν καὶ κύντατος, ἐκ Σάμου ἐλθὼν 
γραμμαδιδασκαλίδης, ἀναγωγότατος ζωόντων, 
συνεφιλοσόφουν δ᾽ αὐτῷ προτρεψαμένῳ καὶ οἱ ἀδελφοὶ τρεῖς 

5 ὄντες, Νεοκλῆς, Χαιρέδημος, ᾿Αριστόβουλος, καθά φησι 
Φιλόδημος ὁ ᾿Επικούρειος ἐν τῷ δεκάτῳ τῆς τῶν φιλοσόφων 


1 6 ᾿Ακαδημείᾳ Usener: ἀκαδημία libri 2 4 ἀπο(φαίνεσθαιν 
τὴν Usener. ἀπο... τὴν B: dmoorivQ. roc τὴν ΕἼ! .. τὴν PPH: 
ἀποστατεῖν τὴν Kochalsky 6 δὲ Usener τε libn τετταρεσκαί- 


δέκα ΒΡΟΗ. . 18 F 13 ἄξαι Hubner: dfac B: digas FPQH 


VI 
LIFE OF EPICURUS 


1 Epicurus, son of Neocles and Chaerestrata, was an 
Athenian of the deme of Gargettus, and the family of the 
Philaidae, as Metrodorus says in his work on Nob:hty of 
Birth. Heraclides in his epitome of Sotion and others say 
that the Athenians having colonized Samos, Epicurus was 
brought up there. In his eighteenth year, as they say, he 
came to Athens, when Xenocratcs was at the Academy 
and Aristotle was living in Chalcis. After the death of 
Alexander of Macedon, when the Athenians were driven 
out of Samos by Perdiccas, he went to join his father in 

a Colophon, Having stayed there some time and gathered 
disciples he returned again to Athens tn the archonship of 
Anaxicrates. For a while he joined with others in the 
study of philosophy, but later taught independently, when 
he had founded the school called after him. He tells us 
himself that he first made acquaintance with philosophy 
at the age of fourteen. Apollodorus the Epicurean in the 
first book of his Life of Epicurus says that he took to 
philosophy because he despised the teachers of literature, 
since they were not able to caplain to him the passage 
about Chaos in Hesiod. Hermippus says that Epicurus 
was at one time a schoolmaster and then after he met with 
the writings of Democritus, he took eagerly to philosophy. 

3 And this is why Timon says about him: 


‘Last and most shameless of the scientists, infant school 
teacher from Samos, the most stubborn of all living 
beings ’. 

His three brothers, Neocles, Chaeredemus, and Aristo- 
bulus joined him in studying philosophy at his suggestion, 
according to Philodemus the Epicurean in the tenth book 


4 


6 


142 VL VITA EPICURI 


συντάξεως. ἀλλὰ καὶ δοῦλος Mis ὄνομα, καθά φησι 
Μυρωνιανὸς ἐν Ὁμοίοις ἱστορικοῖς κεφαλαίοις. 
Διότιμος δ᾽ ὁ Στωικὸς δυσμενῶς ἔχων πρὸς αὐτὸν πικρότατα 
το αὐτὸν διαβέβληκεν, ἐπιστολὰς φέρων πεντήκοντα ἀσελγεῖς 
ὡς ᾿Επικούρου’' καὶ ὃ τὰ els Χρύσιππον ἀναφερόμενα ἐπιστόλια 
ὡς Ἐπικούρου συντάξας. | ἀλλὰ καὶ οἱ περὶ ἸΠοσειδώνιον τὸν 
Στωικὸν καὶ Νικόλαος καὶ Σωτίων ἐν τοῖς δώδεκα τῶν ἐπι- 
γραφομένων Διοκλείων ἐλέγχων, ἅ ἐστι περὶ τῆς εἰκάδος, καὶ 
Διονύσιος ὃ ᾿Αλικαρνασσεύς. καὶ γὰρ σὺν τῇ μητρὶ περιιόντα 
5 αὐτὸν εἰς τὰ οἰκίδια καθαρμοὺς ἀναγινώσκειν, καὶ σὺν τῷ πατρὶ 
γράμματα διδάσκειν λυπροῦ τινος pucOaplov. ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν 
ἀδελφῶν ἕνα προαγωγεύειν, καὶ Λεοντίῳ συνεῖναι τῇ ἑταίρᾳ" 
τὰ δὲ Δημοκρίτου περὶ τῶν ἀτόμων καὶ ᾿Αριστίππου περὶ τῆς 
ἡδονῆς ὡς ἴδια λέγειν. μὴ εἶναί τε γνησίως ἀστόν, ὡς 
10 Τιμοκράτης φησὶ καὶ Ἡρόδοτος ἐν τῷ Περὶ ᾿Επικούρον 
ἐφηβείας. Μιθρῆν τε αἰσχρῶς κολακεύειν τὸν Λυσιμάχου 
διοικητήν, ἐν ταῖς ἐπιστολαῖς Παιᾶνα καὶ ἄνακτα καλοῦντα. | 
ἀλλὰ καὶ ᾿Ιδομενέα καὶ ᾿Ηρόδοτον καὶ Τιμοκράτην τοὺς ἔκπυστα 
αὐτοῦ τὰ κρύφια ποιήσαντας ἐγκωμιάζειν καὶ κολακεύειν αὐτὸ 
τοῦτο. ἔν τε ταῖς ἐπιστολαῖς πρὸς μὲν Λεόντιον “Παιὰν ἄναξ, 
φίλον Λεοντάριον, οἵου κροτοθορύβου ἡμᾶς ἐνέπλησας ἄναγ- 
ενόντας gov τὸ ἐπιστόλιον." πρὸς δὲ Θεμίσταν τὴν Λεοντέως 
γυναῖκα “Οἷἵός τε, φησίν, εἰμί, ἐὰν μὴ ὑμεῖς πρός με ἀφίκησθε, 
αὐτὸς τρικύλιστος, ὅπου ἂν ὑμεῖς καὶ Θεμίστα παρακαλῆτε, 
ὠθεῖσθαι." πρὸς δὲ Πυθοκλέα ὡραῖον ὄντα ‘ Καθεδοῦμαι, 
φησί, προσδοκῶν τὴν ἱμερτὴν καὶ ἰσόθεόν σου εἴσοδον." καὶ 
το πάλιν πρὸς Θεμίσταν γράφων ἢ νομίζει αὐτῇ παραινεῖν F, 
καθά φησι Θεόδωρος ἐν τῷ τετάρτῳ τῶν πρὸς ᾿Επίκουρον. 
καὶ ἄλλαις δὲ πολλαῖς ἑταίραις γράφειν, καὶ μάλιστα Λεοντίῳ, 
ἧς καὶ Μητρόδωρον ἐρασθῆναι. ἔν τε τῷ Περὶ τέλους γράφειν 
οὕτως. Οὐ γὰρ ἔγωγε ἔχω τί νοήσω τἀγαθόν, ἀφαιρῶν μὲν 





8 8 ἐν ὋὉμοίοις Hubner . ἐν νόμοις bri 4 2 τοῖς δώδεκα FPQH: 
τοῖς δωδεκάτω B, unde τῷ δωδεκάτῳ Gassendi 3 τῆς Froben. 
τοῖς BFPQH εἰκάδος Hubner. «é libri 9 ἀστὸν BPH: αὐτὸν 
FQ 5 4 ἐνέπλησας Suidas: ἐνέπλησεν (ἐνέπλησε B) libri 
5 Δεοντέως Gassendi: λέοντος libri [7ἧὅ ὅπου] ὅποι Cobet 10 νομίζει 
αὐτῇ παραινεῖν libri: νομίζειν αὐτὴν περαινεῖν Froben, unde νομίζει αὐτὴν 
περαίνειν Bignone: ὀνομάζει αὐτὴν ἑταίραν (vel ᾿Αριάγνην) Usener : 
νομίζει αὐγὴν παρενεῖναι Kochalsky : locus nondum sanatus 


VI. LIFE OF EPICURUS 143 


of his Comparison of Philosophies. Also a slave called 
Mys, as Muronianus says in his chapters on historical 
coincidences. 

Diotimus the Stoic, who is ill-disposed to Epicurus, has 
calumniated him most bitterly by producing fifty lewd 
letters as Epicurus’ work; so has the writer who has 
assigned to Epicurus the collection of ‘ billets-doux ’ which 
were attributed to Chrysippus, and also Posidonius the 
Stoic and his followers, as well as Nicolaus and Setion in 
the twelve books of the ‘Arguments of Diocles’ which are 
named after the Epicurean celebration of The Twentieth ; 
also Dionysius of Halicarnassus For they say that he 
used to go round from house to house with his mother 
reading out the purification prayers, and assisted his father 
in elementary teaching for a miserable pittance. They 
add that one of his brothers prostrtuted himself and kept 
company with Leontion, the hetaera. Also that he took 
Democritus’ atomic theory and Aristippus’ theory of plea- 
sure and taught them as his own. Further, that he was 
not an Athenian born, as Timocrates says, and Herodotus 
too in his book The Youth of Epicurus. We is also said to 
have used degrading flattery towards Mithres, the steward 
of Lysimachus, calling him in his letters both ‘Saviour’ and 
‘My lord’. Idomeneus too and Herodotus and Timo- 
crates, who divulged his secrets, he 1s said to have praised 
and flattered all the same. And in his letters he wrote to 
Leontion, ‘Lord and Saviour, my dearest Leontion, what a 
hurrahing you drew from us, as we read aloud your dear 
letter’, and to Themista, Leonteus’ wife, ‘ If you two don’t 
come to me, I am capable of arriving with a hop, skip and 
jump, wherever you and Themista summon me’. And to 
Pythocles who was young and beautiful he writes, ‘I will 
sit down and wait for your lovely and godlike appearance ’. 
And again in writing to Themista he calls her (by a most 
flattering name), as Theodorus says in the fourth book of 
6 his attack on Epicurus. They say that he wrote to many 

other women of pleasure and particularly to Leontion, 
with whom Metrodorus was also in love; and that in the 
treatise On the End of L1fe he wrote, ‘I know not how 
I can conceive the good, if I withdraw the pleasures ot 


a 


σι 


144 VI. VITA EPICURI 


τὰς διὰ χυλῶν ἡδονάς, ἀφαιρῶν δὲ τὰς δι’ ἀφροδισίων καὶ τὰς 
5 δι’ ἀκροαμάτων καὶ τὰς διὰ μορφῆς. ἔν τε τῇ πρὸς Πυθοκλέα 
ἐπιστολῇ γράφειν Παιδείαν δὲ πᾶσαν, μακάριε, φεῦγε τἀκάτιον 
ἀράμενος. ᾿Ἐπίκτητός τε κιναιδολόγον αὐτὸν καλεῖ καὶ τὰ 
μάλιστα λοιδορεῖ. καὶ μὴν καὶ Τιμοκράτης ἐν τοῖς ἐπιγραφο- 
μένοις Εὐφραντοῖς ὃ Μητροδώρου μὲν ἀδελφός, μαθητὴς δὲ 
τὸ αὐτοῦ τῆς σχολῆς ἐκφοιτήσας φησὶ δὶς αὐτὸν τῆς ἡμέρας 
ἐμεῖν ἀπὸ τρυφῆς, ἑαυτὸν δὲ διηγεῖται μόγις ἐκφυγεῖν ἰσχῦσαι 
τὰς νυκτερινὰς ἐκείνας φιλοσοφίας καὶ τὴν μυστικὴν ἐκείνην 
συνδιαγωγήν" | τόν te Ἐπίκουρον πολλὰ κατὰ τὸν λόγον 
3 Ν 4 cal Ν ,ὔ fal 
ἠγνοηκέναι καὶ πολὺ μᾶλλον κατὰ τὸν βίον, τό τε σῶμα 
ἐλεεινῶς διακεῖσθαι, ὡς πολλῶν ἐτῶν μὴ δύνασθαι ἀπὸ τοῦ 
φορείου διαναστῆναι" μνᾶν τε ἀναλίσκειν ἡμερησίαν εἰς τὴν 
5 τράπεζαν, ὡς αὐτὸς ἐν τῇ πρὸς Λεόντιον ἐπιστολῇ γράφει καὶ 
ἐν ταῖς πρὸς τοὺς ἐν Μυτιλήνῃ φιλοσόφους. συνεῖναί τε 
αὐτῷ τε καὶ Μητροδώρῳ ἑταίρας καὶ ἄλλας, Μαμμάριον καὶ 
Ἡδεϊαν καὶ ᾿Ερώτιον καὶ Νικίδιον. καὶ ἐν ταῖς ἑπτὰ καὶ 
τριάκοντα βίβλοις ταῖς Περὶ φύσεως τὰ πλεῖστα ταὐτὰ λέγειι' 
το καὶ ἀντιγράφειν ἐν αὐταῖς ἄλλοις τε καὶ Ναυσιφάνει τὰ 
πλεῖστα, καὶ αὐτῇ λέξει φάσκειν οὕτως, ᾿Αλλ᾽ ἴτωσαν" εἶχε 
γὰρ ἐκεῖνος ὠδίνων τὴν ἀπὸ τοῦ στόματος καύχησιν τὴν 
σοφιστικήν, καθάπερ καὶ ἄλλοι πολλοὶ τῶν ἀνδραπόδων. | 
καὶ αὐτὸν ᾿Επίκουρον ἐν ταῖς ἐπιστολαῖς περὶ Ναυσιφάνους 
λέγεω! Ταῦτα ἤγαγει' αὐτὸν εἰς ἔκστασιν τοιαύτη;, ὥστε μοι 
λοιδορεῖσθαι καὶ ἀποκαλεῖ» διδάσκαλοι. πλεύμονά τε αὐτὸν 
ἐκάλει καὶ ἀγράμματον καὶ ἀπατεῶνα καὶ πόρνην' τούς τε περὶ 
5 Πλάτωνα Διονυσοκόλακας καὶ αὐτὸν ΠΙλάτωνα χρυσοῦν καὶ 
3 / ig Ἂς , > 
ApirroréAn dowrtor, (dv) καταφαγόντα τὴν πατρῴων οὐσίαν 
στρατεύεσθαι καὶ φαρμακοπωλεῖν: φορμοφόρον τε ἸΠ]Πρωταγόμαν 
καὶ γραφέα Δημοκρίτου καὶ ἐν ταῖς κώμαις γράμματα διδά- 
6 4 δὲ τὰς] δὲ καὶ τὰς Meibom 5 popdns Athenaeus μορῴφᾶς 
PB' (ex μορφὰς corr.) : μορφὰς QH . μορφῶν F 6 φεῦγε τἀκάτιον 
ἀράμενος Gassendi* φεύγετε κατιδιαραμεν Β : φεύγε τε κατι δι", € 
ραμεν (In ing. 7. αι) Ps φεύγετε κατι διέραμεν QH 13 συνδιαγωγήν 
P συναγωγήν BF: διαγωγήν H 7 6 ταῖς] τῇ Menagius 
7 Μαμμάριον Spengel ex Philodemo’ μαρμάριον BPQH: μαρμά- 
ρειον F 9 ταὐτὰ Kuhn: ταῦτα libri: post ταὐτά Usener (re) 
Inserult 10 ἄλλοις f° ἄλλαις BFPQH τὰ πλεῖστα UNCInIs 
inclusit Usener 11 ἀλλ᾽ ἴτωσαν Usener. ἀλλ᾽ εἴτως ἀλλ᾽ 


B: alu libri alia. ἀλλ᾽ εἴ τις ἄλλος Stephanus εἶχε 
γὰρ ἐκεῖνος Usener: εἶχε γὰρ κεῖνος libri’ εἶχε κἀκεῖνος Stephanus 


VI. LIFE OF EPICURUS 145 


taste and withdraw the pleasures of love and those of 
hearing and Sight ’, Again in the letter to Pythocles they 
say he wrote™ Blest youth, set sail in your bark and flee 
from every form of culture’. Epictetus moreover calls 
him a filthy talker and abuses him roundly. And even 
Timocrates, who was the brother of Metrodorus and a 
disciple of Epicurus, after he had abandoned the school, 
wrote in a book with the title Pleasant Things that Epicurus 
used to vomit twice a day owing to his luxurious hving, 
and that he himself was scarcely able to escape from his 
philosophical disquisitions during the mght and from the 
7community of the initiates. He adds that Epicurus was 
profoundly ignorant of philosophy and still more so of 
practical hfe, that his body was miserably weak, so that 
for many years he was unable to risc from his portable 
couch. further, that he spent no less than a mina a day on 
his food, as Epicurus writes himself in the letter to Leon- 
tion and in the letters to the philosophers in Mytilene 
moreover, there were other women who lived with him and 
Metrodorus, named Mammanion and Hedeia and Erotion 
and Nicidion. He adds that in the thirty-seven books 
On Nature he repeats himself foi the most part and 
attacks many other philosophers in them but Nausiphanes 
most of all, saying in his own words, ‘ Away with them all 
for Nausiphanes, hke many another slave, was 1n travail 
swith that wordy braggart, sophistic’ He says that 
Epicurus himself in his letters about Nausiphanes said, 
‘This drove him to such a state of fury that he abused 
me and ironically called me '‘ Master’”’’. He used to call 
Nausiphanes ‘The mollusc’, ‘The illiterate’, ‘The cheat’, 
‘The harlot’. The followers of Plato he called ‘ Flatterers 
of Dionysus’ and Plato himself ‘The golden man’, and 
Aristotle ‘The debauchee’, saying that he devoured his 
inheritance and then enlisted and sold drugs Protagoras 
he called ‘ Porter’ or ‘Copier of Democritus’, saying that 
he taught in the village schools. Heraclitus he called 


8 3 διδάσκαλον] δύσκολον coniecit Usener: (μον ἑαυτόν) adiecit 
Kochalsky 6 (ὃν) supplevit C. F. Harmann 7 στρατεύεσθαι 
τερατεύεσθαι coniecit Usener 

3818 Κ 


10 


146 VI. VITA EPICURI 


σκει»" Ἡράκλειτόν re κυκητήν' καὶ Δημόκριτον Ληρόκριτον" 
το καὶ ᾿Αντίδωρον Σαννίδωρον' τούς τε Κυνικοὺς ἐχθροὺς τῆς 
Ἑλλάδος: καὶ τοὺς διαλεκτικοὺς πολυφθόρους" Πύρρωνα δὲ 
ἀμαθῆ καὶ ἀπαίδευτον. | 
Μεμήνασι δ᾽ οὗτοι. τῷ γὰρ ἀνδρὶ μάρτυρες ἱκανοὶ τῆς 
ἀνυπερβλήτου πρὸς πάντας εὐγνωμοσύνης ἥ τε πατρὶς χαλ- 
καῖς εἰκόσι τιμήσασα, οἵ τε φίλοι τοσοῦτοι τὸ πλῆθος ὡς 
μηδ᾽ ἂν πόλεσιν ὅλαις μετρεῖσθαι δύνασθαι, οἵ τε γνώριμοι 
πάντες ταῖς δογματικαῖς αὐτοῦ σειρῆσι προσκατασχεθέντες, 
πλὴν Μητροδώρου τοῦ Στρατονικέως πρὸς Καρνεάδην ἀποχωρή- 
σαντος, τάχα βαρυνθέντος ταῖς ἀνυπερβλήτοις αὐτοῦ χρηστό- 
τησιν" ἢ τε διαδοχή, πασῶν σχεδὸν ἐκλιπουσῶν τῶν ἄλλων, 
ἐς ἀεὶ διαμένουσα καὶ νηρίθμους ἀρχὰς ἀπολύουσα ἄλλην ἐξ 
ἄλλης τῶν γνωρίμων" | ἥ τε πρὸς τοὺς γονέας εὐχαριστία, καὶ 
ἡ πρὸς τοὺς ἀδελφοὺς εὐποιία, πρός τε τοὺς οἰκέτας ἡμερότης, 
ὡς δῆλον κἀκ τῶν διαθηκῶν αὐτοῦ καὶ ὅτι αὐτοὶ συνεφιλο- 
σόφουν αὐτῷ, ὧν ἣν ἐνδοξότατος ὁ προειρημένος Μῦς καθόλου 
δτε ἣ πρὸς πάντας αὐτοῦ φιλανθρωπίας τῆς μὲν γὰρ πρὸς 
θεοὺς ὁσιότητος καὶ πρὸς πατρίδα φιλίας ἄλεκτος ἡ διάθεσις. 
ὑπερβολῇ γὰρ ἐπιεικείας οὐδὲ πολιτείας ἥψατο. καὶ χαλεπω- 
τάτων δὲ καιρῶν κατασχόντων τηνικάδε τὴν Ἑλλάδα αὐτόθι 
καταβιῶναι, δὶς ἢ τρὶς els τοὺς περὶ τὴν ᾿Ιωνίαν τόπους πρὸς 
to τοὺς φίλους διαδραμόντα: οἱ καὶ πανταχόθεν πρὸς αὐτὸν 
ἀφικνοῦντο, καὶ συνεβίουν αὐτῷ ἐν τῷ κήπῳ καθά φησι καὶ 
᾿Απολλόδωρος, [ὃν καὶ ὀγδοήκοντα μνῶν πρίασθαι" Διοκλῆς 
δὲ ἐν τῇ τρίτῃ τῆς ἐπιδρομῆς φησι" εὐτελέστατα καὶ λιτότατα 
διαιτώμενοι" | κοτύλῃ γοῦν. φησίν, olvidlov ἠρκοῦντο' τὸ δὲ 
πᾶν ὕδωρ ἦν αὐτοῖς ποτόν. τόν τε ᾿Επίκουρον μὴ ἀξιοῦν els 
τὸ κοινὸν κατατίθεσθαι τὰς οὐσίας, καθάπερ τὸν Πυθαγόραν 
κοινὰ τὰ φίλων λέγοντα: ἀπιστούντων γὰρ εἶναι τὸ τοιοῦτον" 
sel δ᾽ ἀπίστων, οὐδὲ φίλων. αὐτός τε φησὶν ἐν ταῖς ἐπιστο- 
λαῖς ὕδατι μόνον ἀρκεῖσθαι καὶ ἄρτῳ λιτῷς: καὶ πέμψον μοι 


10 Κυνικοὺς Reinesius: κυζηνικοὺς hbri: Kupyvaixovs Gassendi 
1 πολυφθόρους Βακε᾿ πολυφθονεροὺς ΒΟ: πολὺ φθονεροὺς FPH 
ρ ἀνδρὶ Gassendi: τῶν γὰρ ἀνδρῶν hbn 9 νηρίθμονς 
ἜΠΟΣ ἀνηρίθμους ἘΞῊ 10 9 εἰς τοὺς ΒΡΟΕῊ - els om. 
f Usener Il 4 τὰ] τὰ τῶν Meibom 


ο 


VI. LIFE OF EPICURUS 147 


‘The Muddler’, Democritus Lerocritus (‘Judge of non- 
sense’), Antidorus Sannidorus (‘Maniac’), the Cynics 
‘Enemies of Hellas’, the Logicians ‘ The destroyers’, and 
Pyrrho ‘The uneducated fool’. 

But these calumniators are all mad. For Epicurus has 
witnesses enough and to spare to his unsurpassed kindness 
to all men. There 1s his country which honoured him 
with bronze statues, his friends so numerous that they 
could not even be reckoned by entire cities, and his dis- 
ciples who all remained bound for ever by the charm of 
his teaching, except Metrodorus, son of Stratoniceus, who 
went over to Carneades, overweighted perhaps by Epi- 
curus’ excessive goodness. There is also the permanent 
continuance of the school after almost all the others had 
come to an end, and that though it had a countless succes- 
sion of heads from among the disciples. There 1s again 
his grateful devotion to his parents, his generosity to his 
brothers, and his gentleness towards his servants, of whom 
the most notable was Mys already mentioned, as 1s proved 
by his will and the part they took in his philosophical 
discussions. In short there 1s his benevolence to all. Ot 
his reverence towards the gods and his love of his country 
it would be impossible to speak adequately But from 
excess of modesty he would not take any part in politics 
Yet although Greece was at that time in great straits he 
continued to live there, and only once or twice made a 
voyage to Ionia and the neighbourhood to see his friends. 
But they came to him from all quarters, and took up their 
abode with him in the garden, as Apollodorus says [who 
adds that he bought it for eighty minae- Dniocles τῇ the 
third book of his Course τῷ Philosophy confirms this], hving 
a most frugal and simple life. Indeed, he says, they were 
satisfied with half a pint of wine, and for the most part 
drank water. He adds that Epicurus did not recommend 
them to put their belongings into a common stock, as did 
Pythagoras, who said that ‘Friends have all in common’>’ 
For to do so imphed distrust: and distrust could not go 
with friendship. Epicurus himself says in his letters that 
he was content with nothing but water and a bit of bread 

K 2 


12 


18 


14 


1ο 


τι 


1ο 


148 VI. VITA EPICURI 


τυροῦ, φησί, κυθριδίου, ty ὅταν βούλωμαι πολυτελεύσασθαι 
δύνωμαι. τοιοῦτος ἦν 6 τὴν ἡδονὴν εἶναι τέλος δογματίζων. 
ὃν καὶ ᾿Αθήναιος 80 ἐπιγράμματος οὕτως ὑμνεῖ | 
ἄνθρωποι μοχθεῖτε τὰ χείρονα, καὶ διὰ κέρδος 
ἄπληστοι νεικέων ἄρχετε καὶ πολέμων" 
τᾶς φύσιος δ᾽ ὁ πλοῦτος ὅρον τινὰ βαιὸν ἐπίσχει" 
αἱ δὲ κεναὶ κρίσιες τὰν ἀπέραντον ὁδόν. 
γοῦτο Νεοκλῆος πινυτὸν τέκος ἢ παρὰ Μουσέων 
ἔκλυεν ἡ Πυθοῦς ἐξ ἱερῶν τριπόδων. 


εἰσόμεθα δὲ καὶ μᾶλλον προιόντες ἔκ τε τῶν δογμάτων ἔκ τε 
τῶν ῥητῶν αὐτοῦ. 

Μάλιστα δ᾽ ἀπεδέχετο, φησὶ Διοκλῆς, τῶν ἀρχαίων 
᾿Αναξαγόραν,, καίτοι ἔν τισι: ἀντειρηκὼς αὐτῷ, καὶ ᾿Αρχέλαον 
τὸν Σωκράτους διδάσκαλο!. ἐγύμναζε δέ, φησί, τοὺς γνωρί- 
μους καὶ διὰ μνήμης ἔχειν τὰ ἑαυτοῦ συγγράμματα. Τοῦτον 
᾿Απολλόδωρος ἐν Χρονικοῖς Ναυσιφάνους ἀκοῦσαί φησι καὶ 
Πραξιφάνους: αὐτὸς δὲ οὔ φησιν, ἀλλ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ, ἐν τῇ πρὸς 
Εὐρύλοχον ἐπιστολῇ. ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ Λεύκιππόν τινα γεγενῆσθαί 
φησι φιλόσοφον, οὔτε αὐτὸς οὔτε Ἕρμαρχος, ὃν ἔνιοί φασι 
καὶ ᾿Απολλόδωρος ὁ ᾿Επικούρειος διδάσκαλοι Δημοκρίτον 
γεγενῆσθαι. Δημήτριος δέ φησι» 6 Μάγνης καὶ Ξενοκράτους 
αὐτὸν ἀκοῦσαι. 

Κέχρηται δὲ λέξει κυρίᾳ κατὰ τῶν πραγμάτων, ἣν ὅτι 
ἰδιωτάτη ἐστίν, ᾿Αριστοφάνης ὁ γραμματικὸς αἰτιᾶται. σαφὴς 
δ᾽ ἦν οὕτως, ὡς καὶ ἐ» τῷ Περὶ ῥητορικῆς ἀξιοῖ μηδὲν ἄλλο 
ἢ σαφήνειαν ἀπαιτεῖν | καὶ ἐν ταῖς ἐπιστολαῖς ἀντὶ τοῦ 
Χαίρειν Εὖ πράττειν καὶ Σπουδαίως Cir. 

᾽᾿Αρίστων δέ φησιν ἐν τῷ ᾿Επικούρου βίῳ τὸν Κανόνα 
γράψαι αὐτὸν ἐκ τοῦ Ναυσιφάνους Τρίποδος, οὗ καὶ ἀκοῦσαί 
φησιν αὐτόν, ἀλλὰ καὶ Παμφίλου τοῦ Πλατωνικοῦ ἐν Σάμῳ. 
ἄρξασθαί τε φιλοσοφεῖν ἐτῶν ὑπάρχοντα δυοκαίδεκα, ἀφηγή- 
σασθαι δὲ τῆς σχολῆς ἐτῶν ὄντα δύο πρὸς τοῖς τριάκοντα. 


7 κυθριδίου] κυθρίδιον f. Κυθνίου Menagius 12 2 ἄπληστοι 
Usener: ἄπλειστον Ἐ: ἤπληστον ΠΡ. cett. 8 ῥητῶν BP1Q. ῥημά- 
tov FP*H 13 4 ἙἘῤρύλοχον Menagius ex ὃ 28 εὐρόλοκον P'Q: 
eipvdoxov BF P?H 10 ἰδιωτάτη)] ἰδιωτικωτάτη Menagius ἰδιω- 
τικὴ Bake 12 ἀπαιτεῖν] ἀσκεῖν Cobet. ἀπαιτῶν coniecit Usener 
Iq 2 post Χαίρειν Usener γράφει inserere voluit 3 ᾿Αρίστων 
Cobet. ἄριστον. of bri: ᾿Αρίστων ὁ a(epurarnrixds) Bignone: 
’Avriyovos Usener ῴησιν Cobet: φασιν hbri 


12 


VI LIFE OF EPICURUS 149 


‘Send me,’ he says, ‘some preserved cheese, that when 
I like I may have a feast.’ Such was the man who taught 
that the end is pleasure. Athenaeus sings his praise in 
an epigram : 


Men toil at mean pursuits, for love of gain 
Insatiate they welcome war and strife; 
Their idle fancies lead on endless paths, 
But nature’s wealth is set in narrow bounds. 
This truth the prudent son of Neocles 
Learnt from the Muses or Apollo’s shrine. 


The truth of this we shall know better as we go on from 
his own words and teaching. 

Diocles says that of the earlier philosophers he showed 
most sympathy with Anaxagoras, though on certain points 
he opposed him, and with Archelaus, the master of Socrates. 
And, he adds, he used to practise his disciples in getting 


13 his writings by heart. Apollodorus in Ins Chrontcles 


asserts that he listened to the teaching of Nausiphanes 
and Praxiphanes. Epicurus himself denres this in his 
letter to Eurylochus and says he was his own teacher. 
And indeed both Epicurus and Hermarchus deny that 
there ever was such a philosopher as Leucippus, whom 
Apollodorus the Epicurean and others say was the master 
of Democritus. Demetrius of Magnesia says that he was 
also a follower of Xenocrates. 

He uses current diction to expound his theory, but 
Aristophanes the grammarian censures it as being too 
peculiar. But he was clear in expression, just as mm his 


14 book on Rhetoric he insists on clearness above everything. 


In his letters he used to say ‘Prosper’ or ‘Live well’, 
instead of the conventional introduction ‘ Be happy’. 

Ariston in his Life of Epicurus says that he borrowed 
The Canon from the Tripod of Nausiphanes, whose pupil 
he says he was, as well as being a disciple of Pamphilus 
the Platonist in Samos. He states that Epicurus began 
philosophy at the age of twelve, and was at the head of his 
School at thirty-two. 


15° VI. VITA EPICURI 


᾿ἘἘ γεννήθη δέ, φησὶν ᾿Απολλόδωρος ἐν Χρονικοῖς, κατὰ τὸ 
τρίτον ἔτος τῆς ἐνάτης καὶ ἑκατοστῆς ὀλυμπιάδος ἐπὶ 
10 Σωσιγένους ἄρχοντος μηνὸς γαμηλιῶνος ἑβδόμῃ, ἔτεσιν 
15 ὕστερον τῆς ἸΠλάτωνος τελευτῆς ἑπτά. | ὑπάρχοντα δ᾽ αὐτὸν 
ἐτῶν δύο καὶ τριάκοντα πρῶτον ἐν Μυτιλήνῃ καὶ Λαμψάκῳ 
συστήσασθαι σχολὴν ἐπὶ ἔτη πέντε" ἔπειθ᾽ οὕτως εἰς ᾿Αθήνας 
μετελθεῖν, καὶ τελευτῆσαι κατὰ τὸ δεύτερον ἔτος τῆς ἑβδόμης 
5 καὶ εἰκοστῆς καὶ ἑκατοστῆς ὀλυμπιάδος ἐπὶ ἸΠυθαράτου ἔτη 
βιώσαντα δύο πρὸς τοῖς ἑβδομήκοντα: τήν τε σχολὴν δια- 
δέξασθαι “Eppapxov ᾿Αγεμόρτον Μυτιληναῖον. τελευτῆσαι δ᾽ 
αὐτὸν λίθῳ τῶν οὔρων ἐπισχεθέντων, ὥς φησι καὶ “Ἑρμαρχος 
ἐν ἐπιστολαῖς, ἡμέρας νοσήσαντα τετταρεσκαίδεκα. ὅτε καί 
10 φησιν Ἕρμιππος ἐμβάντα αὐτὸν εἰς πύελον» χαλκῆν κεκρα- 
16 μένην ὕδατι θερμῷ καὶ αἰτήσαντα ἄκρατον ῥοφῆσαι" | τοῖς τε 
φίλοις παραγγείλαντα τῶν δογμάτων μεμνῆσθαι, οὕτω τελευ- 
τῆσαι. καὶ ἔστιν ἡμῶν εἰς αὐτὸν οὕτω" 
Χαίρετε καὶ μέμνησθε τὰ δόγματα. τοῦτ᾽ ᾿᾽Επίκουρος 
5 ὕστατον εἶπε φέλοις τοὔπος ἀποφθίμενος. 
θερμὴν ἐς πύελον γὰρ ἐληλύθεεν καὶ ἄκρατον 
ἔσπασεν, εἶτ᾽ ᾿Αίδην ψυχρὸν ἐπεσπάσατο. 
οὗτος μὲν ὁ βίος τἀνδρός, ἥδε (δὲ) ἡ τελευτή. 


Καὶ διέθετο ὧδε" 


(ΔΙΑΘΗΚΗ) 


το Κατὰ τάδε δίδωμι τὰ ἐμαντοῦ πάντα ᾿Αμυνομάχῳ Φιλο- 
κράτους Βατῆθεν καὶ Τιμοκράτει Δημητρίου Ποταμίῳ κατὰ 

17 τὴν ἐν τῷ Μητρῴῳ ἀναγεγραμμένην ἑκατέρῳ δόσιν, | ἐφ᾽ ᾧ τε 
τὸν μὲν κῆπον καὶ τὰ προσόντα αὐτῷ παρέξουσιν ᾿Ερμάρχῳφ 
Ayeudprov Μυτιληναίῳ καὶ τοῖς συμφιλοσοφοῦσιν αὐτῷ καὶ 

οἷς ἂν "Eppapyos καταλίπῃ διαδόχοις τῆς φιλοσοφίας, ἐνδια- 

5 τρίβειν κατὰ φιλοσοφίαν. καὶ ἀεὶ δὲ τοῖς φιλοσοφοῦσιν ἀπὸ 
ἡμῶν, ὅπως ἂν συνδιασώσωσιν ᾿Αμυνομάχῳ καὶ Τιμοκράτει 


lo ἑβδόμῃ Usener: ἑβδόμη Β᾽: ἑβδόμης FPQH: om. B# 
15. 9 τετταρεσκαίδεκα B: τεσσαρεσκαίδεκα Q: τετταρακαίδεκα FP*: 
τετταραακαίδεκα H 16 4~7 in Anthol. Pai. vu. τοῦ mclusum 

τοῦπος Usener: πρῶτος BFH: πρῶτον PQ: οἷσιν f Anthol. 

ἐληλύθεεν Usener: ἐ λύληθεν ex ἐσλύληθεν corr. B ἐσήλυθεν PQH 
Anthol, καὶ BPQH Anthol.: καὶ τὸν Ff ὃ (δὲ) supplevit 
Stephanus 17 3 ᾿Αγεμόρτον Usener ex § 24: ἀγεμάρχου libri 


VI. LIFE OF EPICURUS 151 


He was born, says Apollodorus in the Chronscles, in the 
third year of the 109th Olympiad in the archonship of 
Sosigenes on the seventh day of the month Gamelion, 

15 seven years after the death of Plato. When he was thirty- 
two he started his school first for five years at Mitylene 
and Lampsacus and then he migrated to Athens. There 
he died in the second year of the 127th Olympiad in the 
archonship of Pytharatus, at the age of seventy-two. 
Hermarchus of Mitylene, son of Agemortus, succeeded to 
the headship of the school. Epicurus died of a stone in 
the bladder, as Hermarchus also says in his letters, after 
an illness of fourteen days. Hermippus tells us that as he 
was dying he got into a bronze bath filled with hot water, 
and asked for a cup of unmixed wine, which he gulped 

16 down. Then having adjured his friends to remember his 
teaching he expired. I have composed the following 
epigram on him: 

‘Farewell, remember my sayings.’ Thus spake at his 
death Epicurus, 

These the last words as he died spake he aloud to his 

friends. 
Then inahot bath he laid him, a goblet of wine he demanded, 

Quaffed st, and soon the coldair quaffed he of Hades below.’ 


Such was Epicurus’ life and such his death. 
His will was as follows: 


EPICURUS’ WILL. 


I hereby leave all my possessions to Amynomachus, son 
of Philocrates, of the deme of Bate, and Timocrates, son 
of Demetrius, of the deme of Potamos, according to the 

17 form of gift to each registered in the Metroum, on condition 
that they make over the garden and all that goes with it to 
Hermarchus, son of Agemortus, of Mitylene, and to those 
who study philosophy with him and to those whom Her- 
marchus may leave as his successors in the school, for 
them to live there in the pursuit of philosophy. And to 
those who hereafter follow my philosophy I assign the 
right to live in the garden, that they may assist Amyno- 


162 VI. VITA EPICURI 


κατὰ τὸ δυνατόν, τὴν ἐν τῷ κήπῳ διατριβὴν παρακατατίθεμαι 

τοῖς τ᾽ αὐτῶν κληρονόμοις, ἐν ᾧ ἄν ποτε τρόπῳ ἀσφαλέστατον 

7, ὅπως ἂν κἀκεῖνοι διατηρῶσιν τὸν κῆπον, καθάπερ καὶ αὐτοὶ 
10 οἷς ἂν οἱ ἀπὸ ἡμῶν φιλοσοφοῦντες παραδίδωσιν. 

Τὴν δ᾽ οἰκίαν τὴν ἐν Μελίτῃ παρεχέτωσαν ᾿Αμυνόμαχος 
καὶ Τιμοκράτης ἐνοικεῖν Ἕ ρμάρχῳ καὶ τοῖς μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ φιλοσο- 
φοῦσιν, ἕως ἂν “Ἕρμαρχος (ἢ. | 

Ἔκ δὲ τῶν γινομένων προσόδων τῶν δεδομένων ἀφ᾽ ἡμῶν 
᾿Αμυνομάχῳ καὶ Τιμοκράτει κατὰ τὸ δυνατὸν μεριζέσθωσαν 
μεθ᾽ Ἕρμάρχου σκοπούμενοι εἴς τε τὰ ἐναγίσματα τῷ τε πατρὶ 
καὶ τῇ μητρὶ καὶ τοῖς ἀδελφοῖς, καὶ ἡμῖν εἰς τὴν εἰθισμένην 

5 ἄγεσθαι γενέθλιον ἡμέραν ἑκάστου ἔτους τῇ προτέρᾳ δεκάτῃ 
τοῦ γαμηλιῶνος, ὥσπερ καὶ εἰς τὴν γινομένην σύνοδον ἑκάστου 
μηνὸς ταῖς εἰκάσι τῶν συμφιλοσοφούντων ἡμῖν eis τὴν ἡμῶν 
τε καὶ Μητροδώρου (μνήμην κατατεταγμένην' συντελείτωσαν 
δὲ καὶ τὴν τῶν ἀδελφῶν ἡμέραν τοῦ ποσειδεῶνος" συντελεί- 

1orwoav δὲ καὶ τὴν ΙΙυλυαίνου τοῦ μεταγειτνιῶνος, καθάπερ 
καὶ ἡμεῖς. | 

19 ᾿Ἐπιμελείσθωσαν δὲ καὶ ᾿Αμυνόμαχος καὶ Τιμοκράτης τοῦ 

υἱοῦ τοῦ Μητροδώρου ᾿Επικούρου καὶ τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ Πολυαίνου, 
φιλοσοφούντων αὐτῶν καὶ συζώντων μεθ᾽ “Epudpxov. ὡσαύτως 
δὲ τῆς θυγατρὸς τῆς Μητροδώρου τὴν ἐπιμέλειαν ποιείσθωσαν, 

5 καὶ εἰς ἡλικίαν ἐλθοῦσαν ἐκδότωσαν ᾧ ἂν ”Eppapxos ἕληται 

τῶν φιλοσοφούντων per αὐτοῦ, οὔσης αὐτῆς εὐτάκτου καὶ 

πειθαρχούσης ἙἭ, ρμάρχῳ. διδότωσαν δὲ ᾿Αμυνόμαχος καὶ 

ιμοκράτης ἐκ τῶν ὑπαρχουσῶν ἡμῖν προσόδων εἰς τροφὴν 

τούτοις, ὅ τι ἂν αὐτοῖς κατ᾽ ἐνιαυτὸν ἐπιδέχεσθαι δοκῇ σκοπου- 
10 μένοις μεθ᾽ Ἕ μάρχου. | 

20 Ποιείσθωσαν δὲ μεθ᾽ αὑτῶν καὶ “Ἑρμαρχον κύριον τῶν 

προσόδων, ἵνα μετὰ τοῦ συγκαταγεγηρακότος ἡμῖν ἐν φιλο- 
σοφίᾳ καὶ καταλελειμμένου ἡγεμόνος τῶν συμφιλοσοφούντων 
ἡμῖν ἕκαστα γίνηται. τὴν δὲ προῖκα τῷ θήλει παιδίῳ, ἐπειδὰν 

5 εἰς ἡλικίαν ἔλθῃ, μερισάτωσαν ᾿Αμυνόμαχος καὶ Τιμοκράτης, 


18 


8 ἄν ποτε τρόπῳ Usener: ἂν ἀποτρέπω libn 9 διατηρῶσιν 
Usener: διατηρεῖεν Ἑ : διατηροῖεν libr. cett 10 παραδιδῶσιν 
BP!Q: παραδιδῶσε GHP*: παραδίδωσι F. παραδῶσιν Usener 
18 1 dg’) ὑφ᾽ Kochalsky 6 ὥσπερ Usener: ὥστε hbri: ἔτι δὲ 
Casaubon 8 (μνήμην) supplevit Aldobrandinus collate Cic. de Fin. 
ἧι. 31.101 κατατεταγμένην] κατὰ (τὰ) τεταγμένα Usener 1O μετα- 


18 


τ 


20 


VI. LIFE OF EPICURUS 153 


machus and Timocrates to maintain it to the best of their 
power, and to their heirs, in whatever way may give the 
securest possession, that they too may preserve the garden, 
and after them those to whom the disciples of my school 
may hand it on. 

The house in Mehte Amynomachus and Timocrates 
shall assign for a dwelling to Hermarchus and to those 
who study philosophy with him, as long as Hermarchus 
shall live. 

The income of the property left by mc to Amynomachus 
and Timocrates shall be divided by them as far as possible, 
with the advice of Hermarchus, for the offerings in honour 
of my father and mother and brothers, and for the custo- 
mary celebration of my birthday every year on the tenth 
of Gamelion, and likewise for the assembly of my disciples 
which takes place on the twentieth of each month, having 
been established 1n recollection of myself and Metrodorus. 
Let them also keep the day of my brothers in Poseideon 
and the day of Polyaenus in Metageitnion, as I have done 
myself. 

Amynomachus and Timocrates shall take care of Ep- 
curus, the son of Metrodorus, and of the son of Polyaenus, 
provided they devote themselves to philosophy and live 
with Hermarchus. Likewise they shall take care of 
Metrodorus’ daughter, and when she comes of age shall 
give her in marriage to one of his disciples whom Her- 
marchus shall choose, provided she 1s well-behaved and 
obedient to Hermarchus. Amynomachus and Timocrates 
shall set aside for the maintenance of these children such 
sum out of the revenues of my estate as shall seem good 
to them each year in consultation with Hermarchus. 

They shall give Hermarchus authority with themselves 
over the income, in order that everything may be done in 
consultation with the man who has grown old with me 
in the study of philosophy and has been left by me head 
of the school. The dowry for the girl, when she comes of 
age, shall be apportioned by Amynomachus and Timocrates, 


γειτνιῶνος FP); μεταγειτνίωνος Β. μεταγειτνιῶντος P?GH 20 2 pera 
τοῦ BP'QG: μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ FP*H: fortasse per αὐτοῦ τοῦ 


23 


154 VI. VITA EPICURI 


ὅσον ἂν ἐπιδέχηται ἀπὸ τῶν ὑπαρχόντων ἀφαιροῦντες μετὰ 
τῆς ‘Eppdpxov γνώμης. ἐπιμελείσθωσαν δὲ καὶ Νικάνορος, 
καθάπερ καὶ ἡμεῖς, ἵν᾽ ὅσοι τῶν φιλοσοφούντων ἡμῖν χρείαν 
ἐν τοῖς ἰδίοις παρεσχημένοι καὶ τὴν πᾶσαν οἰκειότητα ἐνδε- 


10 δειγμένοι συγκαταγηράσκειν μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν προείλοντο ἐν φιλο- 


σοφίᾳ, μηδενὸς τῶν ἀναγκαίων ἐνδεεῖς καθεστήκωσιν παρὰ 
τὴν ἡμετέραν δύναμιν. | 
Δοῦναι δὲ τὰ βιβλία τὰ ὑπάρχοντα ἡμῖν πάντα Ἕ, ρμάρχῳ. 
ἐὰν δέ τι τῶν ἀνθρωπίνων περὶ Ἕρμαρχον γένηται πρὸ τοῦ τὰ 
Μητροδώρου παιδία εἰς ἡλικίαν ἐλθεῖν, δοῦναι ᾿Αμυνόμαχον 
καὶ Τιμοκράτη, ὅπως ἂν εὐτακτούντων αὐτῶν ἕκαστα γίνηται 
τῶν ἀναγκαίων, κατὰ τὸ δυνατὸν ἀπὸ τῶν καταλελειμμένων 
ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν προσόδων. καὶ τῶν λοιπῶν ἁπάντων ὧν συντετά- 
χαμεν ἐπιμελείσθωσαν, ὅπως ἂν κατὰ τὸ ἐνδεχόμενον ἕκαστα 
γίγνηται. ἀφίημι δὲ τῶν παίδων ἐλεύθερον Μῦν, Νικίαν, 
Λύκωνα. ἀφίημι δὲ καὶ Φαίδριον ἐλευθέραν. | 


Ἤδη δὲ τελευτῶν γράφει πρὸς ᾿Ιδομενέα τήνδε ἐπιστολήν" 
Τὴν μακαρίαν ἄγοντες καὶ ἅμα τελευτῶντες ἡμέραν τοῦ βίου 
ἐγράφομεν ὑμῖν ταυτί: στραγγουρικά τε παρηκολούθει καὶ 
δυσεντερικὰ πάθη ὑπερβολὴν οὐκ ἀπολείποντα τοῦ ἐν ἑαυτοῖς 

5 μεγέθους" ἀντιπαρετάττετο δὲ πᾶσι τούτοις τὸ κατὰ ψυχὴν 
χαῖρον ἐπὶ τῇ τῶν γεγονότων ἡμῖν διαλογισμῶν μνήμῃ. σὺ 
δὲ ἀξίως τῆς ἐκ μειρακίου παραστάσεως πρὸς ἐμὲ καὶ φιλο- 
σοφίαν ἐπιμελοῦ τῶν παίδων Μητροδώρον. καὶ διέθετο μὲν 
ὧδε. 


10 Μαθητὰς δὲ ἔσχε πολλοὺς μέν, σφόδρα δὲ ἐλλογίμους 


Μητρόδωρον ᾿Αθηναίου ἢ Τιμοκράτους καὶ Σάνδης Λαμψα- 
κηνόν" ὃς ἀφ᾽ οὗ τὸν ἄνδρα ἔγνω, οὐκ ἀπέστη ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ πλὴν 
ἐξ μηνῶν εἰς τὴν οἰκείαν, ἔπειτα ἐπανῆλθε. [ γέγονε δὲ ἀγαθὸς 
πάντα, καθὰ καὶ "Entxoupos ἐν προηγουμέναις γραφαῖς μαρτυρεῖ 


11 παρὰ Usener: ἐπὶ hbn Ι 2 γένηται ἘΠ: γίνηται libr. cett. 
6 &y FPQH ὡς Βὰ 7 ἂν Usener’ δὴ libri ο ἐλευθέραν P*?GH: 
édevbépa Ἐ : ἐλευθερίαν ΒΕ ΡΙΟ : ἐλευθερίᾳ Usener 22 2 τελευ- 
τῶντες] τελευταίαν Davis ex Cic de Fin, 11. 30. 96 3 παρηκολούθει 
Stephanus : παρηκολουθήκει ibn 7 φιλοσοφίαν f: φιλοσοφίας bri 
8 διέθετο Stephanus: ἔθετο hibn 11 ᾿Αθηναίου Duening:? ἀθηναῖον 
libn ἢ] καὶ f Τιμοκράτους Duening: Tipoxpat’ FPQ: τιμο- 


al 


22 


23 


VI. LIFE OF EPICURUS 155 


who shall take a suitable sum from the capital with the 
approval of Hermarchus. They shali also take care of 
Nicanor, as I have done, to show that those who have 
studied with me and have met my needs from their own 
resources and shown me every mark of friendship and 
elected to grow old with me in the study of philosophy, 
may not lack for anything that 1s necessary, as far as lies 
in my power. 

They are to give all the books that belong to me to 
Hermarchus. And if any mortal chance befall Hermarchus 
before Metrodorus’ children come of age, Amynomachus 
and Timocrates shall as far as possible provide 41} that is 
necessary from the income of my estate, if the children 
are well-behaved. They shall carefully carry out all my 
other arrangements, so that each may be fulfilled as far 
as possible. Of my slaves I set free Mys, Nicias and 
Lycon, and [ also set Phaedrium free. 


When he was on the point of death he wrote the 
following letter to Idomeneus: ‘On this truly happy day 
of my life, as I am at the point of death, I write this to you. 
The disease in my bladder and stomach are pursuing 
their course, lacking nothing of their natural severity: but 
against all this is the Joy in my heart at the recollection of 
my conversations with you Do you, as I might expect 
from your devotion from boyhood to me and to philosophy, 
take good care of the children of Metrodorus.’ Such then 
was his will. 

He had many disciples, but among the most distinguished 
was first Metrodorus, son of Athenaeus (or Timocrates) and 
Sande, of Lampsacus. From the time when he first came 
to know Epicurus he never left him, except when he went 
to his native city for six months, and then he came back 
He was a good man in all respects, as Epicurus too bears 
witness in prologues to his writings and in the third book 


xparny BHf Ξάνδης Usener: Σάνδην libri: Kaooavépas coniecit 
Gomperz 13 οἰκείαν Cobet : οἰκίαν libri a3 2 πάντα BF P'Q 
κατὰ πάντα P*H γραφαῖς Usener : γράφει libri 


156 VI. VITA EPICURI 


καὶ ἐν τῷ τρίτῳ Τιμοκράτους. τοιοῦτος δ᾽ ὧν καὶ τὴν ἀδελφὴν 
Βατίδα ἐξέδοτο ᾿Ιδομενεῖ, καὶ Λεόντιον τὴν ᾿Αττικὴν ἑταίραν 
5 ἀναλαβὼν εἶχε παλλακήν. ἦν δὲ καὶ ἀκατάπληκτος πρός τε 
τὰς ὀχλήσεις καὶ τὸν θάνατον, ὡς ᾿Επίκουρος ἐν τῷ πρώτῳ 
Μητροδώρου φησί. φασὶ δὲ καὶ πρὸ ἑπτὰ ἐτῶν αὐτοῦ 
τελευτῆσαι πεντηκοστὸν τρίτον ἔτος ἄγοντα, καὶ αὐτὸς ᾿Επί- 
κουρος ἐν ταῖς προειρημέναις διαθήκαις, ὡς προαπεληλυθότος 
το αὐτοῦ δηλονότι, ἐπισκήπτει περὶ τῆς ἐπιμελείας αὐτοῦ τῶν 
παίδων. [ἔσχε δὲ καὶ τὸν προειρημένον εἰκαῖόν τινα ἀδελφὸν τοῦ 
Μητροδώρου Τιμοκράτην βιβλία δέ ἐστι τοῦ Μητροδώρου 
34 τάδε: | Πρὸς τοὺς ἰατροὺς τρία. Περὶ αἰσθήσεων. Πρὸς 
Τιμοκράτην. Περὶ μεγαλοψυχίας. Περὶ τῆς ᾿Επικούρου 
ἀρρωστίας. ἸΠρὸς τοὺς διαλεκτικούς. Πρὸς τοὺς σοφιστὰς 
ἐννέα. Περὶ τῆς ἐπὶ σοφίαν πορείας. Περὶ τῆς μεταβολῆς. 

5 Περὶ πλούτου. Πρὸς Δημόκριτον. epi εὐγενείας. 

"Hy καὶ Πολύαινος ᾿Αθηνοδώρου Λαμψακηνός, ἐπιεικὴς καὶ 
φιλικός, ὡς οἱ περὶ Φιλόδημόν φασι. 

Καὶ ὁ διαδεξάμενος αὐτὸν “Ἑρμαρχος ᾿Αγεμόρτου Μυτιλη- 
ναῖος, ἀνὴρ πατρὸς μὲν πένητος, τὰς δ᾽ ἀρχὰς προσέχων 

10 ῥητορικοῖς. φέρεται καὶ τούτου βιβλία κάλλιστα τάδε" | 
25 ᾿᾽Βπιστολικὰ περὶ ᾿Εμπεδοκλέους εἴκοσι καὶ δύο. Περὶ τῶν 
μαθημάτων, Wpos Πλάτωνα. Πρὸς ᾿Αριστοτέλην, ἐτελεύτα 

δὲ παραλύσει, γενόμενος ἱκανὸς ἀνήρ. 

Λεοντεύς τε Λαμψακηνὸς ὁμοίως καὶ ἡ τούτου γυνὴ Θεμίστα, 

5 πρὸς ἣν καὶ γέγραφεν ὁ ᾿Επίκουρος. 

Ἔτι τε Κωλώτης καὶ ᾿Ιδομενεύς, καὶ αὐτοὶ Λαμψακηνοί. 
καὶ οὗτοι μὲν ἐλλόγιμοι. ὧν ἦν καὶ TloAvorparos ὁ διαδεξά- 
μενος “Eppapxov ὃν διεδέξατο Διονύσιος: ὃν Βασιλείδης. 
καὶ ᾿Απολλόδωρος δ᾽ ὁ Κηποτύραννος γέγονεν ἐλλόγιμος, ὃς 

το ὑπὲρ τετρακόσια συνέγραψε βιβλία. δύο τε Πτολεμαῖοι 
᾿Αλεξανδρεῖς, ὅ τε μέλας καὶ ὁ λευκός: Ζήνων τε ὃ Σιδώριος, 
ἀκροατὴς ᾿Απολλοδώρου, πολυγράφος ἀνήρ' καὶ Δημήτριος 6 

26 ἐπικληθεὶς Λάκων- [ Διογένης τε ὁ Ταρσεὺς ὁ τὰς ἐπιλέκτους 


5 ἀκατάπληκτος Ff. ἀκατάληπτος BPQH 8 ἄγοντα Casaubon: 
ἄγοντος PQH: ἄγον( res) Be ἀγῶ F = 18 ἔσχε δὲ... 12 Τιμοκράτην 
ut glossema secludendum suasit Usener 24 7 φιλικὸς]} φιλήκοος 
Cobet 25 2 μαθημάτων Casaubon: μαθητῶν libri 3 rapa- 
λύσει Menagius: παρὰ λυσία libri 


VI. LIFE OF EPICURUS 157 


of his Ztmocrates. Such was his character: his sister 
Batis he married to Idomeneus, and had for his own 
mistress Leontion the Athenian hetaera He was imper- 
turbable in the face of trouble and of death, as Epicurus 
says in the first book of his Metrodorus. They say that 
he died at the age of fifty-two, seven years before Epicurus, 
and of this Epicurus gives evidence, since in the will 
already quoted he makes provision for the care of his 
children, implying that he had already died. | He had also 
as a disciple Timocrates, Metrodorus’ brother, who has 
been mentioned already, an aimless person.| Metrodorus’ 

24 writings were as follows Three books Against the Physt- 
ctans, About sensations. To Timocrates. Concernng Mag- 
nanimity. About Epreurus’ dl-health Against the Logictans. 
Nine books Against the Sophists Concerning the Path to 
Wisdom. Concerning Change. Concerning VVealth, Agatmst 
Democritus. Concerning Nobility of Birth. 

There was also Polyaenus, son of Athenodorus, of 
Lampsacus, a modest and friendly man, as Philodemus 
and his followers say 

Also Hermarchus, Epicurus’ successor, son of Agemortus, 
of Mytilene, the son of a poor father, and at first a student 

25 of rhetoric Hus best books are said to be these twenty- 
two essays τη the form of letters On Empedocles. On Science. 
Agawumst Plato Against Artstotle. He was a good man 
and died of paralysis. 

Likewise there was Lconteus of Lampsacus and his wife 
Themista, to whom Epicurus addressed one of his letters. 

Also Colotes and Idomeneus, both of Lampsacus. They 
too were distinguished, as was also Polystratus who suc- 
ceeded Hermarchus; then followed Dionystus and after 
him Basthdes. Apollodorus the ‘King of the Garden’ 
was also famous, and wrote over four hundred volumes 
There were also the two Ptolemies of Alexandria, the 
Black and the White, Zeno of Sidon, a pupil of Apol- 
lodorus, a prolific writer, Demetrius called the Laco- 

26 nian, Diogenes of Tarsus who wrote Selected Lessons, 


158 VI. VITA EPICURI 


σχολὰς συγγράψας: καὶ ᾿Ωρίων, καὶ ἄλλοι οὖς οἱ γνήσιοι 
᾿Επικούρειοι σοφιστὰς ἀποκαλοῦσιν. 

Ἦσαν δὲ καὶ ἄλλοι ᾿Επίκουροι τρεῖς: 8 τε Λεοντέως υἱὸς 

δ καὶ Θεμίστας" ἕτερος Μάγνης: τέταρτος ὅπλομάχος. 

Γέγονε δὲ πολυγραφώτατος 6 ᾿Επίκουρος, πάντας ὑπερβαλ- 
λόμενος πλήθει βιβλίων. κύλινδροι μὲν γὰρ πρὸς τοὺς 
τριακοσίους εἰσί. γέγραπται δὲ μαρτύριον ἔξωθεν ἐν αὐτοῖς 
οὐδέν, ἀλλ᾽ αὐτοῦ εἰσιν ᾿Επικούρου φωναί. ἐζήλουν δὲ αὐτὸν 

10 Χρύσιππος ἐν πολυγραφίᾳ, καθά φησι Καρνεάδης παράσιτον 
αὐτοῦ τῶν βιβλίων ἀποκαλῶν: ““εἰ γάρ τι γράψαι ὁ 
27 ᾿Επίκουρος, φιλονεικεῖ τοσοῦτον γράψαι 6 Χρύσιππος" | καὶ 
ἡ διὰ τοῦτο καὶ πολλάκις ταὐτὰ γέγραφε καὶ τὸ ἐπελθόν, καὶ 
ἀδιόρθωτα εἴακε τῷ ἐπείγεσθαι, καὶ τὰ μαρτύρια τοσαῦτά 
ἐστιν ὡς ἐκείνων μόνων γέμειν τὰ βιβλία, καθάπερ καὶ παρὰ 
5 Ζήνωνι ἔστιν εὑρεῖν καὶ παρὰ ᾿Αριστοτέλει . καὶ τὰ συγ- 
γράμματα μὲν ᾿Επικούρῳ τοσαῦτα καὶ τηλικαῦτα. ὧν τὰ 
βέλτιστα ἐστι τάδε: Περὶ φύσεως AC Περὶ ἀτόμων καὶ 
κενοῦ. Περὶ ἔρωτος. ἙἘπιτομὴ τῶν πρὸς τοὺς φυσικούς. 
Πρὸς τοὺς Μεγαρικούς. Διαπορίαι. Κύριαι δόξαι. Περὶ 
το αἱρέσεων καὶ φυγῶν. Περὶ τέλους. Περὶ κριτηρίου ἣ 
Κανών. Χαιρέδημος. Περὶ θεῶν. Περὲ ὁσιότητος. Ἢγη- 
28 σιάναξ. Περὶ βίων τέσσαρα. | Περὶ δικαιοπραγίας. Νεοκλῆς 
πρὸς Θεμίσταν. Συμπόσιον. Εὐρύλοχος πρὸς Μητρόδωρον. 
Περὶ τοῦ ὁρᾶν. Περὶ τῆς ἐν τῇ ἀτόμῳ γωνίας. Περὶ ἁφῆς. 
Περὶ εἱμαρμένης. Περὶ παθῶν δόξαι πρὸς Τιμοκράτην. 
5 Προγνωστικόν. Προτρεπτικός. Περὶ εἰδώλων. Περὶ φαν- 
τασίας. ᾿Αριστόβουλοςς. Περὶ μουσικῆς. Περὶ δικαιοσύνης 
καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἀρετῶν. Περὶ δώρων καὶ χάριτος. TloAv- 
μήδης. Τιμοκράτης 2B γχ. Μητρόδωρος AB y5e ᾿Αντί- 
δωρος GB Περὶ νόσων δόξαι πρὸς Μιθρῆν. Καλλιστόλας. 
το Περὶ βασιλείας. ᾿Αναξιμένης.Ὠ ᾿Επιστολαί. 

*A δὲ αὐτῷ δοκεῖ ἐν αὐτοῖς, ἐκθέσθαι πειράσομαι τρεῖς 

ἐπιστολὰς αὐτοῦ παραθέμενος, ἐν als πᾶσαν τὴν ἑαυτοῦ 


a6 5 τέταρτος] τρίτος Cobet 9 αὐτοῦ Cobet: αὗται libri 
12 φιλονεικεῖ] ἐφιλονείκεε Casaubon 27 3 εἴακε Cobet: εἷλκε libri 
10 φυγῶν Gassendi: φύτων libri 28 Ὁ νόσων Gassendi: νότων 
libri 11 &Usener: piavhbn αὐτῷ Usener: aire’ B': αὐτῷ[»} 


B?: αὐτῶν libr. cett. 


VI. LIFE OF EPICURUS 159 


Orion, and others whom the genuine Epicureans call 
Sophists. 

There were three other Epicuruses, the son of Leonteus 
and Themista, another, who was a Magnesian, while the 
fourth was a drill-sergeant 

Epicurus was a very prolific writer and exceeded all 
others in the bulk of his works, of which there are more 
than three hundred rolls. There is not in them one single 
citation from another author: it is all Epicurus’ own 
words. Chrysippus tried to rival him in the amount of 
his writings, as Carneades tells us, calling him the parasite 
who fed on Epicurus’ books. ‘Whenever Epicurus wrote 
anything, Chrysippus felt bound in rivalry to write the 

27 equivalent; and this 1s why he often repeats himself and 
says whatever occurs to him, and has left a great deal 
uncorrected in his hurry; moreover, he has so many 
quotations that his books are filled with them and nothing 
else, a characteristic which one may observe also in the 
writings of Zeno and Aristotle.’ Such are the numerous 
and important works of Epicurus, of which the best are the 
following: 1. On Nature, thirty-seven books, 2. On atoms 
and void, 3. On Love, 4. Epitome of the books 4Agazmst the 
Physicists, 5. Agatnst the Megarians, 6. Problems, 7. Prin- 
cipal Doctrines, 8. On Choice and Avoidance, g On the End, 
το. Om the Criterton, or The Canon, 11. Chaeredemus, 

a8 12. On the Gods, 13. On Religion, 14. Hegesianax, 15. On 
Lives, four books, 16 On Just Action, 17 Neocles, ad- 
dressed to Themista, 18. Syspostum, 19 Aurvlochus, 
addressed to Metrodorus, 20. On Vision, 21. On the 
corner 1n the atom, 22. On Touch, 23. On Fate, 24, On 
tnternal sensalions, maxims addressed to Timocrates, 
25. Prognostic, 26. The Protreptic, 27. On wnages, 28. On 
perception, 29 Aristobulus, 30. On Mustc, 31. On Justice 
and the other Virtues, 32. On gifts and gratitude, 33. Poly- 
medes, 34. Timocrates, three books, 35. Metrodorus, five 
books, 36. Antidorus, two books, 37. On disease, maxims 
addressed to Mithras, 38. Cal/stolas, 39. On royal power, 
40. Anaximenes, 41. Letters. 

I will now endeavour to expound the doctrines which 
he sets forth in these works and will put before you three 


160 VI. VITA EPICURI 


29 φιλοσοφίαν ἐπιτέτμηται. θήσομεν δὲ Kal ras Kuplas αὐτοῦ 
δόξας καὶ εἴ τι ἔδοξεν ἐκλογῆς ἀξίως ἀνεφθέγχθαι, Hore σὲ 
πανταχόθεν καταμαθεῖν τὸν ἄνδρα κἂν κρίνειν εἰδέναι. τὴν 
μὲν οὖν πρώτην ἐπιστολὴν γράφει πρὸς Ἡρόδοτον ζῇ τις ἐστὶ 

5 περὶ τῶν φυσικῶν! τὴν δὲ δευτέραν πρὸς Πυθοκλέα) ἢ τις 

ἐστὶ περὶ τῶν μεταρσίων: τὴν τρίτη» πρὸς Μενοικέα, ἔστι δ᾽ 
3 ἧς \ 4 bi] , Ν 4 ἈΝ a , 

ἐν αὐτῇ τὰ περὶ βίων. ἀρκτέον δὴ ἀπὸ τῆς πρώτης, ὀλίγα 

προειπόντα περὶ τῆς διαιρέσεως τῆς κατ᾽ αὐτὸν φιλοσοφίας. | 

30 Διαιρεῖται τοίνυν εἰς τρία, τό τε κανονικὸν καὶ φυσικὸν καὶ 
ἠθικόν. τὸ μὲν οὖν κανονικὸν ἐφόδους ἐπὶ τὴν πραγματείαν 

XN y lat ¢ , Ν x 
ἔχει, καὶ ἔστιν ἐν ἑνὶ τῷ ἐπιγραφομένῳ Κανών. τὸ δὲ 
“ lal fal 
φυσικὸν τὴν περὶ φύσεως θεωρίαν πᾶσα", καὶ ἔστιν ἐν ταῖς 
5 Περὶ Φύσεως βίβλοις AC καὶ ταῖς ἐπιστολαῖς κατὰ στοιχεῖον. 
τὸ δὲ ἠθικὸν" τὰ περὶ αἱρέσεως καὶ φυγῆς" ἔστι δὲ ἐν ταῖς 
Περὶ βίων βίβλοις καὶ ἐπιστολαῖς καὶ τῷ Περὶ τέλους. 
εἰώθασι μέντοι τὸ κανονικὸν ὁμοῦ τῷ φυσικῷ τάττειν. 
καλοῦσι δ᾽ αὐτὸ περὶ κριτηρίου καὶ ἀρχῆς, καὶ στοιχειωτικόν" 
10 τὸ δὲ φυσικὸν περὶ γενέσεως καὶ φθορᾶς, καὶ περὶ φύσεως" 
ν Ν ? x Ν ς “Ὁ ἃ “- \ ‘\ 
TO δὲ ἠθικὸν περὶ αἱρετῶν καὶ φευκτῶν, καὶ περὲ βίων καὶ 
τέλους. | 

31 Τὴ» διαλεκτικὴν ὡς παρέλκουσα; ἀποδοκιμάζουσιν. ἀρκεῖν 

γὰρ τοὺς φυσικοὺς χωρεῖν κατὰ τοὺς τῶ: πραγμάτων φθόγ- 
΄ nm ba , if Ν ς 4 
yous. ἐν τοίνυν τῷ Κανόνι λέγων ἐστὰ' ὁ ᾿Επίκουρος 
- ~ > / + Ν ᾽ if Ἁ ΄ 
κριτήρια τῆς ἀληθείας εἶναι τὰς αἰσθήσεις καὶ προλήψεις 
5 καὶ τὰ πάθη" οἱ δ᾽ ᾿Επικούρειοι καὶ τὰς φανταστικὰς ἐπιβολὰς 
τῆς διανοίας. λέγει δὲ καὶ (αὐτὸς) ἐν τῇ πρὸς ᾿Ηρόδοτον 
ἐπιτομῇ καὶ ἐν ταῖς Κυρίαις δόξαις. πᾶσα γάρ, φησίν, 
αἴσθησις ἄλογός ἐστι καὶ μνήμης οὐδεμιᾶς δεκτική" οὔτε γὰρ 
ὑφ᾽ αὑτῆς κινεῖται, οὔτε ὑφ᾽ ἑτέρου κινηθεῖσα δύναταί τι 
al a > ~ Or w Ν , . ἅ, 
10 προσθεῖναι ἡ ἀφελεῖν. οὐδὲ ἔστι τὸ δυνάμενον αὐτὰς διε- 

32 λέγξαι" | οὔτε yap ἡ ὁμογενὴς αἴσθησις τὴν ὁμογενῇ διὰ τὴν 

ἰσοσϑένειαν' οὔθ᾽ ἡ ἀνομογένεια τὴν ἀνομογένειαν, οὐ γὰρ 





39 3 κἂν Usener: κἀμὲ libri 4 9 tts... 5 Πυθοκλέα adiecit 
Usener 380 καὶ κατὰ στοιχεῖον} κατεστοιχειωμένον. coniecit Usener 
7 καὶ τῷ Usener: καὶ τῶ Ff καὶ τὸ ΒΡΟΗ͂: καὶ ἐν τῷ Meibom 
3I 4 καὶ προλήψεις) καὶ τὰς προλήψεις Gassendi, fortasse recte 


6 fatrés) comiecit Usener. om libn 9 id’ αὑτῆς F: ὑπ' αὐτῆς 
P?; ἀπ᾿ αὐτῆς, ΒΡΟΗ δύναταί Gassendi: ἀδυνατεῖ libri 
32 1 dpoyerns scripsi: ὁμογένεια libn ὁμογενῇ BF P'Q: ὁμο- 


γένειαν PH 


VI. LIFE OF EPICURUS 161 


of his letters, in which he has abridged his whole philo- 


20 sophy. I will also give you the Principal Doctrines, and 


390 


gl 


3 


a selection from his sayings which seem most worthy of 
mention. You will thus be able to understand Epicurus 
from every point of view and could form a judgement on 
him. The first letter he writes to Herodotus (and it deals 
with Physics; the second 1s to Pythocles), and it deals 
with Celestial Phenomena; the third is to Menoeceus, and 
contains the moral teaching. We must begin with the first 
letter, but I will first speak briefly about the divisions of 
his philosophy. 

It is divided into three parts, the Canonicon (or Proce- 
dure), the Physics and the Ethics. The Canonicon gives 
the method of approach to the system, and ts contained in 
the work called Zhe Canon. The Physics contains all the 
investigation into nature, and 1s contained tn the thirty- 
seven books On Nature and in an abridged form in the 
letters. The Ethics deals with choice and avoidance, and 
is contained in the books On Lives and the letters and the 
book on The End. The Epicureans usually group the 
Canonicon with the Physics and state that it deals with 
the criterion of truth and the fundamental principles and 
contains the elements of the system. The Physics deals 
with creation and dissolution and with nature ; the Ethics 
with things to be chosen or avoided, with the conduct of 
life and its purpose. 

Logic they reject as misleading. For they say it is 
sufficient for physicists to be guided by what things say of 
themselves. Thus in Zhe Canon Epicurus says that the 
tests of truth are the sensations and concepts and the 
feelings; the Epicureans add to these the intuitive appre- 
hensions of the mind. And this he says himself too 
in the summary addressed to Herodotus and in the 
Principal Doctrines. For, he says, all sensation 1s irra- 
tional and does not admit of memory; for it 1s not set in 
motion by itself, nor when it is set in motion by something 
else, can τὸ add to it or take from 1t. Nor is there anything 
which can refute the sensations. For a similar sensation 


cannot refute a similar because it is equivalent in validity, 
2978 L 


33 


34 


162 VI. VITA EPICURI 


τῶν αὐτῶν εἶσι κριτικαί: οὔτε μὴν λόγος, πᾶς yap λόγος ἀπὸ 
τῶν αἰσθήσεων ἤρτηται: οὔθ᾽ ἣ ἑτέρα τὴν ἑτέραν, πάσαις 
δ γὰρ προσέχομεν. καὶ τὸ τὰ ἐπαισθήματα δ᾽ ὑφεστάναι 
πιστοῦται τὴν τῶν αἰσθήσεων ἀλήθειαν. ὑφέστηκε δὲ τό τε 
ὁρᾶν ἡμᾶς καὶ ἀκούειν, ὥσπερ τὸ ἀλγεῖν. ὅθεν καὶ περὶ τῶν 
ἀδήλων ἀπὸ τῶν φαινομένων χρὴ σημειοῦσθαι. καὶ γὰρ καὶ 
ἐπίνοιαι πᾶσαι ἀπὸ τῶν αἰσθήσεων γεγόνασι κατά τε 
το περίππωσιν καὶ ἀναλογίαν καὶ ὁμοιότητα καὶ σύνθεσιν, 
συμβαλλομένου τι καὶ τοῦ λογισμοῦ. τά τε τῶν μαινομένων 
φαντάσματα καὶ (τὰ) κατ᾽ ὄναρ ἀληθῆ, κινεῖ γάρ' τὸ δὲ μὴ ὃν 
οὐ κινεῖ, | 
Thy δὲ πρόληψιν λέγουσιν οἱονεὶ κατάληψιν ἢ δόξαν ὀρθὴν 
ἢ ἔννοιαν ἢ καθολικὴν νόησιν ἐναποκειμένην, τουτέστι μνήμην 
τοῦ πολλάκις ἔξωθεν φανέντος, οἷον τὸ Τοιοῦτόν ἐστιν ἄνθρω- 
moss ἅμα γὰρ τῷ ῥηθῆναι ἄνθρωπος εὐθὺς κατὰ πρόληψιν 
skal ὁ τύπος αὐτοῦ νοεῖται προηγουμένων τῶν αἰσθήσεων. 
παντὶ οὖν ὀνόματι τὸ πρώτως ὑποτεταγμένον ἐναργές ἐστι. καὶ 
οὐκ ἂν ἐζητήσαμεν τὸ ζητούμενον, εἰ μὴ πρότερον ἐγνώκει- 
μεν αὐτό' οἷον Td πόρρω ἑστὼς ἵππος ἐστὶν ἣ βοῦς" δεῖ yap 
κατὰ πρόληψιν ἐγνωκέναι ποτὲ ἵππου καὶ βοὸς μορφήν. οὐδ᾽ 
10 ἂν ὠνομάσαμέν τι μὴ πρότερον αὐτοῦ κατὰ πρόληψιν τὸν 
τύπον μαθόντες. ἐναργεῖς οὖν εἰσιν ai προλήψεις. 
Καὶ τὸ δοξαστὸν ἀπὸ προτέρου τινὸς ἐναργοῦς ἤρτηται, ἐφ᾽ 
ὃ ἀναφέροντες λέγομεν: οἷον Πόθεν ἴσμεν εἰ τοῦτό ἐστιν 
ἄνθρωπος; | τὴν δὲ δόξαν καὶ ὑπόληψιν λέγουσιν, ἀληθῆ τέ 
φασι καὶ ψευδῆ" ἂν μὲν γὰρ ἐπιμαρτύρηται ἢ μὴ ἀντιμαρτύ- 
ρῆται, ἀληθῆ εἶναι" ἐὰν δὲ μὴ ἐπιμαρτύρηται ἢ ἀντιμαρτύρηται, 
ψευδῆ τυγχάνειν. ὅθεν (τὸ) προσμένον εἰσήχθη" οἷον τὸ 
5 προσμεῖναι καὶ ἐγγὺς γενέσθαι τῷ πύργῳ καὶ μαθεῖν ὁποῖος 
ἐγγὺς φαίνεται. 


4 εἶσι κριτικαὶ FP3H : εἰς κριτικὸν ΡΟ : εἰς κριτικῶν B 4 ἤρτηται 


Aldobrandinus . εἴρηται bri 5 ἐπαισθήματα B(P!)Q : ἀνεπαί- 
σθητα FP*H 12 (τὰ) supplevit Casaubon 33 © ὑποτεταγ- 


μένον Gassendi: ἐπιτεταγμένον libri 34 4 (rd) addidit Gassend 


VI. LIFE OF EPICURUS 163 


nor a dissimilar a dissimilar, for the objects of which they 
are the criteria are not the same; nor again can reason, 
for all reason is dependent upon sensations; nor can one 
sensation refute another, for we attend to them all alike. 
Again, the fact of apperception confirms the truth of the 
sensations. And seeing and hearing are as much facts as 
feeling pain. From this it follows that as regards the 
imperceptible we must draw inferences from phenomena. 
For all thoughts have their origin in sensations by means 
of coincidence and analogy and similarity and combination, 
reasoning too contributing something. And the visions of 
the insane and those in dreams are true, for they cause 
movement, and that which does not exist cannot cause 
movement. 

33 The concept they speak of as an apprehension or right 
opinion or thought or general 1dea stored within the mind, 
that is to say a recollection of what has often been pre- 
sented from without, as for instance ‘Such and such 
a thing is a man’~ for the moment the word ‘man’ is 
spoken, immediately by means of the concept his form too 
is thought of, as the senses give us the information. 
Therefore the first signification of every name 1s Imme- 
diate and clear evidence. And we could not look for the 
object of our search, unless we have first known it. For 
instance we ask ‘Is that standing yonder a horse or a 
cow ?”. to do this we must know by means of a concept 
the shape of horse and of cow. Otherwise we could not 
have named them, unless we previously knew their appear- 
ance by means of a concept. So the concepts are clear 
and immediate evidence. 

Further, the decision of opinion depends on some 
previous clear and immediate evidence, to which we refer 
when we express It: for instance, How do we know 

34 whether this isa man? Opinion they also call supposition, 
and say that it may be true or false: if it is confirmed or 
not contradicted, it is true; if 1t is not confirmed or is con- 
tradicted, it is false. For this reason was introduced the 
notion of the problem awaiting confirmation: for example, 
waiting to come near the tower and see how it looks to the 
near view. 

La 


164 VI. VITA EPICURI 


Πάθη δὲ λέγουσιν εἶναι δύο, ἡδονὴν Kai ἀλγηδόνα, tordueva 
περὶ πᾶν ζῷον, καὶ τὴν μὲν οἰκεῖον, τὴν δὲ ἀλλότριον" δι᾿ ὧν 
κρίνεσθαι τὰς αἱρέσεις καὶ φυγάς. τῶν τε φητήσεων εἶναι τὰς 

10 μὲν περὶ τῶν πραγμάτων, τὰς δὲ περὶ ψιλὴν τὴν φωνήν. καὶ 
ταῦτα δὲ περὶ τῆς διαιρέσεως καὶ τοῦ κριτηρίου στοιχειωδῶς. 
᾿Ανιτέον δὲ ἐπὶ τὴν ἐπιστολήν. 


Sequitur epistola ad Herodotum. 

83 Καὶ ἥδε μέν ἐστιν αὐτῷ ἐπιστολὴ περὶ τῶν φυσικῶν" περὶ 

δὲ τῶν μετεώρων ἥδε. 
Sequitur eptstola ad Pythoclem., 

ph Tatra αὐτῷ καὶ περὶ τῶν μετεώρων δοκεῖ" | περὶ δὲ τῶν 

βιωτικῶν, καὶ ὅπως χρὴ τὰ μὲν ἡμᾶς αἱρεῖσθαι, τὰ δ᾽ ἐκφεύ- 

yew, οὑτωσὶ γράφει. Πρότερον δὲ διέλθωμεν ἅ τε αὐτῷ 

δοκεῖ περὶ τοῦ σοφοῦ καὶ τοῖς ἀπ᾿ αὐτοῦ. βλάβας ἐξ 

5 ἀνθρώπων ἣ διὰ μῖσος ἣ διὰ φθόνον ἣ διὰ καταφρόνησιν 

γίνεσθαι, ὧν τὸν σοφὸν λογισμῷ περιγίνεσθαι. ἀλλὰ καὶ 

τὸν ἅπαξ γενόμενον σοφὸν μηκέτι τὴν ἐναντίαν λαμβάνειν 

διάθεσιν μηδὲ πλάττειν ἑκόντα. πάθεσι μᾶλλον συσχεθή- 

σεσθαι, (5) οὐκ ἂν ἐμποδίσαι πρὸς τὴν σοφίαν. οὐδὲ μὴν ἐκ 

το πάσης σώματος ἕξεως σοφὸν γενέσθαι ἂν οὐδ᾽ ἐν παντὶ ἔθνει. | 

18 κἂν στρεβλωθῇ δ᾽ ὁ σοφὸς εἶναι αὐτὸν εὐδαίμονα. μόνον τε 

χάριν ἕξειν τὸν σοφόν, καὶ ἐπὶ φίλοις καὶ παροῦσι καὶ ἀποῦσιν 

ὁμοίως διατε(λεῖν) εὐλογοῦντα. ὅτε μέντοι στρεβλοῦται, ἔνθα 

καὶ μύξει καὶ οἰμώξει. γυναικί τε οὐ μιγήσεσθαι τὸν σοφὸν" 

5 ἡ οἱ νόμοι ἀπαγορεύουσιν, ὥς φησι Διογένης ἐν τῇ ἐπιτομῇ 

τῶν ᾿Ἐπικούρον ἠθικῶν δογμάτων, οὐδὲ κολάσειν οἰκέτας, 

ἐλεήσειν μέντοι καὶ συγγνώμην rut ἕξειν τῶν σπουδαίων. 

ἐρασθήσεσθαι τὸν σοφὸν οὐ δοκεῖ αὐτοῖς, οὐδὲ ταφῆς φρον- 

τιεῖν. οὐδὲ θεόπεμπτον εἶναι τὸν ἔρωτα, ὡς Διογένης ἐν τῷ 

το. .«.« οὐδὲ ῥητορεύσειν καλῶς. συνουσίη δέ, φασίν, ὥνησε 


11 δὲ] δὴ coniecit Usener 117 3 d τε αὐτῷῳ] ἃ αὐτῷ τε ex- 
spectandum notavit Usener ὃ πάθεσι] πάθεσί (riot) Bignone 
μᾶλλον] μὴν Usener: μ(ὴν ὡς) ἄλλον Kochalsky 9 (8) addidit 
Kochalsky 118 3 διατεζλεῖν) εὐλογοῦντα. ὅτε Kochalsky: διά 
τε libri: ὄδουχοτε Β' : 68° οὐχ ὅτε Β"- ὁδοῦ χ᾽ ὅτε Ο : ὁδοῦ. Gre P- 
ὁδοῦ, ὅτε FH: λόγου (καὶ διὰ πράξεως ἰέναι) ὅτε Usener 4 μύξει 
FP!. μύζει BP'Q οἰμώξει FP?QH. οἰμώξζει B: οἰμώ.εἰ P 
6 οὐδὲ Usener: οὔτε libri 7 τῶν σπουδαίων F: τὸν σπουδαῖον 


Vi. LIFE OF EPICURUS 16§ 


The internal sensations they say are two, pleasure and 
pain, which occur to every living creature, and the one 1s 
akin to nature and the other alien: by means of these two 
choice and avoidance are determined. Of investigations 
some concern actual things, others mere words. This is 

_ a brief summary of the division of their philosophy and 
their views on the criterion of truth. 

Now we must proceed to the letter. 


9. . . . . 


83 Such was his letter on Physics: then follows his letter 
on Celestial Things. 

u6 Such was his teaching on things celestial. As regards 
the principles of living and the grounds on which we 
ought to choose some things and avoid others, he writes 
the following letter. But before considering it let us 
explain what he and his followers think about the wise 
man. Injuries are done by men either through hate or 
through envy or through contempt, all of which the wise 
man overcomes by reasoning. When once a man has 
attained wisdom, he no longer has any tendency contrary 
to it or willingly pretends that he has. He will be more 
deeply moved by feelings, but this will not prove an 
obstacle to wisdom. A man cannot become wise with 
every kind of physical constitution, nor in every nation. 

118 And even if the wise man be put on the rack, he is happy. 
Only the wise man will show gratitude, and will constantly 
speak well of his friends alike in their presence and their 
absence. Yet when he is on the rack, then he will cry out 
and lament. The wise man will not have intercourse with 
any woman with whom the law forbids it,as Diogenes says 
in his summary of Epicurus’ moral teaching. Nor will he 
punish his slaves, but will rather pity them and forgive any 
that are deserving. They do not think that the wise man 
will fall in love, or care about his burial, They hold that 
love is not sent from heaven, as Diogenes says in his. . . 
book, nor should the wise man make elegant speeches. 


BPQH 10 συνουσίη δὲ FP?H?: συνουσίειν δὲ B: συνοῦσιν ἥδε 
Q: συνουσίην δέ Usener ὥνησε] ὀνῆσαι Usener 


166 VI. VITA EPICURI 


πο μὲν οὐδέποτε, ἀγαπητὸν δὲ εἰ μὴ καὶ ἔβλαψε. | καὶ μὴν καὶ 
γαμήσειν καὶ τεκνοποιήσειν τὸν σοφόν, ὡς ᾿Επίκουρος ἐν ταῖς 
Διαπορίαις καὶ ἐν ταῖς Περὶ φύσεως. κατὰ περίστασιν δέ 
ποτε βίου γαμήσειν. καὶ διατραπήσεσθαί τινας, οὐδὲ μὴν 
5 ἐπηρεάσειν ἐν μέθῃ φησὶν & ᾿Επίκουρος ἐν τῷ Συμποσίῳ. 
οὐδὲ πολιτεύσεται ὡς ἐν τῇ πρώτῃ Περὶ βίων" οὐδὲ τυραν- 
νεύσειν: οὐδὲ κυνιεῖν, Os ἐν τῇ δευτέρᾳ Περὶ βίων: οὐδὲ 
πτωχεύσειν. ἀλλὰ καὶ πηρωθεὶς τὰς ὄψεις (od) μετζαλλ)άξει 
αὐτὸν τὸν βίον, ὡς ἐν τῇ αὐτῇ φησι. καὶ λυπήσεσθαι δὲ τὸν 
120" σοφόν, ὡς Διογένης ἐν τῇ ἐ τῶν ἐπιλέκτων. | καὶ δικάσεσθαι. 
καὶ συγγράμματα καταλείψειν" οὐ πανηγυριεῖν δέ. καὶ κτήσεως 
προνοήσεσθαι καὶ τοῦ μέλλοντος. φιλαγρήσειν. τύχῃ τε 
ἀντιτάξεσθαι, φίλον τε οὐδένα προήσεσθαι. εὐδοξίας ἐπὶ 
5τοσοῦτον προνοήσεσθαι, ἐφ᾽ ὅσον μὴ καταφρονήσεσθαι. 
μᾶλλόν τε εὐφρανθήσεσθαι τῶν ἄλλων ἐν ταῖς θεωρίαις. | 
τῶν εἰκόνας τε ἀναθήσειν" εἰ ἔχοι, ἀδιαφόρως ἂν σχοίη. μόνον τε 
τὸν σοφὸν ὀρθῶς ἂν περί τε μουσικῆς καὶ ποιητικῆς διαλέξασθαι, 
ποιήματά τε ἐνεργείᾳ οὐκ ἂν ποιῆσαι. οὐκ εἶναι τε ἕτερον 
ἑτέρου σοφώτερον. χρηματίσεσθαί τε, ἀλλ᾽ ἀπὸ μόνης σοφίας, 
δ ἀπορήσαντα. καὶ μόναρχον ἐν καιρῷ θεραπεύσειν. καὶ 
ἐπιχαρήσεσθαί τινι ἐπὶ τῷ διορθώματι. καὶ σχολὴν κατα- 
σκευάσειν, ἀλλ᾽ οὐχ ὥστε ὀχλαγωγῆσαι: καὶ ἀναγνώσεσθαι 
ἐν πλήθει, ἀλλ᾽ οὐχ ἑκόντα' δογματιεῖν καὶ οὐκ ἀπορήσειν. 
καὶ καθ᾽ ὕπνους δὲ ὅμοιον ἔσεσθαι, καὶ ὑπὲρ φίλου ποτὲ 

τὸ τεθνήξεσθαι. 
τοῦ [Τὸ ἑξῆς] δοκεῖ δ᾽ αὐτοῖς | ἁμαρτήματα ἄνισα εἶναι. καὶ τὴν 


119 § ἐπηρεάσειν scripsi: τηρήσειν libri {τήρησιν Ῥ᾽)" ληρήσειν 
Cc. F. Hermann: τήρηζσιν κοσμίου μεθήγσειν ἐν μέθη Kochalsky 
8 πηρωθεὶς POF: πυρωθεὶς B: π΄. ρωθεὶς (ὦ supplevi: jerad- 
Adfec scripst: μετάξει POF. μετέξει Bi μετέξες (sc. perefew) H: 
μεθέξειν f: καταξιοῖ Usener: μετ᾽ (ἀταραξίας) ἐξάξει Kochalsky 
9 αὐτὸν] αὑτὸν Usener, Kochalsky τὸν βίον scripsi: τοῦ βίου libri 
λυπήσεσθαι ΒΡΊΟ. λυπηθήσεσθαι ἘΡἾἮ Ι2ΟΝῚ δικάσεσθαι f. 
δικάσασθαε BF POH 4 ἀντιτάξεσθαι Hf: ἀντιτάξασθαι BF POH" 

ὅλον BPQH: φίλων Ε΄, φίλην Usener τε] yap Usener οὐδένα 

Η: οὐδὲν ῬΊΟΕ προήσεσθαι Bignone: κτήσεσθαι libri, (ἀπογ)κτή- 
σεσθαι Kochalsky tat? εἰκόνας τε... δοκεῖ δ᾽ αὐτοῖς totum 
hunc locum ex δ 121 huc transferendum docuit Bignone 1 ante 
εἰ ἔχοι lacunam indicavit Usener: m notis πλοῦτον vel τέκνα supplevit ; 
οἴκησιν Kochalsky σχοίη Kuhn: σχοίης libri 2 διαλέξασθαι 
FQH?!: διαλέξεσθαι BPH* 3 τε] δὲ Rochalsky ἐνεργείᾳ Usener : 
ἐνεργεῖν Inbri οὐκ εἶναι Sambucus: οὐκ éwee re B. οὗ κινεῖται 


VI. LIFE OF EPICURUS 167 


Sexual intercourse, they say, has never done a man good, 
and he is lucky if it has not harmed him. 
ug Moreover, the wise man will marry and have children, as 
Epicurus says in the Problems and in the work on Nature. 
But he will marry according to the circumstances of his life. 
He will feel shame 1n the presence of some persons, and 
certainly will not insult them in his cups, so Epicurus 
says in the Symposium. Nor will he take part in public 
life, as he says in the first book On Ztves Nor will he act 
the tyrant, or live like the Cynics, as he writes in the second 
book Ox Lives. Nor will he beg. Moreover, even 1f he 1s 
deprived of his eyesight, he will not end his whole life, as 
he says in the same work. Also the wise man will feel 
grief, as Diogenes says in the fifth book of the Mrscellamtes, 
ra0* He will engage in lawsuits and will leave writings behind 
him, but will not deliver speeches on public occasions. 
He will be careful of his possessions and will provide for 
the future. He will be fond of the country. He will face 
fortune afd never desert a friend. He will be careful of 
his reputation 1n so far as to prevent himself from being 
despised. He will care more than other men for public 
τὰν spectacles. He will erect statues of others, but whether 
he had one himself or not, he would be indifferent. Only 
the wise man could discourse rightly on music and poetry, 
but in practice he would not compose poems. One wise 
man is not wiser than another. He will be ready to make 
money, but only when he is in straits and by means of his 
philosophy He will pay court to a king, if occasion 
demands. He will rejoice at another’s misfortunes, but 
only for his correction. And he will gather together a 
school, but never so as to become a popular leader, He 
will give lectures in public, but never unless asked; he 
will give definite teaching and not profess doubt. In his 
sleep he will be as he is awake, and on occasion he will 
even die for a friend. 
rao’ They hold that faults are not all of equal gravity, that 
FPQH: οὐ κινεῖσθαι Usener ὀχλαγωγῆσαι BPQH: σχολαγω- 
γῆσαι F 8 ἑκόντα FP*: ἑκών BP'QH II τὸ ἑξῆς ut indicium 


ad fibrarium scriptum seclusit Bignone 120” 1 ante ἁμαρτήματα 
Cobet ra supplevit, τά τε κατορθώματα καὶ τὰ Usener 


168 VI. VITA EPICURI 


ὑγίειαν τισὶ μὲν ἀγαθόν, τισὶ δὲ ἀδιάφορον. τὴν δὲ ἀνδρείαν 
φύσει μὴ γίνεσθαι, λογισμῷ δὲ τοῦ συμφέροντος. καὶ τὴν 
φιλίαν διὰ τὰς χρείας: δεῖν μέντοι προκατάρχεσθαι (καὶ γὰρ 
5 τὴν γῆν σπείρομεν), συνίστασθαι δὲ αὐτὴν κατὰ κοινωνίαν ἂν 
121" τοῖς ταῖς ἡδοναῖς ἐκπεπληρωμζίένοις). | τὴν εὐδαιμονίαν διχῇ 
νοεῖσθαι, τήν τε ἀκροτάτην, οἵα ἐστὶ περὶ τὸν θεόν, ἐπίτασιν 
οὐκ ἔχουσαν καὶ τὴν (κατὰ τὴν) προσθήκην καὶ ἀφαίρεσιν 
ἡδονῶν. μετιτέον δὲ ἐπὶ τὴν ἐπιστολήν. | 


Sequitur epistola ad Menoeceum. 


135 7 Μαντικὴν δ᾽ ἅπασαν ἐν ἄλλοις ἀναιρεῖ, ὡς καὶ ἐν τῇ μικρᾷ 
ἐπιτομῇ. καὶ φησί: μαντικὴ οὖσα ἀνύπαρκτος, εἰ καὶ ὑπαρκτή, 
οὐδὲν παρ᾽ ἡμᾶς ἡγητέα τὰ γινόμενα' τοσαῦτα καὶ περὶ τῶν 
βιωτικῶν: καὶ ἐπὶ πλείω διείλεκται ἀλλαχόθι | 

136 Atadéperat δὲ πρὸς τοὺς Κυρηναικοὺς περὶ τῆς ἡδονῆς. 
ot μὲν γὰρ τὴν καταστηματικὴν οὐκ ἐγκρίνουσι, μόνην δὲ τὴν 
ἐν κινήσει. ὃ δὲ ἀμφότερα (ra γένη) ψυχῆς καὶ σώματος, ὥς 
φησιν ἐν τῷ Περὶ αἱρέσεως καὶ φυγῆς καὶ ἐν τῷ Περὶ τέλους 

5 καὶ ἐν ἃ Περὶ βίων καὶ ἐν τῇ πρὸς τοὺς ἐν Μυτιλήνῃ φίλους 
ἐπιστολῇ. ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ Διογένης ἐν τῇ Uf τῶν ἐπιλέκτων 
καὶ Μητρόδωρος ἐν τῷ Τιμοκράτει λέγουσιν οὕτω: Νοουμένης 
δὲ ἡδονῆς τῆς τε κατὰ κίνησιν καὶ τῆς καταστηματικῆς. ὁ δὲ 
᾿Ἐπίκουμρος ἐν τῷ Περὶ αἱρέσεων οὕτω λέγει: ‘H μὲν γὰρ 

το ἀταραξία καὶ ἀπονία καταστηματικαί εἰσιν ἡδοναί: 7 δὲ χαρὰ 
καὶ ἡ εὐφροσύνη κατὰ κίνησιν ἐνεργείᾳ βλέπονται. | 

137 Ἔτι πρὸς τοὺς Κυρηναικούς" ot μὲν yap χείρους τὰς σωμα- 
τικὰς ἀλγηδόνας τῶν ψυχικῶν, κολάζεσθαι γοῦν τοὺς ἁμαρτά- 
vovtas σώματι' ὃ δὲ τὰς ψυχικάς' τὴν γοῦν σάρκα τὸ παρὸν 
μόνον χειμάζειν, τὴν δὲ ψυχὴν καὶ τὸ παρελθὸν καὶ τὸ παρὸν 

5 καὶ τὸ μέλλον: οὕτως οὖν καὶ μείζνας ἡδονὰς εἶναι τῆς 


5. ἐν τοῖς ταῖς BP?Q: ἐν ταῖς FP*H: μεγίσταις Usener 6 ἐκπε- 
πληρῳμένοις Bignone : ἐκπεπλήηρων ΡῚΩ : ἐκπεπληρῶν Bom, ΕΡῊΉ: 
ἐκπεπληρωμένην Usener 135 7 μικρ ᾳ] “μακρᾷ Gassendi 9 παρ᾽ 

as} πρὸς ἡμᾶς Meibom : παρ(ὰ τὸ 3 παρ᾿) ἡ ἡμᾶς Bignone ἡγητέα τὰ 
sener : ἡγητὰ Bl: ἡγὴ τὰ FPQH: ἡγητέον τὰ Μειροπὶ" ἡγοῦ τὰ 


Cobet: ἤδη τὰ Gassendi 136 3 ἀμφότεραϊ ἀμφοτέραν Meibom : 
dyporépasGassendi τὰ γένη supplevit Bignone: σχήματα Kochaisky: 
lacunam indicavit Usener 5 φίλου] φιλοσόφους Gassendi 


8 δὲ] διχῶς comecit Usener 137 5 ris} (ras) τῆς Cobet 


VE LIFE OF EPICURUS 169 


health is a blessing to some, but indifferent to others, that 
courage does not come by nature, but by a calculation of 
advantage. That friendship too has practical needs as its 
motive: one must indeed lay its foundations (for we sow 
the ground too for the sake of crops), but it 1s formed and 
maintained by means of community of life among those 

1a1* who have reached the fullness of pleasure. They say also 
that there are two ideas of happiness, complete happiness, 
such as belongs to a god, which admits of no increase, 
and the happiness which 15 concerned with the addition 
and subtraction of pleasures. Now we must proceed to 
the letter. 


. . . . . . 


135 In several works he rejects all kinds of prophecy, and 
specially in the Shorter Summary He says, ‘ Prophecy 
does not exist, and even if it did exist, things that come 
to pass must be counted nothing to us’. So much for 
his theory of morals, which he has discussed more fully 
elsewhere 

136 Epicurus differs from the Cyrenaics about pleasure. 

For they do not admit static pleasure, but only that which 

consists in motion. But Epicurus admits both kinds both 

in the soul and in the body, as he says 1n the work on 

Chotce and Avoidance and in the book on The End of Life 

and in the first book On Lives and in the letter to his 

friends in Mytilene. Similarly, Diogenes in the 17th book 
of Miscellanies and Metrodorus in the Zimocrates speak 
thus: ‘ Pleasure can be thought of both as consisting in 
motion and as static’, And Epicurus in the work on 

Chotce speaks as follows: ‘Freedom from trouble in the 

mind and from pain in the body are static pleasures, but 

joy and exultation are considered as active pleasures 
involving motion’. 

137 A further difference from the Cyrenaics: they thought 
that bodily pains were worse than those of the soul, and 
pointed out that offences are visited by bodily punishment. 
But Epicurus held that the pains of the soul are worse: 
for the flesh is only troubled for the moment, but the soul 
for past, present, and future. In the same way the plea- 


170 VI. VITA EPICURI 


ψυχῆς. ἀποδείξει δὲ χρῆται τοῦ τέλος εἶναι τὴν ἡδονὴν τῷ τὰ 
(Ga ἅμα τῷ γεννηθῆναι τῇ μὲν εὐαρεστεῖσθαι, τῷ δὲ πόνῳ 
προσκρούειν φυσικῶς καὶ χωρὶς λόγου. αὐτοπαθῶς οὖν 
φεύγομεν τὴν ἀλγηδόνα' ἵνα καὶ ὃ Ἡρακλῆς καταβιβρωσκό- 
τὸ μενος ὑπὸ τοῦ χιτῶνος βοᾷ 
δακρύων Wor: ἀμφὶ δ᾽ ἔστενον πέτραι, 
Λοκρῶν τ᾽ ὄρειοι πρῶνες EdBolas τ᾽ ἄκραι. | 
138 Διὰ δὲ τὴν ἡδονὴν καὶ ras ἀρετὰς αἱρεῖσθαι, οὐ δι᾿ αὑτάς, 
ὥσπερ τὴν ἰατρικὴν διὰ τὴν ὑγίειαν: καθά φησι καὶ Διογένης 
ἐν τῇ K τῶν ἐπιλέκτων, ὃς καὶ διαγωγὴν λέγει τὴν ἀγωγήν. 
ὁ δ᾽ ᾿Επίκουρος καὶ ἀχώριστόν φησι τῆς ἡδονῆς τὴν ἀρετὴν 
5 μόνην" τὰ δ᾽ ἄλλα χωρίζεσθαι, οἷον βρωτά. 

Καὶ φέρε οὖν δὴ νῦν τὸν κολοφῶνα, ὡς ἂν εἴποι τις, 
ἐπιθῶμεν καὶ τοῦ παντὸς συγγράμματος καὶ τοῦ βίον τοῦ 
φιλοσόφου, τὰς Κυρίας αὐτοῦ δόξας παραθέμενοι καὶ ταύταις 
τὸ πᾶν σύγγραμμα κατακλείσαντες, τέλει χρησάμενοι τῇ τῆς 

10 εὐδαιμονίας ἀρχῇ. 


Sequuntur Sententiae. 


10 χιτῶνος FP9H: χειμῶνος P!* χειμόνος B Boa Menagius: 
βοὴ libri (8oH B) 11 δακρύων Casaubon δάκνων libri: βοῶν 
Soph. ZYrach. 787: δεινῶς Menagius: λάσκων Dobree, δάκεων 
Kochalsky ἰύζων BIFQH: [ύζζήων ῥ᾽; ἤνξων B} ἔστενον» 
ἐκτύπουν Soph. Trach. 787 12 Λοκρῶν τ FP?QH: Aoxpap re 
BP!;  Aoxpiov Soph. Trach 788 ἄκραι ΒΡΟΗ: ἄκρα F 1381 οὐ 
δι αὑτάς FH: οὐδ' ἑαυτάς ? Ῥὶ; οὐ δι’ αὐτάς BP®?Q 5 βρωτά 
ΒΡΟΗ : βροτά ΒῈ : βρωτὰ (nwa) coniecit Usener 


VI. LIFE OF EPICURUS 171 


sures of the soul are greater. As proof that pleasure is 
the end he points out that all living creatures as soon as 
they are born take delight in pleasure, but resist pain by 
a natural impulse apart from reason. Therefore we avoid 
pain by instinct, just as Heracles, when he is being devoured 
by the shirt of Nessus, cries aloud 

With tears and groans: the rocks re-echoed far 

From Locris’ mountain peaks, Euboea’s hills. 

138 He says that virtue is preferred for the sake of pleasure, 
and not for its own sake, just as the doctor’s art 1s em- 
ployed for the sake of health. So Diogenes says too in 
the 2oth book of Miscellamies, and he adds that education 
is a ‘way of life’. Epicurus says also that virtue alone 1s 
inseparable from pleasure, but that other things may be 
separated, such as things to eat. 

Come, then, let us put the crown, as it were, to the whole 
work and to the life of our philosopher, in setting out his 
Principal Doctrines and closing the whole work with them, 
thus using as our conclusion the starting-point of happiness. 


COMMENTARY 


LETTER TO HERODOTUS 


Tue first letter, addressed to Herodotus, 1s an exposition of the 
main principles of Epicurus’ system, intended, as he explains at once, 
not for the outside world or for novices, but for those who have 
already made some progress in acquiring the master’s ideas It 
accordingly assumes considerable knowledge on the part of the 
reader, especially of many of the technical terms and phrases used 
by him, and is often allusive and compendious. It is, moreover, 
carelessly written, and abounds in long sentences, which give the 
appearance of never having been thought out as a whole, but merely 
built up in the course of composition, as new thoughts and modifica- 
tions occurred to the writer. It has no doubt suffered also in trans- 
mission, and consequently, as we have it, 1s one of the most difficult 
and obscure pieces of writing in the Greek language. Even in the 
sequence of the subjects treated it 1s dislocated and incoherent, but it 
seems useless to attempt to reconstitute a logical order of discussion 

The genuineness of the letter has never been contested, and it may 
be accepted as an example of Epicurus’ esoteric and more crabbed style, 
Just as the third letter is of the more lucid and polished style which he 
adopted when writing for a wider and less initiated audience. It 1s, 
with the exception of the poem of Lucretius, the most complete 
exposition of Epicurus’ pmlosophy which we possess. 

Of Herodotus, to whom the letter was written, we know nothing, 
except that he was of course a disciple and that he wrote a work Ov 
the Youth of Eptcurus (Vit § 4). 


Inrropuction (δὲ 35-37): 


Epicurus explains his reasons for writing this new summary, which 
18 intended as a reminder to those who have already made some 
advance in the comprehension of his system. it 15 to be a résumé of 
the chef points in the doctrine, to which chey can refer and which they 
may commit to memory. 

§ 85 2. τὰς μείζους . . . βίβλους : i.e. Epicurus’ more detailed works 
and in particular the Ilepi φύσεως, of which there were thirty-seven 
books (V4, 27). 


174 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


3. ἐπιτομήν : i.e. the work known as the μεγάλη ἐπιτομή, which 
was intended, as he explains here, chiefly for beginners, and set out 
the main principles in the different departments of the system. It was 
probably on this work in the main that Lucretius based the De Rerum 
Natura (see Giussani, Stud. Lucr., p. 10). The present letter was 
sometimes known as the μικρὰ ἐπιτομή. 

πραγματείας, ‘the system’: so Aristotle speaks of ἡ Πλάτωνος mpay- 
ματεία, Mefaph. 1 6.1 

4. κατασχεῖν, ‘to grasp’, ‘get by heart’. Cf. § 83 οὗτος ὃ λόγος 
δυνατὸς κατασχεθῆναι per ἀκριβείας. 

τῶν ὁλοσχερωτάτων γε δοξῶν, ‘at least of the general principles 
covering the whole ground’, sc. in the different departments. The 
variations in the MSS. strongly support Usener’s suggestion of inserting 
ys and it greatly improves the sense. 1t might not be possible for a 
beginner to retain the details of the system, but by the aid of the 
Greater Epitome he will at least comprehend the general] :deas, 

5. αὐτοῖς παρεσκεύασα. Usener quite unnecessarily alters to dy τις 
παρασκευάσαι, probably because he did not realize that Epicurus 1s 
referring to the Greater Epitome, and took the reference to be to the 
present letter. αὐτοῖς picks up rots μὴ δυναμένοις, a not infrequent 
habit in Epicurus (cf K. A. xxx, xxxu, xxxix, though the instances 
there are not quite so clumsy). 

6. αὑτοῖς, An obviously necessary correction for the MS. αὐτοῖς. 

ἡ. καὶ τοὺς προβεβηκότας δὲ .., ‘and those also who have made 
progress’, The more proficient disciples need reminding of the 
main principles, and for them the present letter is intended, It is 
certainly written in an ‘esoteric’ style. The point seems clear 
enough without reading καὶ δὴ καί, as Giussani suggests (S/ud, Lucr., 
Ῥ 7, note 2) 

8. τὸν τύπον... κατεστοιχειωμένον, ‘the scheme of the whole system 
set out in its main principles’. 

10 τῆς ἀθρόας ἐπιβολῆς. ἐπιβολή 1s One of the most difficult 
technical words in Epicurus. It is used without qualification here 
and in two other places in this paragraph, but it cannot be 
separated from ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας in δὲ 38, 51, and K. A. xxiv. It 
means first a ‘ projection (of the mind or senses) towards an image’, 
so an ‘act of attention’, and with the added idea of the result of the 
act ‘view’, ‘apprehension’. So here ‘we need the comprehensive 
grasp’. See also note on § 38, and a full discussion in Appendix, 
pp. 259 ff. 

§ 86. τ. βαδιστέον ἐπ᾽ ἐκεῖνα. ἐκεῖνα must be ‘the general princi- 
ples’, ra ὅλα of ὃ 35 8, though the reference 1s not very explicit. For 
the form of the phrase cf ὃ 83 ἐὰν μὴ καὶ πρὸς ἅπαντα βαδίσῃ τις. 
The MSS. have καὶ ἐπ᾽ ἐκεῖνα συνεχῶς ἐν τῇ μνήμῃ, which is more 
easily and satisfactorily mended by Gassendn’s transposition of καί after 
ἐπ᾽ ἐκεῖνα, than by Usener’s ἔν re μνήμῃ or von der Muehll’s ἐν δὲ 


τῇ μνήμῃ. 


COMMENTARY. § 35-37 175 


3. 4}... κυριωτάτη ἐπιβολή  ΠΕΓΕ again as in 6 ‘the most essential 
view, gfasp, comprehension’ of the truth. 

ἐπὶ τὰ πράγματα : not simply ‘over things’, but over things as 
Epicurus saw them, ‘the truth’. Cf. the use of πραγματεία above. 

4. τὸ κατὰ μέρος ἀκρίβωμα, ‘accurate knowledge in detail’. Cf § 83 
τῶν κατὰ μέρος ἀκριβωμάτων. 

6. τοῦ τετελεσιουργημένου, ‘of the man who 1s perfected in the 
system ’, ‘fully mitiated’. Cf. ὃ 83 ὅσοι δὲ μὴ παντελῶς αὐτῶν τῶν 
ἀποτελουμένων. Giussani apparently takes it as a neuter participle 
with τοῦ παντὸς ἀκριβώματος, ‘of the perfect and complete knowledge 
of the whole system’, but both the order and the parallel of § 83 are 
against this. Bignone agrees m taking it as masculine. von der 
Muehll unnecessarily reads the dative τῷ τετελεσιουργημένῳ 

ἡ. τὸ. . . χρῆσθαι, ‘to be able to make a rapid use of observation 
and mental apprehension’. ταῖς ἐπιβολαῖς is used here in a rather 
more technical sense, and for the plural we must compare § 38 
ἐπιβολὰς εἴτε διανοίας εἴθ᾽ ὅτου δήποτε τῶν κριτηρίων : it means the 
‘apprehensions either by the mind or by the senses’. The truly 
mitiated man must be able to interpret quickly what he perceives and 
to apply rapidly his mental conclusions. 

8. καὶ... ο συναγομένων. The MS. text will not construe as it stands, 
Usener drastically corrects it ἑκάστων. . . ἀναγομένων, ‘by referring 
everything to elementary principles and formulae’. But this is not 
quite the point, and the emendations are both considerable 1t looks 
rather as τῇ something were lost. Buignone supplies after χρῆσθαι {περὶ 
τῶν κατὰ μέρος καὶ περὶ τῶν dAwv), but |. 3 shows that the preposition used 
after ἐπιβολή 15 ἐπί, not περί, and the correction ignores the καί of the 
MSS., nor again is the sense quite what 1s wanted. The initiate must 
be able to form his conclusions rapidly, and for this purpose he needs 
short mnemonic formulae. I therefore suggest that the words lost were 
something like (τοῦτο γίνοιτ᾽ ἂν ἁπάντων). Von der Muehil reads 
συναγομένοις, which I do not understand. 

φωνάς, probably ‘formulae’, made by the combination of φθόγγοι 
(δ 37. 6) and corresponding to προλήψεις in the mind. 

9. τὸ πύκνωμα, ‘the condensation, abbreviation, abridgement’. 

10 τῆς. . περιοδείας - Jit. ‘the continuous circuit of the whole 
system ’, ‘circuit’ because it is all so closely linked that it 1s constantly 
coming back on itself. 

§ 87. 2. φυσιολογίᾳ, ‘the investigation of nature’, but of course with 
the imphcation that it 15 the Epicurean method of investigation. 

τῆς τοιαύτης ὁδοῦ : 1. 6. the course he has just suggested of resuming 
important points for the benefit of the imitiated lake Herodotus. 

5. παρεγγυῶν. .. δοξῶν, A difficult clause in which I have with some 
hesitation accepted Usener’s corrections. παρεγγνῶν τό 18 1n effect the 
MS. text, ἐνέργημα has less authority than ἐνάργημα, but it 1s impos- 
sible to make sense of the latter here, τοιούτῳ 18 a not very serious 
correction for τὸ τούτων, and ἐγγαληνίξων 1s as likely to be concealed by 


x76 ἽἼ. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


the MS. variations as any other case of the partiaple. The most 
serious change is ἐποίησά σοι for ποιήσασθαι, but it seems required by 
the sense, and is the natural conclusion for this section. The whole 
sentence should be compared with the conclusion of the letter in § 83, 
where he comes back to the idea of the γαληνισμός, which results from 
the study of natural science. 

παρεγγυῶν, ‘recommending’, like an officer passing along the 
watchword. 

3- τοιούτῳ. Bignone proposes an alternative correction, τοιοῦτος dy, 
which 1s not palaeographically much better, and 1s awkward in com- 
bination with the other two participles. 


I. Metuops or Procepure (§§ 37, 38). 


Epicurus starts with a brief summary of the important potnts in his 
Canomica, which ts to be regarded not so much as a ‘Logic’ of the 
system, for he had no belief in logic, but as ‘iules of procedure’, or, 
as it presented itself to him metaphorically, the ‘ measures (xavoves) 
and squares and plumb-lines’ with which the builder keeps his building 
straight (Lucr. tv. 513 ff.) For further references to the Canonica see 
Usener, pp. 175-190. 

The first principle ts one of language, Every word must correspond 
to an exact concept on (πρύληψις) in the mind, and this conception must 
be the first and most obvious associated with the word. 

6. τὰ ὑποτεταγμένα τοῖς φθόγγοις, ‘ that which 3s attached to sounds’ 
—i.e. the ideas or conceptions (προλήψεις) associated with words, 
φθόγγοι appear to be ‘ words’ which in combination make φωναί 

4. τὰ δοξαζόμενα, ‘matters of opinion’. According to Epicurean 
doctrine, the mind receives the data of sense-perception and makes its 
inferences from them. These inferences in themselves have no neces- 
sary validity, but must be tested by constant reference to sense-percep- 
tion, and only accepted if they are confirmed (ἐπιμαρτυρεῖται) or not 
refuted (οὐκ ἀντιμαρτυρεῖται) by it (cf. ὃ 50) But sense-impressions 
by frequent repetition form in the mind general conceptions (προλήψεις) 
—‘ composite photographs’, as it were—and these προλήψεις, being 
derived from sense-impressions, have an equal validity with the sense- 
impressions as a criterion of truth (cf, Vit. 31, 33). The φθογγοί 
are the symbols of the προλήψεις. 

ζητούμενα are problems concerned with the mmvestigation of external 
things ; ἀπορούμενα, problems raised in the mind, apart from immediate 
sense-impression. 

9. ἡμῖν (p>: the MSS. read simply ἡμῖν, G alone adding #, of which 
Ὁ seems a simpler and safer correction than ἔῃ. 

ἀποδεικνύουσιν, ‘explaining’ rather than ‘proving’, as Bignone 
points out. 

§ 88. 1. τὸ πρῶτον ἐννόημα : in Epicurus’ idea all thought proceeds 
by means of visualization, or more exactly, the προλήψεις come before 


COMMENTARY. δ 347-38 077 
the mind: an ἐννόημα then 1s a ‘mental image’, and Epicurus 
therefore uses the verb βλέπεσθαι. We are to make it the rule to con- 
sider the ‘ first’ mage, i.e. the most literal picture associated with a word 
Epicurus no doubt meant this rule partly to be a protest against the 
use of metaphorical language in philosophy, but it can hardly be said 
that he carried it out very successfully himself. 

4 ἔτι τε κατὰ τὰς αἰσθήσεις... 8. σημειωσόμεθα. An extremely diffi- 
cult sentence involving several highly technical notions Having 
dealt with the phraseology to be used m investigation, Epicurus passes 
now to the methods of investigation. The order is somewhat illogical 
because, as we have seen, the determination of the phraseology really 
involves the standards of judgement He staits with the simple prin- 
ciple, which is the keystone of the whole metaphysic of Epicureanism 
κατὰ τὰς αἰσθήσεις δεῖ πάντα τηρεῖν, ‘all our investigations’ (πάντα 
takes its content from the general tone of the context) ‘must be con- 
trolled by sensations’. Sensations are infallible; their evidence must 
always be accepted at once, when it 1s available, and in cases where it 
1s not (ἄδηλα), any hypothesis must be submitted to the test of sensa- 
tion, and only accepted if it 1s not then contradicted (8 50). Similarly, 
in the field of morality or conduct, the ὑπάρχοντα 7a6y—the immediate 
feelings of pleasure and pain must be the supreme test~ pleasure 1s 
good, pain is bad (cf. Ep mi 120 ὡς κανόνι τῷ πάθει πᾶν ἀγαθὸν 
κρίνοντες). Thus far the idea 18 clear’ we are left with the words καὶ 
ἁπλῶς (xara) τὰς παρούσας ἐπιβολὰς εἴτε διανοίας εἴθ᾽ ὅτου δήποτε τῶν 
κριτηρίων, which are fully discussed in the Appendix on ἐπιβολὴ τῆς δια- 
voias, pp. 259 ff. We may sum up the conclusions there reached thus : 
the ἐπιβολαὶ τῆς διανοίας are the ‘ apprehensions of mental images’ of 
things imperceptible by the senses im two cases: (4) when certain 
Images too subtle to be perceived by the senses, make their way 
directly into the mind and are ‘apprehended’ by it m a kind of 
secondary sense-perception, such especially are the :mages of the 
gods; (4) when the concepts of science are grasped by an act of 
attention on the part of the mind employing the process of verification 
which consists in their reference to the test of sensation and finding 
that they are not contradicted (οὐκ ἀντιμαρτυρεῖται). The ἐπιβολαὶ τῶν 
κριτηρίων are similar ‘acts of apprehension’ on the part of the senses 
(κριτήριον is here used in an active sense of the ‘instrument of judge- 
ment ’), which are not now content to receive a merely passive impres- 
sion, but ‘look’ or ‘listen’ actively in order to obtain confirmatory 
evidence (ἐπιμαρτύρησις) with regard to the ‘problem awaiting solu 
tion’ (προσμένον) by means of the ‘clear view’ (ἐναργές). This process 
ig exactly parallel to the second process of the ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας. 
For the whole idea of the ἐπιβολαΐί compare phrases in §§ 50, 51, 62, 
and K. A. xxiv, and for the processes of verfication by the test of the 
senses § 50 jim. and notes there. ἔτι re, Arndt, seems a more satis- 
factory correction of the MSS. εἴτε than Usener’s ἔπειτα. 

2918 Μ 


178 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


5. ἁπλῶς probably means ‘in particular’: though Epicurus insisted 
that every αἴσθησις was true, i.e the image formed in the sense-organ 
corresponded exactly to the ‘idols’ that fell upon it, he insisted no 
less strongly that before we allow opinion to pronounce upon the 
nature of the object (στερέμνιον) from which the ‘idols’ originally 
came, we must get the confirmation of the ‘nearer view’. The 
‘nearer view’ obtained by ἐπιβολή was thus in reality a surer indica- 
tion of the truth of the image to the objective reality than the original 
passive αἴσθησις. This Epicurus never liked to admit, as it under- 
mined the validity of αἴσθησις as a criterion of truth, but the letter 
is not without indications, such as this, that he preferred the clear 
view of ἐπιβολή, and indeed for purposes of scientific investigation 
demanded 1t. 

τὰς παρούσας ἐπιβολάς means ‘the immediate apprehensions’ 
apart fiom any addition made to them by δόξα : cf. the exactly parallel 
phrase in K Δ. xxiv τὸ παρὸν ἤδη κατὰ τὴν αἴσθησιν καὶ τὰ πάθη Kai 
πᾶσαν φανταστικὴν ἐπιβολὴν τῆς διανοίας. 

6 τῶν κριτηρίων cannot be here used in its full techmieal sense οἵ 
the ‘standards of yudgement’, which are αἴσθησις, πάθος, and πρό- 
ληψις (and, according to later Epicureans, ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας (Vit. Lp. 
§ 31)), because αἴσθησις and πάθος are separately mentioned, and you 
cannot have an ἐπιβολὴ τῆς προλήψεως (still less an ἐπιβολὴ τῆς ἐπι- 
βολῆς τῆς διανοίας). I take the word both here and in ὃ §1 ἐπιβολὰς 
τῆς διανοίας ἢ τῶν λοιπῶν κριτηρίων to mean ‘the individual senses’ 
sight, hearing, smell, &c., regarded in their capacity as κριτήρια, 
‘instruments of judgement’. Guussani wrongly interprets the word 
in a general sense ‘signs’ or ‘indications’, and propounds a most 
improbable explanation 

If the general view here takcn 1s correct, we must follow Gassendi in 
reading κατά before τὰς παρούσας ἐπιβολάς and Giussam in changing 
καί before τὰ ὑπάρχοντα πάθη to κατά. Otherwise we get the statement 
that the αἰσθήσεις are to contro] the various ἐπιβολαΐ and the πάθη, 
which 1s impossible for Epicurus, Bignone reaches the same sense by 
omitiing κατά after ἔτι re, reading πάντων for πάντα and then preserv- 
ing the MS. text. But this is palaeographically improbable, and the 
expression τὰς αἰσθήσεις. . . πάντων seems very unlike Epicurus. 
Von der Muehll reads here ras αἰσθήσεις δεῖ πάντως τηρεῖν, but πάντως 
18 difficult, I doubt the phrase τὰς αἰσθήσεις τηρεῖν and the whole idea 
1s not so Epicurean. 

7. ὅπως Oy... σημειωσόμεϑα, Notice the implied parallelism of 
ideas: the προσμένον, the problem of sensation, is to be solved by an 
ἐπιβολή of one or other of the senses, the ἄδηλον, the problem of 
thought, by the ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας. Epicurus 1s also harking back 
to the beginning of the section: there the ζητούμενα are the problems 
of sense-investigation, the ἀπορούμενα the problems of thought. 


COMMENTARY. ἐξ 38-39 179 


II. Tue Universe anp 115 ConstiTuENTS. 
A. Things imperceptible: the three princtples. 


Epicurus plunges at once into the discussion of the ἄδηλα, the 
ultimate constituents of the universe, which never could fall within the 
ken of the senses. He here enunciates with brief proofs three funda- 
mental principles: (1) that nothing is created out of nothing, (2) that 
nothing 15 destroyed into nothing ; (3) a deduction from the two former 
principles—the universe 1s ever the same. ‘The first two principles 
had already been enunciated by Empedocles and Anaxagoras and 
adopted by Democritus, whom Epicurus 1s here following. 

The first principle that ‘nothing 1s created out of nothing’ really 
covers two important ideas: (1) in general, that the sum of matter is 
never increased by new additions, and (2) in 1eference to particulars, 
that every material object has a material cause The proof seems at 
first sight irrelevant as it appears to deny fresh creation on the ground 
that there is not indiscriminate creation But it 1s based as usual on 
the appeal to the evidence of sensation: every creation of which we 
have cognizance implies a previous ‘seed’: but if ‘spontaneous crea- 
tion’ were possible, things would be created without ‘ seeds’, which 
sensation denies. Lucretius elaborates the proof at great length in 
i 159-214. 

9. Ταῦτα... διαλαβόντας lit ‘having made these distinctions’, 
i.e, between the mght and wrong use of words and the true and false 
standards of judgement 

Set: either δεῖ must be read here for δέ or 1t must be inserted with 
Meibom after ἤδη or with von der Muehil after διαλαβόντας, 

συνορᾶν, ‘to consider’, ‘obtain a comprehcnsive new of’: notice 
again the suggestion of thought as visualization : 

περὶ τῶν ἀδήλων, ‘imperceptible things ’, such as never could come 
within the cogmizance of the senses. Of these Epicurus distinguishes 
two classes: (1) certain atomic compounds too subtle to be perceived 
by the senses, which yet make themselves known directly to the mind 
by means of εἴδωλα. e.g the gods (cf. Lucr. v. 148-149), (2) imper- 
ceptible things which cannot be perceived by εἴδωλα even by the mind, 
and can only be reached by ratiocination , e.g. the atoms and space, 
the ultimate constituents of the universe He also sometimes applies 
the term ἄδηλα loosely to phenomena so distant that the near view of 
them cannot be obtained: e.g. τὰ μετέωρα. 

11 ἐγίνετ᾽, Usener’s suggestion in the notes that éyéver’ should be 
read 18 contradicted by ἐφθείρετο tn the next line, and 13 inconsistent 
with Epicurus’ view of creation as a continual piocess: ‘sporadic 
creation ’ would be going on now. 

ὃ 39. The second principle that ‘nothing 1s destroyed into the non- 
existent’ is the complement of the first, and hke 1t has two implica- 
bons: (1) 1m general, that the sum of matter 1s never decreased by any 


M 2 


180 1. ΠΡῸΣ HPOQAOTON 


absolute loss—the principle of the ‘permanence of matter’; (2) that 
no individual thing 1s utterly destroyed, but only dissolved into its 
component particles (see Lucr. 1, 215, 216). The proof is again 
succinctly put, but more obviously than that of the first principle. 
If everything which passed from our ken (τὸ ἀφανιζόμενον) utterly 
passed out of existence, then seeing that this process of ‘ penshing’ 1s 
always going on all round us, the whole sum of nature would long ago 
have been destroyed. As it is, destruction 1s prevented by the ‘ seeds’. 
Again Lucretius elaborates at great length (1. 217-264). 

2. οὐκ ὄντων εἰς ἃ διελύετο, ‘since the things into which they were 
dissolved did not exist’, This clause is the link between the two 
principles: it is the existence of the permanent σπέρματα which 
secures the permanence of the universe, and this existence is of course 
the ultimate basis of the atomic theory. 

The third principle that ‘the universe Js unchanging’ is in part a 
deduction from the other two if nothing 1s ever added by fresh 
creation from the non-existent, the universe cannot increase: if 
nothing is ever destroyed into nothing, the universe cannot decrease. 
The expression here is very compressed, and Epicurus only uses the 
latter of these two arguments explicitly in the last clause ; the former 
1s implied. Moreover the argument is expressed from the point of 
view of change, which is shghtly different from that of the previous 
clauses. Change, in Epicurus’ view, 1s always destruction. see the con- 
stantly recurring and almost axiomatic lines in Lucretius (1.670, &c.): 

nam quodcunque suis mutatum finibus exit, 

continuo hoc mors est illus quod fuit ante 
In the parallel passage of Lucretius 11. 304 ff, which was pro- 
bably based on the Greater Epitome, it 1s implied that there are 
three possibilities by which the umiverse might. change. (1) if 
there were anything outside it into which any part of it might 
escape; (2) if there were anywhere from which a new force might 
enter the universe and alter it. These two causes are those most 
prominent tn this section. But there 1s another (3), the possibility of 
change by internal rearrangement, which might at first sight seem, in 
view of the constant dissolution and recomposition of the atomic 
compounds, to be a cause actually at work in the universe. Epicurus’ 
answer lies in the conception of equilibrium (icovoyia): the atoms, 
not infinite but unhmuited in number, have long ago entered into all 
possible combinations and nothing new can be created by their com- 
binations. This Lucretius (i. 297 ff.) puts vividly: 

quapropter quo nunc in motu pmncipiorum 

corpora sunt, in eodem ante acta aetate fuere 

et posthac semper simil ratione ferentur, 

et quae consuerint gigni gignentur eadem 

condicione et erunt et crescent vique valebunt, 

quantum cuique datumst per foedera natura. 


Bignone (Appendix, ui, p. 253) has rightly called attention to this 


COMMENTARY. § 39 181 


third point, and sees a reference to τῇ in the words οὐθὲν γάρ ἐστιν eis 
ὃ μεταβαλεῖ. I think on the whole that it is more probable that thrs 
sentence refers to the first of the causes enumerated above, change 
due to dissolution into something else; but the idea of change by 
internal alteration seems to be lurking in Epicurus’ mind, as is shown 
by his use of μεταβάλλειν. 

4. μεταβάλλει ts the reading of all the MSS. and can, I think, be 
retained, although Usener’s correction μεταβαλεῖ would produce a 
more normal construction Bneger’s omission of εἰς would make the 
clause a mere tautology of what follows, and is based on a musunder- 
standing. Still more so 1s Giussam’s violent change παρὰ yap τὸ πᾶν 
οὐθέν ἐστιν εἰς ὃ μεταβαλεῖ ἢ ὃ ἂν εἰσελθὸν .. 

5. οὐθέν ἐστιν, ὃ... Bignone thinking that there should be direct 
mention of the posstbilty of change by loss would amplify οὐθέν 
ἐστιν moe ἄν τι ἐξέλθοι, ἢ ὃ) ἂν εἰσελθν . . But this is un- 
necessary, 1f we can suppose that this cause of change 1s implied tn the 
previous sentence. 

6. ποιήσαιτο. a curious use of the middle, but it 1s unnecessary to 
alter to ποιήσαι with Usener, or with Cronert to ποιῆσαι (δύναιντο. 
Eptcurus not infrequently employs the middle unexpectedly. 


B Bodtes and space. 


Epicurus proceeds at once to consider the constitution of the 
universe. It consists of bodies (matter) and space That body 
exists is attested by the universal experience of mankind, and space 
must needs exist in order that bodies may exist and move mit The 
line of argument 15 familiar in Epicurean writings (the Scholiast here 
notes that it recurred both in the Greater Epitome and 1m the Περὶ 
φύσεως) and is closely followed with some amplification by Luer 1 
419-448. 

ἡ. (σώματα καὶ τόπος) the addition made by Usener is amply 
justified by Ep. 1. 86 τὸ πᾶν σώματα καὶ ἀναφὴς φύσις, by quotations 
from Epicurus in Sext. adv Dogm in. 333 (Fr. 13) and Plut. adv. 
Col.11,p 1112e (Fr. 14), and by Lucr 1 420. The omission 1s due 
to ‘haplography’. Arndt and Kochalsky propose to read τὸ πᾶν ἔστι 
without any addition, but τὸ 1s absurd that he should here state the 
existence of the universe after assuming it in the previous section, and 
the following sentence would then be left without connexion. 

8. αὐτὴ ἡ αἴσθησις. we are at every moment conscious of the 
existence of bodies and our consciousness cannot be denied. Reason 
must take its evidence from the senses in judging of ἄδηλα. 

ἐπὶ πάντων : not neuter ‘on all occasions’ but ‘before the eyes of’, 
as often τῇ legal phraseology (e.g. Dem. 781. 4 ἐλέγχεσθαι ἐπὶ πάντων). 
This 1s proved by Lucr. i. 422 ‘corpus enim per se communis dedicat 
esse sensus ’. 

9. ὥσπερ προεῖπον. sc. ὃ 38. 

10, τὸ πρόσθεν. Usener’s τόπος δέ 1s an unnecessary emendation 


182 1. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


of the MS. τὸ πρόσθεν : δέ must be inserted, as Gassendi saw, 
after εἰ, : 

§ 40, 1. ὃ κενὸν... Epicurus’ list of synonyms is carefully repro- 
duced by Lucretius: τόπος = locus, κενόν = tnane, χώρα = spatium : 
ἀναφὴς φύσις is represented by the adjective ensactele in 1. 437 (cf. ἐπα 
factus, ‘intangibilty’, i. 454). The words are used as absolute 
synonyms by Epicurus, but their interchangeable use suggests an 
uncertainty, and Epicurus seems to oscillate between the ideas of 
‘space’ = extension in an almost mathematical sense, and the more 
concrete notion of the ‘unoccupied space’ between bodies, 6 has the 
best MS. authority. Usener reads ὅν from the ὅν of some MSS., to 
agree with τόπος in lis emendation. 

2. ἀναφῆ φύσιν regards space from a slightly different point of view 
and leads up to the mention of properties. The one property of 
space, that by which alone it can be known, 15 that ‘it cannot be 
touched’: but it 1s a φύσις---δὴ existence—Just as matter 13 a φύσις. 
The idea really goes back to the controversies of Leucippus and 
Democritus with their opponents. ‘The real’ (τὸ 6v), said Leucippus, 
meaning what his opponents called real, 1 6. matter, ‘exists not a 
whit more than the unreal, the void exists no less than matter’, 

8. καθάπερ φαίνεται κινούμενα Notice again the appeal to sense, 
but in this case it cannot be so direct: sensation cannot tell us of the 
existence of the void, as it can of body. But it does tell us of the 
positions and motions of bodies: and neither position nor motion 1s 
possible without ‘empty space’. Here then we have a case of the 
μαρτύρησις of phenomena. 

παρὰ δὲ ταῦτα... Epicurus repeats his position from a slightly 
different pomt of view, stating 1t now negatively. Besides bodies and 
space there is nothing else which exists as a ‘complete thing’ (ὅλῃ 
Pious), nothing, that 1s, which has an independent existence. Anything 
else we can conceive (e.g a quality or a state) has an existence 
dependent on or relative to something else, 1s, as Epicurus says, 
a property (συμβεβηκός) or accident (σύμπτωμα) of body or space. 
Lucretius 1s again (1. 430-432, 445-448) following closely and goes on 
naturally enough to discuss properties and accidents, a subject rele- 
gated in the letter (possibly out of place} to ὃ 68 Bignone notes that 
Epicurus’ view is here stated in opposition to the Platonic theory of 
ideas and to any spiritual view of the ψυχή. 

4. οὔτε περιληπτικῶς οὔτε ἀναλόγως τοῖς περιληπτοῖς, ‘ neither by way 
of conception nor on the analogy of conceivable things’. Epicurus’ 
idea of thought is always the grasping (περιλαμβάνειν) of a 
visual image (bake) eon etnies this 1s the πρόληψις, which has 
been formed in the mind by a succession of εἴδωλα from outside 
(περιληπτικῷς), sometimes by a combination of images the mind forms 
an image of its own (ἀναλόγως τοῖς περιληπτοῖς). 

Usener 1s probably right in regarding the form περιληπτῶς in the 
MSS. as impossible and emending to περιληπτικῶς. 


ῷ COMMENTARY. ξὲ 40-41 183 


ὡς. . .λαμβανόμενα. . . λεγόμενα. There seems no need to 
follow Usener in emending to dca... λαμβάνομεν. .. λέγομεν : the 
construction is loose, but not too loose for Epicurus. 

6. συμπτώματα ἢ συμβεβηκότα: cf ὃ 68 and notes there. 

ἡ. καὶ phy kat... Having established matter and void as the sole 
existences, Epicurus proceeds to consider the form in which matter 
or body exists. ‘Body’1s an ambiguous term We normally mean 
by it material things, such as we perceive’ these are in reality com- 
pounds (συγκρίσεις) of matter and void. In its more technical sense it 
means ‘absolute matter’, matter apart from void. Once more 
Lucretius follows closely (1. 483, 484) 


corpora sunt porro partim primordia rerum, 
partim concilio quae constant principrorum. 


ὃ 41. 1. ταῦτα δέ dor... This ‘absolute matter’ exists in the 
form of imdivisible, unalterable particles, ‘atoms’. Epicurus’ very 
brief proof—that otherwise the dissolution of things would mean their 
absolute destruction—is elaborated by Lucretius into a long series of 
arguments to show that the ultimate particles are ‘solid, single, and 
eternal’ (1. 503-634, especially 540-550). 

ἄτομα καὶ ἀμετάβλητα, ‘they cannot be separated into smaller par- 
ticles, nor can there be any internal change by rearrangement of their 
parts’, both ideas come directly to Epicurus from Democritus, but the 
latter has greatly elaborated in the conception of the πέρατα, δὲ 56, 57 

3. ἰσχῦόν τ. The MSS. have ἰσχύοντα, but (4) it cannot be taken 
with πάντα, for Epicurus could not have said ‘all things remain 
strong’, meaning that their component particles so remained, (4) 
Bignone’s suggestion that 1t might refer to ταῦτα at the beginning 
of the sentence would involve a considerable stretch of grammatical 
probability. Usener emends to ἰσχύειν τι, but ἰσχύειν aS a mere 
equivalent of δύνασθαι 1s unhkely. E Rohde in a MS note m his 
copy of Usener, now in my possession, suggested ἰσχύοντά τινα, which 
is on the mght lines: the things are dissolved but ‘ some permanent 
existences’ remain, 1.6. the atoms survive. I suggest (and I now find 
that Bignone in his notes has the same proposal) ἰσχῦόν τι, ‘some- 
thing with strength’, ‘something permanent’, which ts nearer to the 
MS, text. The participle 1s strongly confirmed by ὃ 54 ἐπειδήπερ 
δεῖ τι ὑπομένειν ἐν ταῖς διαλύσεσι τῶν συγκρίσεων στερεὸν καὶ ἀδιάλυτον, 
and by Lucretius’ recurrent descnpiion of the atoms m the corre- 
sponding passage as ‘solida pollentia stmplicitate’ (1 574, 612). 

Cronert’s ὑπομενεῖν for ὑπομένειν 15 hardly necessary m Eprcurus in 
spite of φθαρήσεσθαι. 

4. πλήρη : 1.6. each of the atoms 15 a solid corporeal plenum with- 
out any admixture of void. 

ὄντα : the MS. ὅταν is clearly a mistake. Bignone’s correction ofa 
δή 1s less satisfactory than Usener’s ὄντα, and Meibom’s ὄντα καί 15 


hardly necessary. 


184 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


ὅπῃ ἢ ὅπως : quite literally, there is no part of themselves in which 
they could break up and no means by which they could do it—another 
anticipation of the idea of the πέρατα. 


C. Infinity of the unrverse. 


Epicurus proceeds to a new point. The universe, the sum-total 
that 1s of body + space (τὸ πᾶν), 18 infinite. This he proves charac- 
teristically by an appeal to sense-experience. In the case of any 
limited thing, you must come to the end of it, and you perceive its end 
‘against something else’, 1.e. as standing out against something which 
is not ‘it’. But in the case of the umiverse there 1s no such end and 
nothing outside τι. The argument 15 brought out more clearly by 
Lucretius (1. 958-964) . 


omne quod est igitur nulla regione viarum 
finitumst ; namque extremum debebat habere 
exiremum porro nulls posse videtur 

esse, ms) ultra sit quod fimiat, ut videatur 

quo non longius haec sensus natura sequatur 
nunc extra summum quoniam nil esse fatendum, 
non habet extremum, caret ergo fine modoque. 


It 18 clearly illustrated by the famous problem of the throwing of the 
spear (968-983) 

ἡ. παρ᾽ ἕτερόν τι θεωρεῖται. Usener, thinking the argument 1s 
incomplete as it stands, suggests (Introd , p. xvin) that a clause has 
been lost by ‘homoeoteleuton’ ἀλλὰ μὴν τὸ πᾶν οὐ map ἕτερόν τι 
θεωρεῖται, the equivalent of which 1s found in Cic. ge Div. ν 50. 103 
‘at quod omne est, id non cermitur ex alio extrinsecus’ But I agree 
with Bignone that in a brief epitome like this it 13 quite hkely that one 
step in the argument was omitted. 

9. καὶ phy καὶ... Not only is the universe infinite as a whole, but 
each of its two component parts ts infinite, ‘the bodies’ in number, 
space in extent. For (af the whole ts infinite, one or other or both of 
its constituents must be infinite—anothei omitted step conscientiously 
supplied in Lucr, i. 1008 ff), and (2) a limited number of atoms in 
infinite void could never meet or remam m union to form things, 
(6) unlimited atoms im finite space would not have room to take up 
their place (an argument shghtly vaned by Lucretius in 1. 988-1007). 

ὃ 42, 3. οὐκ ἔχοντα τὰ ὑπερείδοντα καὶ στέλλοντα κατὰ τὰς ἀνακοπάς. 
The idea involves the Epicurean cimetics. The atoms are continually 
falling in the void of the:r own weight, but they swerve from time to time 
owing to the παρέγκλισις (Lucr. i1, 216 ff) and this causes them to 
collide. The result of constant collisions 15 that they are driven off in 
all directions, even upwards, and are so both prevented from falling 
and kept in their places withm compounds. The dvaxory is the single 


COMMENTARY. §& 41-42 185 


blow which hes at the basis of the process of ἀντικοπή (see δὲ 462, 
41%). Meibom’s proposal to read dyrixomds here 1s out of place 

4. οὐκ ἂν εἶχε... : ice. there would not be room for infinite atoms 
in limited space. Lucretius (i. 988 ff.) argues rather differently that 
the particles would all collect m a mass at the bottom of lmited 
space. The two ideas differ only in the relative extent attributed to 
a lhmuted space. 


D. Differences of shape in the atoms. 


Epicurus’ position on this point is a little unexpected and needs 
explanation, The varieties of shape in the atoms are caused by the 
number and arrangement of their wépatra—their inseparable parts. 
In order to produce the great variety of perceptible things—ovyxpicas 
—the vanety of atomic shapes must be immensely large. But 
Epicurus 1s unwilling to say that it 1s infinite for a reason which 
becomes clear in § 56. Further variety of shape can only be pro- 
duced by the increase in the number of πέρατα in the atoms, and if this 
merease were carried on to infinity, the atoms would become so large 
as to be perceptible to the senses. Democritus had indeed boldly 
said that some atoms are μέγιστα, but Epicurus, feeling that the 
evidence of sense-perception was against this conclusion, decided that 
the varieties of atomic shape were not infinite, but only inconceivably 
many. See Lucr. 1. 478 ff. 

6. peord, ‘compact’, ‘solid’, one of the regular atomic words to 
denote the sohdity and unbreakability of the atoms 

ἢ. ἀπερίληπτα, ‘incomprehensible’, ‘not to be grasped by the 
mind’; sec the note on περιληπτικῶς (ὃ 40). The idea is again 
visual: you could not put the varieties of shape together and conceive 
them as a collection with a boundary round the outside, 

9. τὰς τοσαύτας διαφοράς ᾿ 1.6. 1π συγκρίσεις. 

ἐκ τῶν αὐτῶν σχημάτων. i.e. in the atoms One MS. (6) omits 
αὐτῶν, but there seems no season to suspect it. ‘by repeating the 
same shapes’ we might say 

περιειλημμένων, ‘limited’; so as to become comprehensible in 
number, i 

10. καθ᾽ ἑκάστην δέ : though the number of shapes 1s only incom- 
prehensible, the number of atoms of each shape 1s infimite. this idea 
greatly assists the possibility of the formation of compound bodies 
with so vast a variety of shape. 

11 οὐχ ἁπλῶς ἄπειροι, ‘not quite mfinite’: an almost colloquial 
use, 

12. After ἀπερίληπτοι ἴῃς MSS have the words οὐδὲ γάρ φησιν ἐνδοτέρω 
(‘further on’, sc. ὃ 56) εἰς ἄπειρον τὴν τομὴν τυγχάνειν, λέγει δέ, ἐπειδὴ 
αἱ ποιότητες μεταβάλλονται, εἰ μέλλει τις μὴ καὶ τοῖς μεγέθεσιν ἁπλῶς εἰς 
ἄπειρον αὐτὰς ἐκβάλλειν. This has generally been recognized by 
editors as a scholium, as 1s shown by its introductory words. Bignone 
(Atti della Reale Acc. delle Sctense dt Torino xlvu, 1912, pp. 680 ff.) 


186 I, ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


has shown that Usener’s emendation of λέγει to λήγειν is unnecessary, 
and that the general sense is that if you deny infinite division, as 
Epicurus did, and yet wish to account for variations in quality in 
things, you still need not suppose an infinite variety of atomic shapes, 
and τῇ you do, some will become so large as to be vistble. Von der 
Muehll would retain the words ef μέλλει. .. ἐκβάλλειν in the text, 
which is possibly rnght, as 1t completes the argument, but it makes 
the schohhum leave off very abruptly at μεταβάλλονται. 


E. Motion of the atoms 


The never-ceasing motion of the atoms and the consequent internal 
vibration in compound bodies is a very important point in Epicurean 
physics and 1s treated at length by Lucretius (1. 80-332). The 
present statement is very much abbreviated and entirely confined to 
the internal movement in compounds. It 1s however fairly certain, as 
modern editors assume, that something must have been lost in which 
Epicurus dealt with the two primary causes of atomic motion, their 
weight, which causes them to fall downwards at an equal rate in the 
void, and the swerve (παρέγκλεσις, clinamen) which produces their 
collisions and constant motion in all directions, The text resumes 
where he is describing the mternal movement of the atoms inside 
compounds: there some atoms recoil at great distance, and thus con- 
stitute ramfied bodies, such as air and fire, in which there is a large 
admixture of void, others are kept more closely together either by 
their own interlacings, as in hard solids, or by the interlacing of an 
outer atomic ‘case’ which confines them, as in the case of liquids. 
In such compounds there 1s a constant internal vibration of atoms, 
recoiling at short distances between their collisions with one another. 

§ 48. 1. καὶ αἱ μὲν... Bignone places the Jacuna here, and 
suggests aS giving its general form the words (κατὰ στάθμην, ai δὲ 
κατὰ παρέγκλισιν, ai δὲ κατὰ παλμόν τούτων δὲ αἱ μὲν φέροντα). This 
will fit well with the context and 1s fairly clearly what a lost passage 
might have contained. Usener places the lacuna after τὸν αἰῶνα, but 
does not indicate its exact contents. It 1s almost inconceivable that 
Epicurus should not have spoken of the two primary causes of atomic 
motion, and 1t 1s noticeable that in the letter as we have it there is no 
mention at all of the all-important doctrine of the παρέγκλισις, which 
would have come in naturally here. 

2 at δὲ αὖ τὸν παλμόν is Usener’s correction for the MS. reading 
ai δὲ αὐτὸν τὸν παλμόν. It is difficult to attach much meaning to αὐτὸν, 
though it would be easier 1f mention of the παλμός had been made in 
the lost passage. The correction to αὖ 1s simple, αὐτὸν having resulted 
from the repetition of rov Von der Muehll, following Bneger, reads 
αὐτοῦ, ‘there’, sc. in the compound. The παλμός 15 of course the 
internal vibration within close compounds resulting from the constant 
movement and recoil of the constituent atoms. 


COMMENTARY. §§ 42-45 187 


3. ἴσχουσιν, not merely ‘have’ but ‘keep up’. Usener suggests 
the correction ἔἴσχουσαι, but (a) 1f Bignone’s idea of the form of the 
lost passage 1s correct, the indicative would be natural ; (ὁ) even other- 
wise this abrupt breaking away from exact parallehsm in clauses 18 very 
much m Epicurus’ manner. 

τῇ περιπλοκῇ KexAipdvar . . . Epicurus assumes two varieties of 
these closer compounds. In one the atoms, those still] moving in the 
παλμός, are actually interlaced with one another as in most solids, 
an the other there 1s as it were an outer case of interlaced atoms, which 
shuts in a number of other atoms moving freely within it (oreya- 
ζόμεναι παρὰ τῶν πλεκτικῶν). It was in this latter form that he con- 
ceived the body of fluids. The MSS, have τὴν περιπλοκήν, but it 18 
impossible to construe the accusative. 

4. παρὰ τῶν πλεκτικῶν, G only, must be right as against the περὶ of 
the other MSS, 

§ 44.1. ἥ τε γὰρ... Epzicurus’ explanation of the twofold cause 
of the internal vibration is rather obscure. When the atoms have 
entered a compound they are unable to stay still because they are 
even now individually surrounded by void, which offers no resistance 
to their movement; on the other hand, their constant collision with 
other perfectly hard and unyielding atoms makes them recoil in all 
directions. 

2. αὐτήν: emphatically predicative, ‘each by itself? The αὐτῶν of 
G seems pointless and Meibom’s correction ἄτομον needless, and not in 
Epicurus’ manner 

4. κατὰ Thy σύγκρουσιν, ‘on their collision’, almost ‘as the result of 
their collision ’ 

ἐφ᾽ ὅποσον ἂν. ‘This 1s clearly a greater distance in the case of 
atoms in the fluid body than in the solid 

6. τούτων, ‘these motions’. 

οὐκ ἔστιν Usener’s suggested addition οὐδὲ τέλος Is quite un- 
necessary 

αἰτίων Usener adopted H Weil’s conjecture ἀιδίων, and it has been 
received by subsequent editors. But there seems no need for it. 
‘there 1s no beginning to these motions, because their cause 1s the 
atoms and the void’, and they are the uluumate constituents of the 
universe which here existed for all eternity. Kochalsky would read 
ἀναιτίων, ‘uncaused’ (ursachlos), but such a meaning 1s surely 
doubtful. 

§ 45 τ ‘H τοσαύτη §}...: a short conclusion to this section, which 
would perhaps be better im place after the next paragraph. It 15 
expressed in the material terms of the Epicurean phraseology In 
order to have a visual image (ἐπίνοια) of unseen things, the mind must 
have an example {τύπος) on which to build. This example 15 given in 
the audible sounds {φωνή) of Epicurus’ words, the written text being 
Tegarded, as always in Greek, as a record of the spoken words 
τοσαύτη δὴ has better MS. authonty than τοσαύτη δὲ and is more 


188 1. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


natural. Bignone takes it to mean ‘of so great importance’, but it 
surely means “80 brief’. 

2. τῆς... ἐπινοίας. The MSS have érwotas which Usener keeps, 
insetting (ταῖς περῶ before τῆς. But Zf have ἐπινοίας, which Bignone 
adopts, and the correction is simpler. For the construction of τύπον 
with gen. he compares ὃ 35 τὸν τύπον τῆς ὅλης πραγματείας 


F. Infinite number of worlds. 


This section comes as a sort of afterthought Other worlds than 
our own are in fact another kind of ἄδηλα, not because, like the atoms 
and space, they are in their nature imperceptible, but because we can 
never perceive them. It was a regular tenet of the atomic school that 
there is an infinite number of worlds, some hke ours, some unlike, and 
differing too from one another The proof given by Epicurus is also 
traditional, that with infimte atoms moving in space the sequence of 
their movements will cause the creation of other worlds just as it has 
of this world. no limited number of worlds could exhaust the supply 
of matter Lucretius (11 1023-1089) argues also from the typically 
Epicurean idea that nothing 1s unique, and that on the whole there 15 
about an equal number of all things (ἰσονομία). 

3. of θ᾽ has the support of the majonty of the MSS.: the alternative 
εἴθ᾽ would involve the change made by f of καὶ of to εἴτε. τούτῳ 15 of 
course ‘our world’ 

4. al re γάρ. The re suggests a complementary clause with reference 
to the infinite extent of space and something may have dropped out, 
as 1s suggested by the parallel passage of Lucretius 11. 1053-1055 ° 


undique cum versum spatium vacet infinitum 
seminaque innumero numero summaque profunda 
multimodis volitent aeterno percita motu 


ὡς ἄρτι ἀπεδείχϑη sc in § 42 

6. ἐξ dv. . ποιηθείΐη It 1s difficult to see the difference between 
the two clauses. Perhaps ἐξ ὧν ἂν γένοιτο refers rather to the original 
creation of the world, ὑφ᾽ dy ἂν ποιηθείη to its maimtenance 

οὔθ᾽ ὅσοι... ϑιάφοροι τούτοις. τούτοις 15 the reading of all the 

Μ55.. the parallel of οἵ θ᾽ ὅμοιοι τούτῳ would lead one to expect 
τούτῳ here, ‘like or unlike our world’, but there is no authority for 
the change. The idea then must be a new one, ‘neither all those 
which are like one another nor all those which are different from these’, 
᾿ δ. from those which are alike. 


III, ΘΕΝΞΕ-ΡΕΚΟΕΡΤΙΟΝ. 
A. Sight by means of the ‘images’. 


Epicurus now starts on a quite different topic. αἴσθησις is the 
foundation of the Epicurean theory of knowledge, and it is therefore 


COMMENTARY. §§ 45-464 189 


necessary to know how it 1s brought about. He staris directly on 
sight and enunciates the main theory that it is caused by ‘images’ 
which come off from things and travelling through the intervening air 
collide with the organs of sense and so cause perception. The theory 
was inherited from the Atomists and is descmbed by Lucretius in a 
section which, though not closely following the present treatment, in 
many respects throws light on it (ιν. 46-268). 

(1) The ‘images’. ‘The first section gives a very careful descrip- 
tion of the ‘images’. They are in fact a film or framework, the outer 
atomic ‘case’ of things which comes off from the surface. It is thus 
hollow within and extremely thin. Here agam we are dealing with 
something beyond the ken of the senses, and according to the Canontca, 
the theory may be accepted, if it 1s not contrary to our experience. 
This accounts for the strangely negative form of the proof οὔτε yap 
ἀποστάσεις ἀδυνατοῦσιν .. 

§ 46°. 1 τύποι ὁμοιοσχήμονες, ‘images like in shape or outline’ to 
the solid bodies from which they come. Cf. Lucr iv. 51-52: 


quod speciem ac formam similem gerit e1us imago 
culuscumque cluet de corpoie fusa vagari 


2 τῶν φαινομένων, ‘the objects of sense’, a traditional philosophic 
term, rather oddly used by Epicurus, in whose theory external objects 
are never directly perceived except by touch The ‘subtlety’ of the 
images far exceeds that of the objects, so that they can never be 
perceived by touch but only by the organs of sense 

8. ἂν τῷ περιέχοντι, ‘in whatever surrounds the object’, a perfectly 
vague phrase: in the case of the majority of things it 1s of course 
the aur. 

4. τῆς Karepyacias, The MSS are divided between τούς, ras, and 
rats, which points to some case of the article, the variations may be 
due, as Kochalsky suggests, to a mistaking of the rare ἐπιτηδειότητες 
for some case of the superlative of ἐπιτήδειος τῆς therefore seems 
a simpler solution than Usener’s πρός, the genitive being a perfectly 
natural construction after ἐπιτηδειότητες 

τῶν κοιλωμάτων καὶ λεπτοτήτων, I take this to be a very careful 
description of the ‘images’, which are merely films or cases, hollow 
within and extremely thin in the outer crusts. Usener emended to 
λειοτήτων and took the whole phrase to mean, as Hicks translates, 
‘matenals adapted for expressing the hollowness and smoothness of 
the surfaces’, 1.e. of reproducing those of the original object: so 
Bignone. This seems to be quite unnecessary and really to antici- 
pate: Epicurus does not come to the relation of the image to the 
object till the next clause. - 

5. θέσιν καὶ βάσιν" θέσις 15 the position held by the atom in rela- 
tion to itself (i.e. whether it 1s upside down or on its side), βάσις 115 
place in the series with reference to 185 neighbours. ‘The words 
correspond to the τροπή and διαθέγη of Leucippus, which Aristotle 


4190 1. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


explains to mean θέσις and τάξις : Giussani wishes to emend βάσιν to 
τάξιν, but that is unnecessary The importance of the preservation of 
these positions in the ‘image’ 13 that it enables it to reproduce not 
only the shape but also the colour of the object, colour being due to 
the arrangement and movements of the atoms. Cf. θέσιν καὶ τάξιν 
below, § 48. 

§ 46, καὶ μὴν καὶ. . 47. τοῦτο κατασχεῖν τὸ στοιχεῖον, There 
follows a considerable section which interrupts the sequence of thought 
about the εἴδωλα and deals with the motion of atoms in the void and 
in compounds. Gnuussani suggested its transposition to §§ 61, 62, 
where he adjusted the two sentences naturally to the context, and with 
some hesitation I follow him. Bignone (Z%zcuro, Appendix I, IT) has 
argued at length for the retention of the passage in its place, regarding 
it aS a preliminary explanation of the general principles of atomic 
motion intended to lead up to the discussion of the motion of the 
stmulacra at the end of ὃ 47. But (1) it seriously interrupts the 
sequence here. Epicurus states at the outset of § 46 that there are 
‘images like in shape to the objects’, and that ‘they far surpass per- 
ceptible things in subtlety’. The fist statement he immediately 
confirms in the sentence οὔτε yap ἀποστάσεις. . .,ὄ the second 1s dealt 
with in the words εἶθ᾽ ὅτι τὰ εἴδωλα... It 1s most improbable that 
these clauses should be interrupted by a long discussion of atomic 
motion intended to explain the subsequent ὅθεν καὶ τάχη ἀνυπέρβλητα 
ἔχε. Even if the explanation 1s required, it 1s not in place, (2) In 
order to obtain the reference to the szmu/acra Bignone has to adopt an 
improbable emendation 1n the text (τἀποφερόμενον σῶμα). (3) The 
sentences fit admirably in the place to which Giussani transfers them 
in δὲ 61, 62, and indeed seem necessary there to complete the argu- 
ment. Itis best therefore to regard these sentences as belonging to 
the later context and transferred here by a scribe 1n order to assist the 
understanding of what 1s undoubtedly an anticipation of the general 
ideas of the atomic cinetics at the end of ὃ 47 such an anticipation 
Epicurus might well make in a letter intended for persons already 
acquainted with the system. Von der Muehll retains the sentences 
here and believes them to refer to the motion of the εἴδωλα, but they 
seem to me to contain many statements quite mapplicable to the 
‘images’. 

§ 47°. (2) The subtlety and speed of the images. Having said 
that nothing in sense-experience contradicts the possibility of the 
formation of images, Epicurus proceeds to state that there 15 similarly 
nothing to contradict the notion of their extreme subtlety. This is 
the normal Epicurean ‘ proof’ with 1egard to ἄδηλα. He then pro- 
ceeds to deduce from their subtlety an extreme speed in motion. The 
text here 1s uncertain and the argument difficult as it assumes a know- 
ledge of the Epicurean cinetics (see §§ 61, 62). Briefly the idea 15 
this: the unimpeded atom passes through space at ‘inconceivable’ 
(ἀπερινοήτῳ) speed: the only cause of delay is collision, which causes 


COMMENTARY. & 465-478 τοῦ 


arrest during the infinitely brief trme of contact, and then the atom 
moves again at ‘atomic’ speed. In a compound body there are 
two causes of delay: firstly, τ may collide with other bodies outside 
itself; secondly, the collisions and movements in all directions of the 
atoms which compose 1t delay the motion of the whole body, and it 19 
only through this delay that its motion becomes percepuble (For 
both kinds of collision Epicurus uses the word ἀντικοπή) Now the 
‘images’ are mainly fine in texture’ they are shot off from the body 
by the impulse of atomic movement within 1t, which starts the whole 
complex film in movement in one direction, they can move through 
space without encountering any—or only a few—obstacles, and there 
1s luile or no internal vibiation For these reasons the images are 
able to move almost at atomic speed they are imperceptible in their 
transit, and 111s only when they touch our eyes that we then perceive 
them lLucr wv. 176-229 deals with the subject fully and im an 
independent manner, but he 1s, I think, of considerable value for the 
interpretation of the present passage. 

I λεπτότησιν ἀνυπερβλήτοις, ‘unsurpassable fineness of texture’, 
indefinitely greater than that of any compound percepuble by the 
senses. Cf, Lucr. ἵν. 110-28. 

3. πάντα πόρον σύμμετρον ἔχοντα : a difficult expression which recurs 
m§6r. The analogy of ὃ 53 ὄγκοι .. σύμμετροι πρὸς τὸ τοῦτο τὸ 
αἰσθητήριον κινεῖν suggests that we should emend here πρὸς (1d) τῷ...» 
‘they have all their movement proportionate to the fact that. ᾿ This 
was the view taken by the Ambrosian version and recently by ‘Tescari 
and Kochalsky. But im ὃ 61 the expression 1s used absolutely, and 
the two passages must be taken together. Bignone would render it 
‘having all their movement in one direction’, and Gyussan: explains 
that the component atoms of the ‘image’ are not impeded by any 
ἀντικοπή of their own owing to movements in many directions and 
consequent collisions It 1s hard to see how even in the subtle com- 
plex of an ‘image’ there can be no ἀντικοπή at all, and Epicurus 
himself seems to suggest that there 1s some: it 15 therefore best to take 
the expression in a vaguer sense, ‘having all their motion uniform ’, 
1e in speed and direction 

πρὸς (τῷ τῷ ὀλίγα ἀντικόπτειν. It 15 clear that an additional 
article must be inserted, and if we reyect τὸ (see above), Meibom’s τῷ 
1g inevitable, ‘besides the fact that’. The MSS. then have ἀπείρῳ. 
This Usener retains, and proposes to translate ‘ besides the fact that 
nothing . hinders their infimte subtlety’, referring to Lucr. ἵν, 
196-19]: 


deinde quod usque adeo textura praedita rara 
mittuntur, facile ut quasvis penetrare qucant res. 


This Giussam: adopts with some reluctance, and Hicks translates, 
‘owing to their infinitesimal fineness they meet with no resistance’. 
But this 1s a quite impossible sense for ἀπείρῳ, especially in view of 


192 1. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


the occurrence of ἀπείροις immediately afterwards in a normal sense. 
Tescari, feeling that Usener’s solution was impossible, supposed a 
lacuna after ἀπείρῳ in which the meaning required by Usener would 
be expressed. Buignone would read τῷ (μὴ) ἀπείρῳ, ‘nothing hinders 
the limited number of atoms in the images’, as opposed to ἀπείροις 
just afterwards. But though there is no difficulty in the neuter and 
genitive, for which he quotes parallels, the expression τῷ μὴ ἀπείρῳ 
αὐτῶν sounds very unhke Epicurus, who would surely have said 
πεπερασμένοις. In the parallel passage Lucretius (iv. 205) says: 


cum iaciuntur et emissum res nulla moratur, 


which suggests a word equivalent in sense to emzssum. 1 therefore 
propose ἀπορρῷ: it does not elsewhere occur in Epicurus though 
ἀπόρροια does in ὃ 46, but it seems a quite probable word for him 
10 use. 

4. πολλαῖς δὲ καὶ ἀπείροις εὐθὺς ἀντικόπτειν τι. The MS text is 
apparently πολλαῖς, though Usener in his notes quotes it as πολλοῖς. 
With the latter we should supply εἰδώλοις, and the meaning would be 
that though any one image would meet with but few obstacles, yet the 
continuous flow of them would be soon interrupted. ‘This gives good 
sense, though it 1s surely possible to retain πολλαῖς (sc. ἀτόμοις). ‘The 
images with their subtle lexture and few aioms meet with httle oppo- 
sition, whereas the many or infinite (in a loose sense) atoms which 
compose a normal compound body must at once be brought up 
against obstacles’ 

(3) Epicurus proceeds to the question of the creation of the images. 
It must be that they not only move to us with incredible speed, but 
also that there is an immediate and unbroken flow. otherwise we 
should not have a steady vision of the object but a broken chain of 
images [{ is also this constant and immediate flow which enables us 
to correct impressions which might be produced by the disturbance of 
individual images owing to collisions in transit, though occasionally 
(as in the famihar instance of the square tower seen at a distance) the 
whole series may be so affected. The images preserve ‘for a long 
tume’ the order and position of the atoms on the original body, but 
cannot do so for an indefinite time or distance: hence we do not see 
distant objects so clearly or certainly as those near at hand. Epicurus 
adds further that images may be formed by the union of atoms in the 
air or in other ways, and finally, rather more elaborately than usual, 
states his ‘proof’: that nothing in his theory is contradicted by our 
experience of the clear view of things or of the deiails of colour, move- 
ment, &c. For the whole passage cf. Lucr. iv. 143-175 

ὃ 48. 1. ὅτι: ... σε. οὐθὲν ἀντιμαρτυρεῖ τῶν φαινομένων from above. 

ἃ. ἅμα νοήματι, ‘as quick as thought’, almost a colloqmal phrase 
Cf, § 61. 

3. ῥεῦσις is here used generally not only for the flow of images, bul 
for the constant efflux of individual atoms from compounds. Com- 


COMMENTARY ὃξὲ 479-48 193 


pound bodies are always losing matter in this way and at the same 
time taking in fresh atoms from without 

3. ἐπιπολῆς : the correction of Z*’ and f for the MS. ἐπὶ πολλῆς 
συνεχής from the margin of P for συνοχῆς. Both corrections are 
necessary and inevitable. 

οὐκ ἐπίδηλος τῇ μειώσει, Usener’s correction for σημειώσει of the 
MSS.: ἢ μειώσει in F and the margin of P points in this direction. 
This 1s an interestung point in the theory, which 1s not reproduced by 
Lucretius. The constant efflux of images does not diminish the size 
of the object, because the place of the atoms lost 1s immediately taken 
by other atoms joming the compound body from the surrounding 
atmosphere (διὰ τὴν ἀνταναπλήρωσιν). Cf especially Plut adv. Col. 
τό μυρίων μὲν εἰδώλων ἀπερχομένων ἀεὶ καὶ ῥεόντων, μυρίων δ᾽ ὡς εἰκὸς 
ἑτέρων ἐκ τοῦ περιέχοντος ἐπιρρεόντων καὶ ἀναπληρούντων τὸ ἄθροισμα, 
though he 1s of course wrong in supposing that it was by other images, 
not other atoms, that the place of the lost images 1s taken. Guussanl! 
wrongly interprets the ἀνταναπλήρωσις as of the images; Epicurus 
does not mean that what 1s rubbed off from them 1n transit 1s replaced 
by the influx of new atoms. 

4. σῴζουσα : from this point the ῥεῦσις, which ts the subject, 15 
definitely the flow of images. 

5. θέσιν καὶ τάξιν  5ες note on § 46%, 1 5 

6. συγχεομένη., Epicurus admits that the images may become 
blurred by collisions in transit; when this happens only to individual 
images the necessary correction 1s made by the ‘cinematographic’ 
effect of the whole series: but since, in the case of distant objects, the 
series may be thus affected we must be careful to regard what we see 
asa mpoopévov. Usener adds ὑπάρχει after συγχεομένη from the margin 
of H, but the participle can well stand alone. 

συστάσεις, ‘compound idols’, which correspond to no real object, 
but are formed by the spontaneous congregation of atoms τῇ the air 
Compare Lucr. 1v. 129-142, where he illustrates the 1dea by the con- 
figurations formed by clouds in the ar. 

7. ὀξεῖαι διὰ τὸ μὴ δεῖν... Such idols can be formed quickly 
because it is only necessary foi enough atoms to unite to form the 
external film, whereas ἸῺ order to make a normal compound body, it 
would be necessary for all the interior to be filled up (κατὰ βάθος) as 
well. This 1s another interesting point which seems to have escaped 
Lucretius. 

8. ἄλλοι δὲ τρόποι τινὸς... Lucretius notes one other such possi- 
bility (iv 724 ff.), when images emitted from things unite 1n the air to 
form a new compound image. ‘These are the cause of the belief in 
such monsters as Centaurs, Scylla, and Cerberus. 

9. ἀντιμαρτυρεῖται, the passive, seems a necessary correction of 
Weil’s for ἀντιμαρτυρεῖ. Epicurus could not say, ‘none of these 
things witnesses against the senses’ 

To. ἂν βλέπῃ τις, .. ἀνοίσε. A difficult and obscure sentence 

3018 N 


194 : I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


All editors agree with Gassendi’s correction évapyedas for ἐνεργείας and 
that the ἀνοίσει of B is the origin of the strange vanants ἀνοίσῃ and 
ἄνεισι Usener also altered the MS. iva to riva; but with his accentua- 
tion ἄν βλέπῃ ris τινα τρόπον Tas ἐναργείας, τίνα Kai. . . ἀνοίσει Lam 
unable to construe the sentence. It 1s surely probable that we have 
two parallel clauses, and should accentuate ἂν βλέπῃ τις τίνα τρόπον 
τὰς évapyeias, τίνα καὶ. . . ἀνοίσει: the subject of ἀνοίσει will be 
αἴσθησις (derived from ταῖς αἰσθήσεσι) and we shall get the meaning 
‘if one looks to see in what way sensation will bring us the clear 
visions from outward things and in what way their qualities’, i.e. if we 
try to investigate by means of our sense-perceptions how we get those 
sense-perceptions both of the near view of objects and of their qualities, 
we find nothing which contradicts the present theory. 

Bignone keeps the MSS. ἵνα and translates, ‘1f one observes in a 
certain way the evidence of phenomena to which he must refer. . .’, 
but τινα τρόπον is then very weak, the use of iva is unnatural and the 
whole idea out of place here. 

τὰς συμπαθείας Occurs again in ὃ 50. It means the corresponding 
affections 1n the 1mages to the atomic positions and movements in the 
onginal, to which are due the qualities of colour, &c, and any inci- 
dents of change. It is almost impossible to render 3t in a single word. 
Bignone says, ‘ the constant continuity of the sensible properties of the 
external objects’: this seems to me to miss a little the 1dea of corres- 
pondence: we may perhaps say, ‘the corresponding sequence of 
qualities and movements ’. 

(4) The letter passes from the consideration of the images and 
their character to that of the act of sight. ‘Two points of some 
importance emerge in this section: (1) The idea that thought as well 
as sight is due to images; this was part of the matenal conception of 
the nature of the soul, and explains Epicurus’ habit, already noticed, 
of regarding all thinking as a kind of visualization. (2) The refuta- 
tion, very rare in the letters, of rival theories, namely that of Demo- 
critus of an impression made on the air and that of Empedocles and 
others of the effect of rays passing from the eye to the object. In con- 
tradiction to these Epicurus reasserts clearly and distinctly his own 
theory, and makes the new point that the emission of the images from 
objects 1s due to the internal vibration of the component atoms. 

ἢ 40. 2 καὶ διανοεῖσθαι" an important addition. Thought too as 
well as sight is due to the influx of images directly into the mind: 
ef. Lucr. iv. 722 ff. He 1s thinking here, however, not so much of 
the ordinary processes of thought, which employ images or concep- 
tions (προλήψεις) already stored in the mind, as of those rarer processes 
by which we obtain a direct mental image of an external object by 
means of ‘fine idols” which pass directly into the mind without stirring 
the senses. This 1s above all the means by which we obtain know 
ledge of the gods (cf. Lucr. v. 1169-1182). 

οὐ γὰρ ἂν ἐναποσφραγίσαιτο. . . Epicurus dismisses two rival 


COMMENTARY. § 48-50 195 


theones. The first 18 that of Democritus, from whom his system 
was derived, but whose over-refinements he not infrequently rejected. 
Democritus held (Theophr. de Sensu 52) that the effluence from the 
object did not itself penetrate the eye, but that it formed in the air an 
impression (ἀποεύπωσις) in two dimensions, hike the impression which an 
object makes in wax, and this impression being hard was able to enter 
the soft maternal (ὑγρόν) of the eye and appear there as the image in 
the pupil Gubac, which 1s what we actualiy see. This subtlety 
Epicurus rudely brushes aside, apparently because he did not believe 
that the air could receive and retain such an impression. Note 
that ἐναποσφραγίσαιτο recalls closely the Democritean idea of the 
arorvructs. 

4. οὐδὲ διὰ τῶν ἀκτίνων. The second theory 1s usually attributed to 
Empedocles and was certainly held by Parmenides, namely that rays 
came from the eyes of the percipient and acting on the effluence from 
the objects joined in forming the image. This theory, which was no 
doubt designed to emphasize the active element in perception, was 
adopted by Plato (Zheaet. 153 e, Zim. 45 ¢, ὥς.) τῶν ἀκτίνων 18 the 
MS. text, and Usener’s alteration to τινῶν 1s unnecessary: Epicurus 
means ‘the rays’ of which Parmenides and Plato speak 

6. οὕτως ὡς with the whole sentence’ ‘the impression could not be 
produced so weli by either of these two means as by my theory’. 

τύπων, ‘models’ he wishes for the sake of argument to avoid his 
technical term εἰδώλων. 

ἢ Spoxpdwy- the ἀπὸ χροῶν of the MSS. appears to be a mere 
mistake derived from ἀπὸ τῶν πραγμάτων just before. 

κατὰ τὸ ἐνάρμοττον μέγεθος, ‘according to the appropriate size’, 
1e, the grosser images affect the sight, the more subtle pass directly 
into the mind and awake a mental image 

8. ταῖς gopais: the margin of H aione has preserved what must 
certainly be the nght reading as against popgats—it is because of the 
celerity of their creation and the swiftness of their motion that the 
successive images are able to give a continuous and steady vision. 

8 50. 2. συνεχοῦς, ‘ continuous’, that ts in time, ‘ uninterrupted’ 

συμπάθειαν - see note on ὃ 48, 1. 8. 

3 κατὰ τὸν ἐκεῖθεν σύμμετρον ἐπερεισμόν---ἃ careful phrase, ‘owing 
to the uniform contact kept up from the object’: the succession of 
tmages makes a continuous line of contact between the object and the 
percipient : for σύμμετρον see note on § 47, 1. 3. 

4. é τῆς... πάλσεως. This is a new point: it 1s the constant 
internal vibration of the atoms deep down withm the object which 
forces off the outer fiim that comes to us as an image. 

(5) Truth and falsehood in vision. After describing the genesis of 
the images and the method of their apprehension by the sight and the 
mind, Epicurus returns to the crux of the whole position, the nature 
of truth and falsehood in sight-perception. In the remainder of the 
section he distinguishes carefully between that which is seized by an 

N 2 


196 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


act of apprehension (ἐπιβλητεκῶς) either by the mind or by the senses, 
which is true, and the additional inference made by the mind {(προσδοξα- 
¢opevov), which must not be regarded as either true or false until it has 
received the confirmation of the near vision. The general idea i 
familiar, but it is very difficult to seize the exact meaning, and the 
reader 1s left with the impression that Epicurus did not very success- 
fully get out of the difficulty caused by the possible alteration of the 
images 1n their transit from the object to the percipient. 

6 καὶ ἣν ἂν λάβωμεν φαντασίαν .. τοῦ στερεμνίου. Another reference 
to the idea of the ἐπιβολή both of the mind and of the senses: see note on 
§ 38 and Appendix, pp. 259 ff. Here, since Epicurus 1s speaking of the 
image of a concrete object (στερέμνιον), 1t 15 probable that ἐπιβλητικῶς 
τῇ διανοίᾳ refers only to the first of the two senses of ἐπιβολὴ τῆς δια- 
νοΐας, the apprehension by the mind of subtle images too fine for sense- 
perception, and indeed mainly to the apprehension of images of the 
gods. The sense then is, ‘When we have apprehended an image 
either by an act of attention on the part of the mind, undistracted as, 
for mstance, in sleep, by other images, or by the active apprehension 
of the senses confirming the first passive impression by the near view, 
we may be certain that the image exactly represents the concrete 
object’. φαντασία is the image created in sense-perception by the 
rapid succession of ‘idols’, n® one of which 18 perceptible in itself: 
in the mind the image may sometimes be produced by a single ‘idol’. 

ἐπιβλητικῶς must be taken both with τῇ διανοίᾳ and τοῖς αἰσθητηρίοις 
and the whole expression corresponds to ὃ 38 ras παρούσας ἐπιβολὰς 
etre διανοίας εἴθ᾽ ὅτου δήποτε τῶν κριτηρίων and ὃ 51 below ἐπιβολὰς τῆς 
διανοίας ἢ τῶν λοιπῶν κριτηρίων. 

6. εἴτε συμβεβηκότων this refers back to the συμπάθεια of §§ 48 
and 50 It is the ‘corresponding sequence’ which gives us the 
‘accidents ’, colour, movement, &c., of the original object. 

7. μορφή ἐστὶν αὕτη τοῦ στερεμνίου. Epicurus states unhesitatingly 
the correspondence of image and actuality in the case of perceptions, 
sensible and mental, made ἐπιβλητικῶς, 1 © by an active act of appre- 
hension, and not a mere passive reception of the image. This involves 
in the case of sight the clear vision of the ἐνάργημα : he could not say 
that the first vision of the tower as round was ‘the shape of the 
object’: to be sure of that we must get the near vision obtained by 
looking (ἐπιβλητικῶς). 

Included in μορφή we must understand καὶ ra συμβεβηκότα. 

γινομένη : sc. φαντασία (not of course μορφή), which is picked up in 


αντη. 

κατὰ τὸ ἑξῆς πύκνωμα ἢ ἐγκατάλειμμα τοῦ εἰδώλου : a very difficult 
and widely differently interpreted phrase. (1) Giussani would take it 
of the succession of images coming to the percipient, ‘the successive 
fullness or failure of the mages’. This 1s of course impossible with 
the singular rod εἰδώλου. (2) Bignone takes it ‘the complete integnty 
of the image or a remainder of it’, and explains that it refers to the 


COMMENTARY. §§ 50-51 197 


image which arrives at the percipient without loss and that which has 
suffered detrition on the way. But (a) this omits ἑξῆς altogether, 
(2) it is surely impossible that Epicurus could say that the image 
produced by the ‘ido!’ which has suffered detrition (e.g. that of a 
rounded tower) 7s the shape of the object. (Bignone does not, as I do, 
lay stress on ἐπιβλητικῶς) (3) It is tempting to translate ‘ according 
to the successive fullness and hollowness of the idol ’, 1.6. 1ts successive 
coneave and convex parts represent those of the outline of the onginal 
—but I think this is an impossible sense for ἐγκατάλειμμα. (4) With 
some hesitation I believe that the two alternatives here correspond to 
rots αἰσθητηρίοις and τῇ διανοίᾳ above. The image of sight-percep- 
tion is produced by the ‘successive repetitions’ (τὸ ἑξῆς πύκνωμα) of 
the idol: the image in the mind ts due to ‘the impression left by’ 
(ἐγκατάλειμμα) the :dol which penetrated to it. ἑξῆς then goes only 
with πύκνωμα and not with the whole phrase. 

9. τὸ δὲ ψεῦδος . . The information given to the senses by the 
images is always true; they represent nothing which ts not there in 
the original, even though it may need the ‘near vision’ to determine 
whether as they reach us they correspond exactly to the object 
Where then does the possibilty of error he? Epicurus here recurs to 
the tdeas already sketched 1n §§ 37, 38: tt hes in the additions made 
by opimion to sensation (ἐν τῷ προσδοξαζομένῳνγ The vision of an 
object at a distance should always be regarded as a problem awaiting 
the confirmation (προσμένον) of the nearer view, by which, if it is either 
confirmed or not contradicted, 1t 1s true 

1Ό-12 (ἐπὶ τοῦ mpoopévoyros) . (ἢ ἀντιμαρτυρουμένου) the addi- 
tions made by Usener are in exact accord with Epicurean usage 
elsewhere and seem demanded by the context 

12. After ἐπιμαρτυρουμένου the MSS, have what is clearly a note on 
τὸ προσδοξαζόμενον derived from the material of the next section: κατά 
τινα κίνησιν ἐν ἡμῖν αὐτοῖς συνημμένην τῇ φανταστικῇ ἐπιβολῇ, διάληψιν 
δὲ ἔχουσαν, καθ᾽ ἣν τὸ ψεῦδος γίνεται, ‘by means of a movement in 
ourselves closely linked with the visual act of apprehension, but 
differing from it, by which falsehood is produced ’. 

§§ 61, δῷ. There follows a summing up of the doctrine about truth 
and falsehood in viston. On the one hand the exact correspondence 
of the image in sensation to the external object can only be brought 
about by the transit of the ‘idols’ from the object to the sense-organs * 
on the other error can only arise by the spontaneous movement of the 
mind (opimon) which is akin to the movement of apprehension 
(ἐπιβολή) It ts essential to keep this in mind, if we are successfully 
to distinguish the true from the false 

§ 61. 2 οἷον ei, the reading of the MSS., 1s certainly right. The 
‘idols’ are received by us as ‘though they were a picture’ of the 
thing, and the two processes by which this may occur are either (ἢ) 
when they visit the undisturbed mind directly m sleep or (4) when 
they are grasped by an act of apprehension in waking life sener’s 


198 i, ΠΡΟΣ HPOAOTON 


οἷον 74 would make three processes, but would establish a cross- 
division, as there is no distinct process by which the images are 
received οἷον ἐν εἰκόνι. 

ἐν εἰκόνι ; Bignone translates ‘in a plastic representation ’, and draws 
attention to the ‘solid’ three-dimension appearance even of the visions 
of sleep. But it is not easy to insist on this sense for εἰκών, nor does 
it seem necessary. 

3- ἢ καθ᾽ ὕπνους γινομένων: the images seen in sleep are true, 
i.e. they are produced by ‘idols’ which enter us from without and 
therefore originate from reality. 

ἢ κατ᾽ ἄλλας τινὰς ἐπιβολὰς τῆς διανοίας : 1.6. mental apprehensions 
of an image, when awake—but he 1s still thinking of direct apprehen- 
sions and not those formed by a combination of προλήψεις : see 
Appendix, pp. 259 ff. 

4. ἢ τῶν λοιπῶν κριτηρίων see note on ὃ 38, 1.5. Here again tt 
must mean ‘or of the other instruments of judgement ’, 1.e. the senses, 
and the whole phrase therefore corresponds closely to ὃ 50 ἐπιβλητικῶς 
τῇ διανοίᾳ ἣ τοῖς αἰσθητηρίοις. The ἐπιβολή of the senses 15 the 
grasping by attention of the ‘clear vision’ (évapyefa). It 1s possible 
here that he includes πάθος, though it 1s doubtful whether it could 
have an ἐπιβολή the nearest instance to such an idea would be 
.K.°A. xxiv τὸ παρὸν ἤδη κατὰ... τὰ πάθη. Note that here διάνοια 1s 
classed 88 ἃ κριτήριον even more clearly than in § 38. 

6. τοιαῦτα προσβαλλόμενα is a necessary correction of the MS. text 
ταῦτα πρὸς ὃ (ἃ) βάλλομεν. Von der Muehll retains ταῦτα (sc. the bodies 
which emit the images) πρὸς ἃ βάλλομεν, but it is not clear how he 
takes the last words. 

τὸ δὲ διημαρτημένον. The δὲ of the MSS. 1s quite necessary he is 
here opposing the source of error to the source of truth, and Usener’s 
re really weakens the text. 

7. ἄλλην τινὰ κίνησιν : 1.6. opinion, which like the ἐπιβολὴ τῆς 
διανοίας 15, ΙΏ Epicurus’ view, ultimately a spontaneous movement of 
the atoms of the mind. 

8. συνημμένην μὲν {τῇ φανταστικῇ ἐπιβολῇ) Σ the missing dative 1s 
supplied with certainty from the gloss on § 50 above Opinion 1s 
closely linked with the ἐπιβολή because 1t combines images in σύν- 
Geos, but it differs in that it acts at random and does not check tts 
conclusions by ἐπεμαρτύρησις and οὐκ ἀντιμαρτύρησις. 

διάληψιν δὲ ἔχουσαν, ‘ but having a difference’. This must certainly 
be the meaning, as Bignone agrees: earlier commentators took it to 
mean ‘having opinion’, but it 1s itself opinion, and both substantive 
and verb are used in the sense of ‘distinction’, ‘distinguish’, in 
§ 58. 

9. κατὰ δὲ ταύτην. ... ἃ recapitulation of the ideas of éripapripy- 
σις and οὐκ ἀντιμαρτύρησις already familar. 

ἃ 52. 1. καὶ ταύτην οὖν. . .: an emphatic warning. ‘We must 
have this doctrine constantly in mind’, for otherwise on the one hand 


COMMENTARY. §§ 51-52 199 


we shall annul the value of the clear view given by the ἐπεβολαί of the 
mind and the senses, and on the other by placing the false inference 
of opinion on a level with their information, we shall undermine all our 
standards of judgement and cause universal confusiow For the 
general idea compare K. A. xxiv. 


B. Hearing 


Epicurus passes from the sense of sight to that of hearing. Once 
again it was necessary to estabhsh a material link between the object 
and the percipient, and this he finds in a stream of particles emitted by 
the object. But here there was a new difficulty. In the case of sight, 
since every object is constantly giving off ‘idols’ in every direction 
at once, it is clear that 1t may be seen simultaneously by many people. 
But in the case of sound we have a single emission of particles appar- 
ently in one direction: how then can many persons hear at once? 
Epicurus gets over this difficulty by supposing the material ‘sound ’ 
after its emission to split up into a number of small particles, each 
preserving the same characteristics (ὄγκοι ὁμοιομερεῖς), and stretching 
back in a continuous chain to the object. These particles radiate off 
in different directions, and reaching the ears of many persons, produce 
an apprehension of their meaning (ἐπαίσθησις) or at least ἃ recogni- 
tion of the presence of an external object. Enpicurus does not himself 
chrectly indicate the necessity for this rather elaborate suppositron, but 
it 1s brought out clearly by Lucretius (iv. 563-567): 


praeterea verbum saepe unum perciet auris 
omnibus in populo, missum praeconis ab ore 
m multas igitur voces vox una repente 
diffugit, in privas quoniam se dividit auris 
obsignans formam verbi clarumque sonorem. 


As in his discussion on sight, so here he disposes briefly of nval 
theories. 

5. ῥεύματος : the MSS. have πνεύματος, which 1s not im itself im- 
possible and is supported by ῥεύματος πνευματώδους below (ἢ 53), but 
τὸ δὲ ῥεῦμα τοῦτο in the next sentence makes Gassendi's correction 
necessary, 

6. ἀπὸ τοῦ φωνοῦντος... παρασκευάζοντος a most scrupulous expres- 
sion of al] the possible kinds of sound, showing that Epicurusis writing 
here with care. 

8. ὁμοιομερεῖς ὄγκους, ‘ particles like, as parts, to the whole ’—the 
adjective employed by Anaxagoras to express his famous theory that 
all things were composed of particles like in substance to the whole: 
likeness of shape, however, 1s what Epicurus would most wish to insist 
on here. The ὄγκοι will be small atomic compounds, of acute parti- 
cles for shrill sounds, and rounder particles for lower sounds: Giussan1 
18 wrong in attempting to see a technical sense of ‘ molecules’. 


20D ~ 4. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


συμπάθειαν, ‘correspondence’, as in §§ 48, 50. Here of general 
hkeness of character. 

9. ἐνότητα ἰδιότροπον : another careful expression, ‘a unity consisting 
in pecuhanty of character’. The idea is of several chains of similar 
particles, stretching from the speaker to the hearer. 

10. τὴν ἐπαίσθησιν, ‘comprehension ’ as opposed to mere αἴσθησις" 
we not only hear a person speaking but ‘catch his words’, i e under- 
stand what he 15 saying. 

én’ ἐκείνου. in the percipient as opposed to τὸ ἀποστεῖλαν. 

és τὰ πολλά 15 wrongly expunged by Usener as a gloss: we do not 
always comprehend what we hear. 

11. ποιοῦσαν and 12. παρασκευάζουσαν, is the MS. reading and 1s 
probably mght; Epicurus conceives of the ἑνότης ἰδιότροπος as a 
perfectly concrete ‘chain’ of particles, which actually causes the 
hearing Usener alters unnecessarily to ποιοῦντας. . . παρασκευάξοντας 
referring to ὄγκους. But the ὄγκοι would not themselves cause 
ἐπαίσθησις if they were not connected by the ‘chain’ to the object 
which emits the sounds, 

εἰ δὲ μή ye...: even if we do not hear distinctly enough to com- 
prehend the meaning of the sounds, at least the particles which reach 
us make clear to us the presence of some object outside us 

ᾧ 58. 2. οὐκ αὐτὸν οὖν δεῖ νομίζειν... Epicurus is once again arguing 
against Democritus, whose explanation of hearing was given on just 
the same lines as his theory of vision (Theophr. de Sensu 55). He 
held that ‘the airis torn up (θρύπτεσθαι) into bodies of similar shape 
(ὁμοιοσχήμονα) and 15 assimilated to the particles which issue from the 
voice’ (Act. iv. 19. 13): 1.e that the bodies of voice, which we emit, 
form ἀποτυπώσεις Of themselves, just as do the idols of sight, and that 
it is these ‘impressions’ which come into contact with our sense- 
organs. Epicurus’ comment 1s again purely contemptuous, ‘this 15 
very far from happening ’ 

4. τῶν ὁμογενῶν i.e, ‘similar sounds’, i.e noises which are not 
significant: cf. ἠχοῦντος ἢ ψοφοῦντος above 

5 πάσχειν 15 a necessary correction of the variants πάσχων and 
πάσχον. Von der Muehll retains πάσχων, referring presumably to ἀήρ. 

6. ἔκθλιψιν, ‘a squeezing out’. The MSS. here show traces of a 
serious corruption, most of them getting no farther than ἐκ Usener 
emends ἔγκλισιν, ‘swerve’, a very improbable word for Epicurus to 
have used here, and one which would not account for the variants 
ἐκλίθην, ἐκλήθην of the only MSS. which produce a word at all. 
I have little doubt that ἔκθλιψιν is right. Brieger (Epzkurs Lehre von 
der Seele, p. 6) has confidently made the same emendation. It would 
account well for the variants, and 15 a technical term of the atomists for 
the ‘squeezing out ’ of particles between others surrounding them. It 
ig then a very appropnate word for the emigsion of particles from the 
throat. For its use in Epicurean writings see Ep. 11, § 109g, 4. 

ὄγκων τινῶν. the authority of the MSS. 1s distinctly in favour of 


COMMENTARY. §§ 52-53 201 


τινῶν, rather than τινός, which 18 preferred -by Usener and Bignone, 
but would involve a very unnatural order of words 

7. ἀποτελεστικῶν again is the MS reading, and there is no reason 
to follow Usener in altering 1t to ἀποτελεστικήν. It is indeed more 
natural to conceive of the particles forming the stream of breath, than 
of their emission doing so. A favounte word in the second letter. see 
§§ ror, 102, 108. 


C. Smell. 


Continuing with the senses in order Epicurus proceeds to smell 
and decides that !t too 1s due to the effluence of paiticles, which are of 
such ἃ size as to enter into and stu the sense-organs. Lucretius has 
again (ιν, 673-705) considerably elaborated the treatment of the sub- 
ject, and explains (a) that it 1s owing to the accommodation or the 
reverse of the various shapes to the sense-organs of the percipients 
that smells which are good to some animals are bad to others, 
(45) that the particles of smell are much more easily destroyed in 
transit than those of sound or the idols of sight. 

To. οὐκ ἄν ποτε... ἐργάσασθαι because no sensation (πάθος) can 
be produced without touch, and therefore contact must be produced 
between object and perciprent by means of a concrete effluence. 

11. σύμμετροι πρὸς τὸ... κινεῖν σύμμετρος 15 not here used in the 
technical sense in which it occurred in §§ 47, 50, but more generally 
‘fitly formedto. .’ 

12. τεταραγμένως καὶ ἀλλοτρίως. . ἔχοντες 1.6. they are both dis- 
ordered among themselves, they do not fit well together, and are ahen 
in shape to the particles which compose the sense-organs of the 
percipient, and therefore produce the effect of a bad smell. Cf. Lucr 
1, 414~417. 

neu simili penetrare putes primordia forma 

in naris hominum, cum taetra cadavera torrent, 
et cum scena croco Cilici perfusa recens est 
araque Panchaeos exhalat propter odores. 


It might have been expected that there would be sections on taste and 
touch: Lucretius deals fully with taste in iv. 615-672. But probably 
Epicurus would assume a knowledge of these in his more advanced 
disciples. 


IV. Tne AromMs THEIR Properties, Parts, anp Motion, 


Epicurus now returns to the atom and discusses at length its 
properties, constitution, and motion. The main conception of the 
nature of the atom he inherits from Leucippus and Democritus, but 
he has greatly elaborated it, especially in the conception of the 
menimae partes, and in some details as regards motion. This section 
would more naturally have preceded the discussion of the theory of 
sensation and ought possibly to be transposed, but the order of topics 


202 I ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


in the letter is so irregular as compared with that in Lucretius, which 
may be taken to represent the normal Epicurean tradition, that it 18 
best not to attempt transposition, except in certain small sections 
where it seems absolutely necessary (e.g. δὲ 46, 47): 


A. Properties of the atom. 


These are, according to Epicurus, shape, size, and weight. The last 
was probably added by Democritus in order to explain the movement 
of the atoms. 

(1) Epicurus argues that the atoms do not possess any of the qualities 
(or properties) which attach to compound bodies, except the primary 
properties of shape, size, and weight. For qualities are changeable 
and the atoms are ex Aypothes: unchangeable, and it is their arrange- 
ment one with another, which 1s the cause of change in compounds. 
In elaborating the conception of shape he introduces the idea of the 
inseparable parts of the atom, which is dealt with at length in §§ 58, 
59 The argument of this subsection is not explicitly stated in 
Lucretius, but 15 implied in 1. 503-634 and again in 1. 478-521. 

ὃ δά. 2 προσφέρεσθαι : lit. ‘claim for themselves’. 

3. ὅσα ἐξ ἀνάγκης σχήματι συμφυῆ ἐστι. the necessary accompani- 
ments of shape in the Epicurean doctrine would be ἀντιτυπία, the 
capacity to strike against other atoms (cf. Sextus, adv Dogm ἵν, 257 
κατὰ ἀθροισμὸν σχήματός τε καὶ μεγέθους καὶ ἀντιτυπίας καὶ βάρους τὸ 
σῶμα νενοῆσθαι), and the possession of inseparable parts: cf. §§ 58, 59 

4. οὐδέν : a necessary correction made by Z and f for οὐδέ. 

5. ἐπειδήπερ δεῖ... Epicurus here bases his argument on the 
fundamental principles of the system enunciated in §§ 38, 39: ‘ noth- 
ing 1s created out of the non-existent’ and ‘nothing 1s destroyed 
into the non-existent’. In the dissolution of compound bodies, 
whose qualities are then lost, there must be something which 
remains constant, we must ultimately arnve at particles which are not 
dissoluble, but permanently retain their shape, size, and weight, 
1.6. at the atoms. It 1s they which cause the creation, alteration, and 
dissolution of compound bodies by their meetings, changes of position, 
and separations. For the general idea compare Sextus, adv. Dogm. 
iv. 42 (Us. fr. 291). 

ἡ. ἀλλὰ κατὰ μεταθέσεις... 8 ἀφόδους. The MSS. have ἀλλὰ κατὰ 
μεταθέσεις ἐν πολλοῖς τινῶν δὲ καὶ προσόδους καὶ ἀφόδους. (1) The tradi- 
tional correction, adopted by Giussan: (Lucr. i. 681 note) is ἀλλὰ κατὰ 
μεταθέσεις μὲν πολλῶν, τινῶν Stxai.. But, apart from palaeographical 
difficulties, this represents ‘rearrangement’ and ‘addition and subtrac- 
tion ’ of atoms as concurrent causes needed to produce change, whereas 
they are im fact alternative causes: change may be due to atomic 
rearrangement, or 1t may be due to the addition or subtraction of 
atoms in the compound. (2) Usener would excise ἐν woAAois.- - 
ἀφόδους as ἃ varia lecito to explain μεταθέσεις, but the words τινῶν 


COMMENTARY. § 53-55 203 


ἀφόδους are absolutely essential to the sense: μεταθέσεις will not 
account for ali changes in compounds, some (e.g. increase or decrease 
in size) must be due to the addition of new atoms or the departure of 
some hitherto included in the compound: cf. Lucr.1. 675 ff. : 
certissima corpora quaedam 

sunt quae conservant naturam semper eandem, 

quorum abitu aut aditu mutatoque ordine mutant 

naturam res et convertunt corpora sese. 
(3) Bignone excises ἐν πολλοῖς (sc. ἀπογράφοις) a3 ἃ lemma introducing 
the addition τινῶν δὲ cal... and supposes that {τινῶν has fallen out 
by haplography. This gives the required sense, and seems on the 
whole the best solution of a rather uncertain passage. 

9 τὰ μὲν μετατιθέμενα. The MSS. have ra μὴ μετατιθέμενα, which 
ig impossible, and Usener’s τὰ δὴ μετατιθέμενα 15 very 1mprobable. τὰ 
μέν might be justified either as used with an implied apodosis (cf ὃ 36 
βαδιστέον μὲν οὖν and ὃ 37 πρῶτον μὲν οὖν, where μὲν does not go 
closely with οὖν), or as picked up rather irregularly by ὄγκους δὲ .. 

10, ὄγκους δὲ καὶ σχηματισμοὺς ἰδίους, The atoms have ‘ parts and 
arrangements of their own’ which are constant and unchangeable. 
ὄγκους 18 here an anticipation of the discussion in §§ 56-58, and 1s used 
of the ‘least inseparable parts ’ of the atom which Eprcurus there calls 
πέρατα, and which are the measure of its extension. The σχηματισμός 
of an atom depends on the arrangement of its πέρατα. Bignone 
points out that Epicurus 1s here arguing against both the vague inde- 
terminate matter (ὕλη) which Aristotle, following Plato, had assumed 
as the ultrmate constituent, and also against Democritus, who had said 
that the atom has no parts Epicurus holds that it has determinate 
parts, but these are inseparable. 

11. ὑπομένειν, the reading of the MSS., must certainly be kept 
‘this much (sc. the parts and the shape) must remain as constant’: the 
shape of the atoms, constituted by the arrangement of their munimae 
partes, 1s the ultimately permanent thing τῇ all matter. τοῦτο 1s used 
loosely, but need not be emended to ταῦτα (cf. § 55 τούτου προσόντος) 
Usener, misunderstanding the passage, altered ὑπομένειν to ὑποτιθέναι, 
‘this we must assume’, but the alteration 1s qumte gratuitous. 
Kochalsky retaining ὑπομένειν cuts out τοῦτο - ἀναγκαῖον, ‘ the atoms 
must remain as particles and shapes’, again a gratuitous alteration 
based on a misunderstanding Bignone agrees with me 1n retaining 
the MS. text: ὑπομένειν 15 vouched for by τὰ ὑπολειπόμενα below. 

§ 55 τ. καὶ γὰρ ἐν τοῖς. . . 5. ἀπολλύμεναι : a rather difficult and 
obscure sentence. Epicurus is as usual appealing to the experience 
of phenomena: when they change their shape by being reduced in 
size, we see that they lose their other qualities, but still retain the 
property of shape: much more must the atoms, which have no other 
qualities to lose, and cannot be diminished im size, retain their shape. 
Bignone aptly compares Lucr. u. 826, where Lucr. explains that if you 
divide a piece of purple cloth into smaller and smaller particles, the 


204 . ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


smaller the particle the fainter becomes the colour until it is finally 
fost: but the smallest particle will stil] have shape. 

2. κατὰ τὴν weptalpeow, ‘by taking off bits all round ’, sc. by diminu- 
tion in size. 

5. ἱκανὰ ody ...: ive. it has thus been shown that atoms, possessed 
only of size, shape, and weight, are sufficient, since they remain 
permanent, to account for all the varieties in sensible things 

7. καὶ (μή). the MSS, have only καὶ, which Usener boldly emends 
to οὐκ. It 1s surely more natural to suppose that μὴ has dropped out 
owing to the succeeding εἰς τὸ μὴ ὄν. Bignone supplies μηδὲν as a 
reference to the fundamental axiom that nothing 1s destroyed into the 
non-existent. 

(2) Epicurus now passes to a new consideration with regard to the 
size of the atoms. ‘They vary in size, but are not of ali sizes. A 
certain amount of variation in size 1s sufficient to account for the 
varieties in phenomena, and if the atoms were of all sizes, some would 
have to be so large as to be actually visible to us. Here again 
Epicurus 1s diverging from Democritus, who, apparently not perceiving 
this objection, stated that the atoms were ‘ unhmited in size’ (ἀπείρους 
κατὰ μέγεθος, D.L. 1x 44), and again that ‘some atoms were very 
large’ μεγίστας. Lucretius apparcntly dealt with this subject in a 
passage which has been lost before 1 478, for he speaks of the point 
as already proved in 499. 

10, παραλλαγάς " not of course changes of size in individual atoms, 
which are unchangeable, but a senes of variations of size. 

11, τούτου 1 6. the variation of size, used vaguely as τοῦτο γάρ in 
ὃ 54 fin. Differences of size together with differences of shape in the 
atoms account for differences of sensation and qualities in phenomena. 

§ 56, 1 ὑπάρχον 15 the reading of the MSS. and will construe quite 
well. it 1s unnecessary to alter with Usener to ὑπάρχειν, which would 
moreover almost demand an article. 

2. ἅμ᾽ ἔδει (Usener) seems to be indicated by the ἀμέλει of the 
MSS., though Well’s suggestion ἄν ἔδει might be mght. 

4. ὁρατὴ dropos need not be excised from the text with Usener as 
a gloss. It is not absolutely required for the construction, but makes 
it clearer 


B Parts of the atom. 


Epicurus, having decided that there 1s an upward [τη to the size 
of the atoms, proceeds to consider the downward limit: can the atoms 
be infinitely small? Huis decision 1s again in the negative: there 18 a 
limit also to the smallness of the atom. But his discussion of this 
point leads him necessarily to the wider consideration of the hmit of 
divisibility in general, and so to the conception of the atom itself. He 
argues against infintte divisibility on two main grounds: (1) that unless 
you can reach a permanent existence, a pont beyond which division is 
impossible, there is no substratum of strength and durabihty in the 


COMMENTARY. ξὲ 55-56 205 


universe’ it is necessary, as he said im § 41, that there should be 
ἰσχῦόν τι, which 1s permanent, (2) that on the analogy of sensible 
things,in which there 1s a minimum vistbile, there must also be a 
minimum of existence in the atom. The conception of the atom thus 
reached is that it is of a determinate size, has extension, and there- 
fore must have parts; you could think of a top and bottom and nght- 
hand and left-hand parts of 1t- but the atom could never be divided 
into these parts. These parts are the minzmum of extension and can 
only exist as parts of the atom: the atom itself 1s the menzmum of 
physical existence. 

The argument 1s complicated and difficult. Considerable help 18 
obtained from the parallel passage in Lucretius (1. 599-634) where the 
doctrine of the minmzmae partes of the atom 15 expounded. Gnuussani 
in his essay on the Lucretian A/somra (vol.1, pp 39-84, and especially 
PP. 52, 56-75) has done great service in elucidating the general ideas, 
though his treatment of individual passages 1s sometimes arbitrary. 
Bignone in his notes and Appendix brings out many pomnts clearly, 
especially as regards Epicurus’ opposition to the Eleatics. 

Epicurus first argues generally that m a hmited body there 
cannot be an infinite number of parts nor can the parts be infinitely 
small: the two ideas are of course interdependent. If the parts were 
infinite im number, they must be infinitely small in size and vice versa, 
We must therefore in the first place reject the belief in τομὴ eis 
ἄπειρον ἐπὶ τοὔλαττον, in the possibility of an infimte physical sub- 
division of matter into smaller and smaller particles: for otherwise we 
shall ‘make all things weak’ and have no permanent substratum, and 
by constantly ‘pounding’ matter up into smaller and smaller particles 
we shall annihilate it. Secondly, we must not believe in the possibility 
of an ideal progress in thought to ever smaller and smaller particles, 
such as the Eleatics conceived. The argument against this idea is set 
out in the following sections 

5. ἐν τῷ ὡρισμένῳ σώματι 1s here quile general ‘ in any limited body’ 
He proceeds to apply the idea to a perceptible body in § 58 and by 
analogy to the atom 1n ὃ 59. 

, 6. ἀπείρους... ὁπηλίκους οὖν, ‘infinite ἸῺ number’ or ‘of any size you 
will’, 1.e, as is obvious from the context ‘ of any smallness you will’, 
‘infinitely small’. The ideas are complementary. 

Gore οὐ μόνον... Of the two processes discussed τῷ this clause 
the first 1s the physical process of infinite division (τομὴ εἰς ἄπειρον ἐπὶ 
τοὔλαττον) and corresponds to the notion of ἄπειροι ὄγκοι, the second a 
mental or ideal process of ‘passing’ in thought to ever smaller and 
smaller particles (μετάβασις εἰς ἄπειρον ἐπὶ τοὔλαττον) and corresponds 
to the notion of ὄγκοι ὅὁπηλίκοι οὖν. 

ἡ. τὴν εἰς ἄπειρον τομήν “ the ‘cutting up’ of the limited body, first 
into halves, then into quarters, then into eighths, and so on to infinity 
Lucretms argues against the possibihty of such infinite division in 
i.551 ff., ina subtle passage which has been well expounded by Giussam. 


206 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


ἵνα ph πάντα ἀσθενῆ ποιῶμεν: Epicurus states two reasons why 
infimte divisibility must be rejected. In the first place, if we could 
carry on the process of division without Jimit and cut things up into 
ever more and more minute particles, we should utterly deprive things 
of physical force. For any particle capable of further subdivision must 
have in it an admixture of void and would therefore be ‘ weak’, 
i.e. subject to further dissolution from external blows: we should 
never atrive at anything which could be a source of permanent 
strength, The idea is that of ὃ 41 εἴπερ... . μέλλει. . . ἰσχϑόν τι 
ὑπομένειν. Lucretius (i. 565 ff.) puts the same notion more simply. 
if there are hard permanent particles (the atoms) we can explain the 
creation of soft things by the admixture of void: but if the particles 
are ‘soft’, we cannot account for the creation of hard things. 

8. κἂν ταῖς περιλήψεσι. . . 9. καταναλίσκειν The second reason. 
We must follow Usener tn writing κἄν forthe MS. καί, but even so the 
clause is obscure. The meaning I take to be this. In the formation 
of actual compound bodies, the solid atoms are the source of strength, 
which enables the compound to have the powers of matter (cf. Lucr. 
i. 628-634). If there were a possibility of infinite subdivision, aggre- 
gate bodies would be built up of ‘weak’ particles they would not 
thus have the underlying strength, which 1s necessary to create material 
things, and to enable them to keep together : they would cease to be 
‘matter’ or ‘body’ at all In his own atomic world Epicurus denies 
the possibility of anything betng dissolved into the μὴ ὅν : ma world 
without ultimate hard particles 1t would inevitably occur. 

περίληψις Means literally ‘a marking off of a thing so as to be 
separate from others ’ (cf. ἀπεριλήπτως in i. 42): so ‘the separating 
off of atoms to aggregate themselves into a compound body’. 
Bignone, following Kochalsky, would translate ‘conception’, but 
Epicurus 15 speaking here of actual things and not of our conceptions 
of them. 

g. τὰ ὄντα : Giussam insists that this means compound bodies, 
‘things ’; Bignone that at must mean ‘atoms ’, the only real existences. 
It is surely inclusive and imphes both, just as does τῷ ὡρισμένῳ 
above. Through this section Epicurus’ argument 1s general, and it is 
only in §§ 58 and 59 that he ts thinking specially first of phenomena 
and then of the atoms. 

θλίβοντες καταναλίσκειν are more than usually picturesque words for 
Epicurus, ‘ by pounding things up to fritter them away into nothing’. 

10. ἀλλὰ καὶ τὴν μετάβασιν... 11 pnd (ἐπὶ) τοὔλαττον. We pass to 
the second idea, which must be rejected. Not only is tt possible to 
conceive of the physical division of things into smaller and smaller 
particles, but in imagination we may conceive a mental process by 
which we ‘ pass’ from one part of a body to another. In perceptible 
things, as Epicurus explains below, we may look at one ἄκρον or 
extreme point after another: with the atoms we may conceive our- 
selves conducting the same process. Now it is clear that in a limited 


COMMENTARY. §§ 56-57 207 


body we cannot do this els ἄπειρον ἐπὶ τὸ ἴσον : if we conceive of these 
minute particles as all of one size and ‘pass’ from one to another 
successively, we shail sooner or later reach the sum total which 
constitutes the aggregate body. Still less can we have μετάβασις εἰς 
ἄπειρον ἐπὶ τὸ μεῖζον, in which we proceed from smaller to larger 
particles: for we shall reach the aggregate sooner. But we might 
suppose ourselves to continue the process els ἄπειρον ἐπὶ τοὔλαττον, 
passing first in perception and then in thought to ever smaller and 
smaller particles. Such an idea 1s of course Eleatic, and we may com- 
pare the old problem of Achilles and the tortoise. But, says Epicurus, 
we must not even suppose such a process possible: for, if τὸ were, we 
should similarly have a finite body composed of infimte particles, even 
though each were smaller than the last. The argument 1s leading up 
to the conception of the mznimae paries. 

TI. μηδ᾽ (ἐπὶ) τοὔλαττον. Gassendi’s addition ἐπί 1s necessary for 
the sense, and 1s of course vouched for by τομὴν ἐπὶ τοὔλαττον above 
The MSS. (reading μηδέ or μὴ δέ) clearly indicate μηδ᾽, though the 
passage might be easier without it: Giussam, who has interpreted the 
general notion very clearly, has ignored its effect: ‘not only must we 
reject μετάβασις εἰς ἄπειρον ἐπὶ τὸ ἴσον OF ἐπὶ τὸ μεῖζον, but we cannot 
even admit it ἐπὶ τοὔλαττον ᾿ 

§ 67. Epicurus proceeds to support his rejection of τομή and μετά- 
βασις eis ἄπειρον ἐπὶ τοὔλαττον by two arguments. the first based on 
the idea of roxy shows that logically such a conception is impossible ; 
the second examines the notion of μετάβασις and shows that it too 
in a finite body cannot be conducted εἰς ἄπειρον ἐπὶ τοὔλαττον. The 
text and the structure of the sentences is rather uncertain, the view 
I have adopted with some hesitation being that of Bignone 

(2) The argument 1s a reducteo ad absurdum. You cannot either 
conceive how infinite parts, however small, could be contained in a 
finite body, nor how, if the parts were infinite, the body could be finite. 
For the parts must be of some size, however small, and the sum of 
an infimte number of them must itself be infinite in size. 

I. οὔτε γὰρ ὅπως. . . ἔστι νοῆσαι is then parallel to the direct 
question πῶς τ᾽ ἂν... τὸ μέγεθος, and with ὅπως must be supplied 
something hike τοῦτο γένοιτ᾽ dv; cf. ὃ 56. 3 οὐδ᾽ ὅπως ἂν γένοιτο ὁρατὴ 
ἄτομος ἔστιν ἐπινοῆσαι. The ellipse 15 awkward, but not, I thnk, 
impossible, especially in the near neighbourhood of the fuller expres- 
sion. Guiussani would follow F in omitting ὅπως, and then construct 
οὔτε ἔστι νοῆσαι was τ᾽ av... τὸ μέγεθος ..., ἄκρον τε ἔχοντος. . . 
(οὐκ fore... νοεῖν) μὴ οὐ. .. But (a) οὔτε has then nothing to corre- 
spond to it, (4) the picking up of ob« ἔστι νοῆσαι by οὐκ ἔστι νοεῖν in the 
second member 1s awkward, (c) the MS. testimony is overwhelmingly 
in favour of the retention of ὅπως. 

2 ἄπειροι ὄγκοι... . ἢ ὁπηλίκοι οὖν : corresponding exactly to ἀπείρους 
ὄγκους. .. οὐδ᾽ ὁπηλίκους οὖν in § 56. 6. Usener would read οἱ 
ὁπηλίκοι οὖν, constructing it after νοῆσαι, ‘for, if you once say that 


ao8 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


there are infinite parts in a body or parts of any degree of smallness, 
it is not possible to conceive of what size they would be’, but (a) this 
is quite irrelevant to the argument, (6) the previous parallel esq 
certain, () Usener appears to neglect ὅπως altogether. 

4. πηλίκοι γάρ τινες... 6. καὶ τὸ μέγεθος. A parenthesis reinforcing 
the last argument. a body composed of infinite parts, however small, 
must itself be infinite: for the parts must have some size, and if they 
are infimte in aumber, their sum will be infinite in size. 

g- After καὶ οὗτοι all the MSS. except B have ἐξ ὧν, which must, as 
Usener points out, be intended as a vanant for καὶ οὗτοι, but there 1s 
no reason to adopt tt, 

6. ἄκρον τε ἔχοντος .. . 10. τῇ ἐννοίᾳ. The second argument has 
been well explained by Grussani (/oc. czf., p. 67). Epicurus’ opponent 
might admit that a μετάβασις εἰς τὸ ἴσον could not proceed to infinity, 
but he would say that a μετάβασις eis τὸ ἔλαττον could. Epicurus asks 
hum to consider the process more closely: he mght go on for a while 
‘passing’ from a larger to a smaller part of a perceptible thing, but he 
would ultimately reach a part of 1t so small that though ‘it was distin- 
guishable, it was not perceptible by itself’, i.e, could only be seen as 
part of the whole, On either side of this he could proceed to ‘equal’ 
parts, but not to smaller parts, as they would not be visible at all. 
Similarly, as he will show 2n ὃ 59, in the atom itself we must reach 
a part which is ‘distinguishable but not separable’. μετάβασις εἰς 
τοὔλαττον then cannot be continued to infinity, for after a while it 
becomes μετάβασις εἰς τὸ ἴσον, and that ex Aypothesi is mcapable in 
a finite body of prolongation to infinity. 

ἄκρον, ‘the extreme visible point’ of the perceptible body, which 1s, 
as Epicurus very exactly explains, διαληπτόν, for it can in thought 
be separated from other component ἄκρα, but οὐ καθ᾽ ἑαυτὸ θεωρητόν, 
perceptible only as a part of a whole: by itself it would pass out of 
the field of vision. 

7. θεωρητόν is a necessary correction for the MS. θεωρητέον. 


8. οὐκ ἔστι... 10. τῇ ἐννοίᾳ. The construction 18 οὐκ ἔστι νοεῖν 
(4) μὴ οὐ καὶ τὸ ἑξῆς τούτου τοιοῦτον («vaz) καὶ (4) οὕτω... βαδίζοντα 


++. ὑπάρχειν εἰς τὸ ἄπειρον κατὰ τὸ τοιοῦτον ἀφικνεῖσθαι, ‘it is not 
possible to conceive that the next ἄκρον should not be similar (in size), 
or that a person going on in this way to successive ἄκρα should be 
able to proceed to infinity ’. 

οὕτω with βαδίζοντα, Usener adopts τοῦτο from BF}, taking it with 
ὑπάρχειν ‘that this should occur, namely that he should arrive’: the 
construction is unnatural. Guussami with less probability reads οὐ τῷ, 
constructing the sentence οὐκ ἔστι νοεῖν μὴ ot (4) Kal τὸ ἑξῆς τούτον 
τοιοῦτον (δ) καὶ ob τῷ. . . βαδίζοντα ὑπάρχειν : the sense 15 the same, 
but the accumulation of negatives unnecessary and almost unbearable. 

to, (τὸν is a necessary msertion made by Schneider. 

§ 58. Epicurus proceeds to a more careful analysis of the ‘least 
part in perception’ in order to apply the analogy from αἴσθησις to the 


COMMENTARY. ξὲ 57-58 209 


idea of the structure of the atom. The ἄκρον 18 ἀμετάβατον ; you 
cannot within the hmuts of this ‘smallest visible’ part, pass to anything 
less than itself. It is hke pera@ard in that it has extension, but it 18 
unlike them in that it has not itself distinguishable parts. If trying to 
look at an ‘extreme point’ we think that we are ‘passing’ within tts 
own limits to something smaller, 1 ¢ to a part of it, we are mistaken, 
and our eye has im reality only slipped on to the next extreme point 
We may, however, pass from one ἄκρον to the next, which is lke it 
and equal to it, and so in course of ume our eye might travel over the 
whole surface of the object. In this way the ἄκρον becomes the 
measure of the object’s size: for the larger the object the more ἄκρα 
it will contain. 

τ, τὸ. . ἐλάχιστον τὸ ἐν τῇ αἰσθήσει ‘ The lcast part visible ’, ‘the 
mintmum for peiception’, which Ejnicurus refers to also as ἄκρον 
cf. Lucr. 1. 599 ‘extremum. .cacumen’. 

2 οὔτε τοιοῦτόν ἐστιν. =. It 15 unlike in that it has itself no distin- 
guishable parts. 

3. τὸ τὰς μεταβάσεις ἔχον, ‘that which does permit of passing fiom 
part to part’. Bignone notes mghily that the pluial τὰς μεταβάσεις 
must include μετάβασις ert τὸ μεῖζον and ἐπὶ τοὔλαττον as well as ἐπὶ 
τὸ ἴσον We may take as an illustration a line, which we may divide 
either into equal parts, of which we may pioceed from one to the 
other, or into a series of uncqual paits, when we may either proceecl 
ἐπὶ τὸ μεῖζον until we have reached the end of the line, or ἐπὶ 
τοὔλαττον until we come down to the wunmum visidile, when we still 
have to proceed ἐπὶ τὸ ἴσον until we reach the end. see notes on ὃ 57. 


οὔτε... ἀνόμοιον it is ‘not altogether unlike’ μεταβατά im that it 
has extension 
4 ἔχον . τινα κοινότητα, ‘having some community’ or ‘affimty’ 


with μεταβατά. 

5 ϑιάληψιν μερῶν, ‘possibility of distinguishing parts’* cf ἄκρον. 
διαληπτόν, εἰ μὴ καθ᾽ ἑαυτὸ θεωρητύν 1n ὃ 5] 6 The ἄκρον is itself the 
least distinguishable part of the whole and cannot itself have disianguish- 
able parts. 7 

5. ἀλλ᾽ Grav... δεῖ προσπίπτειν We may sometimes be misled by 
this affinity with peraBard and suppose that because the ἄκρον has 
extension, we shall be able to divide it too up into a right-hand and a 
left-hand pait, 1 e. to proceed farther m the process of μετάβασις εἰς 
τοὔλαττον. But if we try experimentally to do so, we shall find that 
each time we think we are looking at the nght-hand or left-hand part 
of an ἄκρον, we have really passed in sight to the next ἄκρον, and from 
wt are surveying the first. 

ἀλλ᾽ ὅταν. The MSS have ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε or ἄλλοτε, but Cobet’s correc- 
tion ἀλλ᾽ ὅταν 15 necessary. 

διὰ τὴν. -. προσεμφέρειαν, ‘on account of the similarity of the 
common characteristic’, 1 e extension. 

7. τὸ ἴσον, sc. another ἄκρον like the first : προσπίπτειν, " fall into our 

2079 oO 


210 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


ken’, ‘meet our sight’, used no doubt with reference to the idea of the 
εἴδωλα of vision ‘ falling into’ the eye. 

ἑξῆς τε θεωροῦμεν... ἐλάττω ἔλαττον. As we move our sight over 
the object, we see a succession of such ἄκρα: and by reckoning up 
their number, thus successively perceived, we can reckon the size of 
the object. But the sentence contains some new and subtle points. 

8. οὐκ ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ: when on the analogy of the μεταβατά we tried 
to distinguish the parts of the ἄκρον, we imagined they would be 
‘inside the same’ ἄκρον : but, as shown above, we found that we were 
really looking at fresh ἄκρα outside it. 1 have hittle doubt that with 
ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ we should supply ἄκρῳ (Giussam, Bignone) and not take 1t, 
as Hicks does, to mean ‘in the same space’, which 1s quite mconsis- 
tent with the argument. The argument 1s largely directed against 
Anaxagoras 

9 οὐδὲ μέρεσι μερῶν ἁπτόμενα Contact implies parts which touch . if 
I place two bodies in contact, it means that parts of each are in 
juxtaposition: but as the ἄκρα have no parts, this is with them 
impossible They cannot touch but only succeed one another, you 
cannot see the edge or extreme point of an ἄκρον, but only look at it, 
as it were, from the next ἄκρον As Grussani pomts out, Epicurus 15 
here meeting a possible argument of the Eleatic School: a sine, they 
might say for example, consists of a series of points, which touch each 
other. but each of these points again consists of smaller pomts in 
juxtaposition and so on to infimty. But Eprcurus imposes a limit 
you reach in perceptible objects one so sma}] that it has no parts 
which can touch, and beyond that you cannot go farther in the world 
of vision, 

ἀλλ᾽ ἢ . . . ἔλαττον Though these ἄκρα have themselves no 
parts and cannot be in contact, yet because they have extension, they 
form a unit of size, and to say that a body is larger or smaller 15 in 
effect only to say that τὶ contains a greater or smaller number of ἄκρα. 

ἐν τῇ ἰδιότητι τῇ ἑαυτῶν, ‘by virtue of their peculiar characteristics’, 
i.e, of the possession of extension without distinguishable parts. 

After this very careful examination of the ἀμετάβατα or ‘least 
points’ in sensible things, Epicurus turns to its application to the 
structure of the atom and maintains that the analogy 1s complete. 
The atom too has its least parts, which themselves have only extension 
and no parts, and never came together to form the atom, but have 
always existed in it; for indeed apart from it they could have no 
material existence at all, Having explained the character of the 
sensible points so elaborately, he is content now with a brief drawing 
of the parallel. The assumption of the analogy may appear arbitrary, 
but it 18 a characteristic application of the Epicurean principle that 
the ἄδηλα must be explained on the analogy of phenomena. 

11, ἀναλογίᾳ, Guiussani translates ‘ the same characteristics’, Hicks 
‘follows the same analogy’, Bignone ‘such an analogy’. But the 
word in Greek means ‘ proportion ’, ‘relation’, and ταύτῃ must mean 


COMMENTARY. §§ 58-59 211 


‘this which I have described’ in relation to the sensible mznzma, 
J shovid then translate ‘the same proportion’ or ‘relation’ to the 
whole body. So again in ὃ 59. 2 below. 

§ 59. 3. κέχρηται. Gassendi’s correction is necessary : the κεχρῆσθαι 
of the MSS. 15 merely due to κεχρῆσθαι above, ὃ 58. 12. 

4. κατὰ τὴν (τῶν) ἐνταῦθα ἀναλογίαν, ‘in virtue of its relation to 
things here’ (i.e. perceptible things) Usener’s addition (τῶν) 15 
necessary, and the MSS. are particularly hable to leave out one of two 
consecutive articles: cf. § 47%. 3. 

κατηγορήσαμεν.. 1. 6. 10 ὃ 54. 

μικρόν τι μόνον μακρὰν ἐκβάλλοντες, Usener’s correction, μακράν 
for μακρόν, seems necessary, but even so the form of expression 1s 
odd. lit. ‘only as a small thing casting it (the atom) far away’, 
1.e. ‘only placing it far below perceptible things in smallness’. So 
apparently Giussam1 who paraphrases, ‘only that tts size 1s very much 
smaller’. Bignone takes it slightly differently, ‘only removing to 
a distance (profrarre lontano) a determined degree of smallness’, 
1.e, assuming that the wt7um of perceptible things repeats itself far 
below in the scale as a minimum of extension, but this 1s putting 
rather too much into μικρόν τι Hicks takes it, ‘herem we have 
merely reproduced something small on a large scale’ (reading pre- 
sumably μακρόν), an unnatural sense for ἐκβάλλοντες and not what 
Epicurus wants to say 

5. ἔτι τε... τῶν ἀοράτων: a development of the analogy. just as 
the sensible least points act as a unit of the measurement of the size of 
concrete bodies, so do the least pomts act as the measurement of the 
size of the atom,1.e, the atoms vary m size according to the number 
of πέρατα which they contain. Epricurus concerved the normal atom 
as consisting of three or four πέρατα cf. Lucr τ΄. 485 ff. 

There is some difficulty as to the construction of the sentence. The 
older editors took τὰ ἐλάχιστα καὶ ἀμιγῆ πέρατα together, in which 
case we must either translate γομίζειν, ‘believe in’, which 1s very 
improbable, or suppose that it 1s constructed with the participle παρα- 
oxevdfovra, which 1s again yregular Usener, perceiving this difficulty, 
supposed a smal] lacuna after παρασκευάξοντα, which would have con- 
tained an infinitive such as φαίνεσθαι or φανερὰ γίγνεσθαι. This 18 
unnecessary, if with Giussani and Bignone we take τὰ - - ἀμιγῆ as 
subject and πέρατα as predicative ‘we must regard the least indivisible 
points as wépara.’. 

Most editors take τῶν μηκῶν with πέρατα, placing a comma after 
μηκῶν and another after παρασκευάζοντα. so Bignone, who translates, 
‘the extreme boundaries of extension’. This would surely require 
τοῦ μηκοῦς, and I prefer to take τῶν μηκῶν, ‘the sizes of individual 
atoms’, with τὸ καταμέτρημα, placing the comma after νομίζειν. 

6. ἀμιγῆ. 1.6. themselves perfectly single and ‘unmixed’, sc. not 
consisting of parts: this idea Lucretius expresses by solzda semplicttate, 
1.609 Von Arnim’s correction ἀμερῇ 15 unnecessary 

oO 2 


212 [.- ΠΡΟΣ HPOAOTON 


πέρατα" a new word specially introduced by Epicurus to denote the 
least parts of the atom, as ἄκρα above denotes the least perceptible 
parts of the sensible body. The ‘least part ’1s at once the ‘ boundary’ 
in that there can be nothing smaller, and the ‘unit of measurement’ 
an idea also contained 1n πέρας. 

ἐξ αὐτῶν πρώτων, ‘starting from themselves as units’: sc. the size of 
the atom depends on the number of πέρατα which it contains. αὑτῶν 
18 again a necessary emendation of Usener’s for αὐτῶν The MSS. are 
divided between πρώτων and πρῶτον Bignone prefers the latter, con- 
structing it with τὸ καταμέτρημα, but πρώτων seems more in accordance 
with the general idea of the passage. 

ἡ. τοῖς μείζοσι καὶ ἐλάττοσι, ‘to larger and smaller things’, that 1s, 
in the first instance to the atoms and through them to the compound 
bodies which they form 

8. τῇ διὰ λόγου θεωρίᾳ ἐπὶ τῶν ἀοράτων, ‘in our Contemplation by 
thought of invisible things’. We have no direct perception of the 
atom, still less of its parts, but according to the Epicurean canons we 
must consider :t in thought on the analogy of perceptible things. We 
may remember that to Epicurus thought itself was always a process of 
mental visualization, and m this we can, as it were, contemplate the 
atom and count its πέρατα. 

ἡ γὰρ κοινότης ἡ ὑπάρχουσα... συντελέσαι. There 1s again diffi- 
culty as to the constiuction and meaning of the sentence, 

(t) Tagree with Bignone in taking αὐτοῖς to be the πέρατα of the 
atom, πρός to be constructed after κοινότης, τὰ ἀμετάβολα (leaving for 
the moment the question of the reading) to be the ἄκρα of the sensible 
body, and συντελέσαι to mean ‘to form a conclusion ’. ‘ for the affinity 
which the least parts of the atom have to the Jeast perceptble parts of 
the sensible body is sufficient to justify this conclusion’, 1.6 though 
the πέρατα in fact differ from the ἄκρα in that they are physically 
indivisible, whereas the ἄκρα are capable of further physical subdivision, 
yet the analogy between them as the min:mum im their respective 
spheres is enough to justify the conclusion we have formed. 

(2) I was formerly inclined, keeping the same idea of the con- 
struction, to take ovyreAéoae to refer to the arrangement of the 
πέρατα In succession to one another in the atom, as opposed to owp- 
φόρησιν which follows ‘the affinity...1s sufficient for them to be 
ranged alongside each other (just like the ἄκρα) to the extent we have 
descnbed (1.e, in succession without contact of parts)*. συντελέσαι 
would then be a metaphorical extension of its usual constitutional 
sense, ‘to belong to a class’ (e. g. συντελεῖν εἰς ἄνδρας, Isocr. 277 B), 
and the whole would form a close paraJle] to Lucretius’ descnption of 
the atom in the passage corresponding to this section (i. 609-612) : 


sunt igitur solida primordia simplicitate 
quae minimis s#zpala cohaerent partibus arte, 
non ex illarum conventu conciata, 

sed magis aeterna pollentia sim plicitate. 


COMMENTARY. §& 59-60 213 


But one can go too far in attempting to get an exact parallel with 
Lucretius, and 1 doubt this meaning for συντελέσαι. 

(3) Giussani takes the clause in an entirely different way. αὐτοῖς is 
the atoms (he suggests that 1t might be better to read αὐταῖς), κοινότης 
1s their affinity with perceptible bodies, πρός means ‘1n respect of’, and 
συντελέσαι 18 ‘the coming together of the atoms for creation’: ‘the 
common characteristics, which the atoms have with sensible things in 
respect to their smallest parts 1s what makes them fit for the composi- 
tion, that 1s the creation, of things up to the pomt which we see’ 
This is surely a very unnatural sense to give both to αὐτοῖς (the 
πέρατα being the subject of the previous sentence), to πρός, and above 
all to συντελέσαι Grussant is, I think, carried away by a desire to find 
in Epicurus a conclusion like that of Lucr. 1. 628-634. 

9. ἀμετάβολα All modern scholars before Bignone adopted 
Usener’s obvious emendation ἀμετάβατα cf. ὃ 58 τῶν μεταβατῶν. 
Bignone, however, quotes from Sex. Empir. adv. Afath i 118 povoe- 
δὴς καὶ ἀσύνθετος καὶ ἀμετάβολος, wherc it appears to have the sense 
‘unchanging’, ‘homogeneous’. ‘This is an admirable descnption of 
the ἄκρα, and would correspond exactly to ἀμιγῇ in] 6 There seems 
therefore no reason for departing from it. 

10, συμφόρησιν, ‘a bringing together’ (conven/us, Lucr., loc. cit.) 
The atoms are ‘brought together’ to form things, but ther least parts 
can never have been brought together to form the atoms, for the atom 
1s ex Aypothes: mdivisible. 

ἐκ τούτων κίνησιν ἐχόντων, ‘out of the store of first parts as bodies 
capable of movement’. If the πέρατα could have a separate existence, 
they could have movement: and if movement they might have been 
brought together, but all this 15 impossible The expression 18 loose 
but not, I think, impossible for Epicurus. Brieger’s insertion of (oix) 
before ἐχόντων 1s not only unnecessary, but mistaken, as 1t then makes 
κίνησιν οὐκ ἐχόντων the main reason why there 1s not a συμφόρησις, 
whereas it 1s only a secondary cause, dernved from the primary cause, 
that the πέρατα have no independent existence. More probable 1s 
Bignone’s emendation τούζτων ὡς τῶν, and indeed ὡς 15 rather badly 
needed, but I think the passage can stand as 1t Is. 

§ 60. A detailed paragraph follows dealing with an tmportant point: 
Can there be motion upwards and downwards in infinite space? The 
paragraph fits in badly where it stands, and Giussam would attach 1t to 
other sections concerning the universe (§ 42 and § 47) But itis almost 
more closely connected with the motion of the atoms, which Epicurus 
1s about to consider. It seems best on the whole to leave it here in 
parenthesis, unless one is attempting to reconstruct the whole letter. 

The argument 1s characteristically Epicurean We cannot, says 
Epicurus, predicate upward and downward motion in infinite space 
with reference to a highest and lowest point, an absolute top and 
bottom, for such do not of course exist, but we can with reference to 
ourselves or to any point in space of which we choose to think The 


214 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


motion from our feet to our head, however prolonged, 1s to us 
motion upwards and the opposite motion downwards. From a 
mathematical poimt of view of infinity this 1s, of course, as Brieger 
says, ineple excogtlatum, but, as Giussani points out (1, p. 169), the 
contradiction 1s mherent in the conception of space itself, at once 
infinite and relative. Moreover, the conclusion 1s reached in strict 
accordance with the Epicurean canons. We are bound to ask our- 
selves if αἴσθησις provides any evidence on the point, and the answer 
15. that it does we know what we mean by motion upward and 
downward in reference to ourselves, and we have only to prolong 
such mouon to infinity, and we then have the conception we need. 

I. καὶ μὴν. . . ἢ κάτω. A sentence of some difficulty. I take 
it to mean hterally, ‘moreover in the infinite we must not speak of 
the ‘“‘up” and the “down” as though (measured by) the highest or a 
lowest’. τὸ ἄνω ἢ κάτω 18, I think, ‘up or down’ in anticipation of 
the idea of the motion of the atoms, which 1s to follow in the new 
section: if so, we must read ἀνωτάτῳ. . . κατωτάτῳ with Usener 
Giussan1 and Bignone who take τὸ ἄνω. . . κάτω as ‘the ngh’ and 
‘the low’, making it a merely special reference without consideration of 
motion, keep the MS. ἀνωτάτω... κατωτάτω, ‘we must not speak 
of hgh or low as of a nghest or lowest’. Neither the sense nor the 
reference seem to me so probable. 

The MSS. are divided between ἀνωτάτω καὶ κατωτάτω and ἀνωτάτω 
ἢ κατωτάτω : the parallel of ἄνω ἢ κάτω below seems to decide for 7 
After κατηγορεῖν Usener marks a lacuna, which presumably would 
contain something hke τὴν φορὰν eis. But it 1s unnecessary he 15 
here thinking simply of the directions ‘up’ and ‘down’, and the ques- 
tion of motion arises later. 

2. εἰς μέντοι. .. ἡμῖν. With Bignone I regard this clause as a 
parenthesis strengthening the previous sentence The general sense 
18, ‘indeed, even if we were to prolong to infinity the line passing above 
our heads, we shall never reach the top (noi the bottom, if we prolong 
the line passing below our feet)’. τοῦτο is then τὸ ἀνωτάτω. 

There 1s, however, difficulty in the text after eis ἄπειρον The MSS 
read ἄγειν ὅν (or ὄν). Palaeographically one would suppose this stood 
for ἄγειν (ov sscr,), 1 e. the correction of the infinitive into the neuter 
participle: but I cannot see any sense to be derived fiom this. Usener 
would read τεῖνον for ἄγειν ὄν, which I cannot construe. Hicks (in 
Storcs and Eptcureans, presumably translating Usener’s text) says, 
“Still a line may be drawn vertically upward and stretch to infinity 
from the point, wherever it is, where we stand, and we must not say 
that this distinction of up and down will never be found init’. This 
15 good sense, but can hardly be extracted from the text Bignone 
would read ἄγειν (νοοῦσε, δῆλγον, ‘evenif we imagine ourselves proceed- 
ing to infinity above our head . . . it 1s manifest that we shal] never 
find this extreme limit’, but the msertion 1s too large. Guussan! 
suggests ἄγειν (ἐξ)όι, ‘if 1t were possible to go on’; this seems to me 


COMMENTARY. § 60 215 


far more probable, but I suggest (év)dy as more likely to have produced 
the MS. text. 

4. ἢ τὸ ὑποκάτω... πρὸς τὸ αὐτός The construction runs on 
grammatically from οὐ δεῖ κατηγορεῖν after the parenthesis, and ἡ takes 
the place of the expected δέ corresponding to ὡς μὲν dvwréry. ‘ While 
we cannot postulate a top and bottom in infinite space, we must not 
either say that that which stretches downwards to infinity below the 
point thought of can be at once up and down in reference to the same 
thing’, 1 6. though ‘up’ and ‘down’ cannot be used in reference to 
a top or bottom, they can with reference to a point selected in space . 
in other words, the terms are not absolutely true, but they have a rela- 
tive truth Asin the parenthesis, there 1s an implication, and the same 
is assumed with regard to the line upwards 

R. D Hicks (Class. Rev xxxvu, p 108) has a different view of the 
whole sentence. He retains ἴσμεν and ἄγειν dy, takes τοῦτο, ‘this point or 
region ’, as the subject of φανεῖσθαι, Ὴς] places ἢ τὸ ὑποκάτω τοῦ νοηθέντος 
els ἄπειρον 1n a parenthesis ‘As to the space overhead, however, if at 
be possible to draw a line to infimty from the pomt where we stand, we 
know that never wil] this space—or, for that matter, the space below 
the supposed standpoint if produced to infimitty—appear to us to be at 
the same time ‘‘ up” and “down” with reference to the same point , for 
thts 15 inconceivable’, This 1s an ingenious interpretation and requires 
careful consideration it certainly gets over the somewhat awkward 
want of parallelism between the two clauses 

6. ὥστε ἔστι μίαν λαβεῖν φορὰν... So far he has spoken of direc- 
tion he now pioceeds to what, in its effects on the gencral theory, 1s 
the more important question of motion. We may then in this con- 
ventional sense say that there 1s a motion upwards and a motion 
downwards in respect to us 

7. ἂν καὶ μυριάκις... . even though there are thousands of worlds 
above and below us to whom this same motion passes from us. But 
the clause 15 not very satisfactory, because if motion upwards from us 
went on arriving at the feet of persons in worlds above us it would 
still be motion upwards to them too, and similarly with motion down- 
wards our ideas would be confirmed. I strongly suspect that πρὸς 
τοὺς πόδας and ἐπὶ τὴν κεφαλήν ought to be imterchanged We then 
get very good sense: it is still motion upwards to us, even though 
persons in many other worlds are, in our view, upside down, so that 
to them it appears to be motion downwards. The two expressions 
might easily have been reversed by a scribe who did not properly 
understand the argument 

9 (és) again seems a necessary addition 

Io. ἡ γὰρ ὅλη φορὰ. ..* a summing ὋΡ for m any case, whether 
you call them up and down or not, the two motions are diametrically 
opposed to one another. Of course once more, not a mathematical 
statement but a conclusion based on experience. 


216 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


C. Motions of the atoms. 


The two following sections together with portions of §§ 46, 47, 
which should be placed here, constitute an account of the motions of 
the atoms and their relation to the motion of compound bodies. The 
subject is very difficult, but both the general ideas and the phraseology 
have been very brilliantly clucidated by Giussan. 1n his essay Cenefica 
Epicurea (Lucr , vol. 1, pp. 97-124) 

It will perhaps be well to begin by an attempt to state the main 
ideas The free atoms 1n the void are borne downwards by their own 
weight at an incredible speed (ἅμα νοήματι) <All move at an equal 
rate, differences of weight making no difference of speed in a vacuum 
for retardation is only due to the opposition of external bodies or, as 
we shall see, to internal vibration (ἀντικοπή), which cannot occur in 
the individual atoms But owing in origin to the παρέγκλισις Or spon- 
taneous swerve of the atoms (which strangely enough 1s omitted in 
the letter, though it was an all-important pornt in the system and is 
treated at length by Lucretius 1 216-293), the atoms collide. Then 
either they rebound in any direction, even upwaids, and continue their 
movement at precisely {he same speed but in a new direction, or they 
unite to form a compound body But even in the compound their 
motion does not cease or slacken continually moving, meeting, and 
clashing, and startling off again at the same atomic spced, they keep 
the body in a constant state of internal vibration. When the body 1s 
at rest, this means that the sum total of internal movements balances 
and produces an equilibrium when the body moves, for instance, as 
the result of an external blow, this means that to all the atoms 1s com- 
municated over and above their natural mouons a tendency towards 
movement in a certain dnection Yet even so their uny trajects in ail 
directions continue and act now as a ietardation (ἀντικοπή) of the 
compound body ‘These main notions are refined by certain subtleties 
of thought, as Epicurus proceeds, but with them in mind, we can con- 
sider the passage 

§ 61. 2. εἰσφέρωνται. The compound verb 1s undoubtedly difficult, 
and both Brieger and Giussani have noticed that one would expect 
the simple φέρωνται. The MSS however, in spite of variations, all 
point to the compound, and it should probably be regarded, with 
Guiussani, aS picturesque. Eprcurus 1s thinking of the atoms plunging 
on into the void before the eyes of an imaginary spectator. It 15 
consistent with his invariable conception of thought as visualization 
It is unnecessary to follow Bnieger in reading εἰς (éva τόπον) φέρωνται. 

μηθενὸς ἀντικόπτοντος the Epicurean idea of ἀντικοπή must be 
carefully thought out and apphed in each case, where it occurs, Its 
primary notion is of course the clash of atom with atom [ἢ the case 
of the individual] atom the sole cause of retardation is the collision with 
other atoms, nor indeed can any one collision do more than momen- 
tarlly check its course before it starts off in a new direction. But 


COMMENTARY. § 61 217 


a series of such collisions may by constantly diverting its course [ἢ 
different directions, delay its advance in the orginal direcuon: such, 
for instance, would be the case,:f the atom was moving not through 
the void, but through air In the case of the compound body, how- 
ever, the collision of the atoms which compose it translates itself into 
an internal vibration, which 1s a cause of delay and the slackening of 
speed. It 1s in this latte: sense that ἀντικοπή becomes a technical] 
term of Epicurean phraseology. Guussani wishes to interpret it im 
this technical sense al] through, and even to take ἀπαντᾷ below τὴ the 
same sense so here, ‘when the atoms are moving through the void, 
without rnternal vibration’ (which the atom cannot have, because it 
has not separable parts, §§ 58, 59). But this 15 surely mistaken here 
and leads to great difficulties in the next sentence. we must interpret 
the idea of ἀντικόπτειν according to its context as (1) external collision, 
(2) internal vibration, remembering of course that the latter 1s only the 
former looked at from the point of view of the compound body 
(Giussani 1s too apt to think of them as distznct things). Here, as 
Epicurus 15 speaking of the indzvidual atoms, it rs external collision 
alone. Bignone (Appendix, p 226) strongly supports this view. 

οὔτε yap τὰ βαρέά.. Epicurus now supports his previous state- 
ment about the atoms with a wider statement about bodies in general 
(τὰ βαρέα neut.), but he is still thinking of external collision. the 
technical notion of dyrixomy does not appear tll later The idea here 
then is quite simple.‘ you might think that owing to their weight 
heavier bodics move faster than hght. but provided the latter 
meet with no external collisions to deflect and delay them, this 1s not 
the case: the reason why, e.g. we sce hght bodies falling more 
slowly, 1s because the air offers to them a more successful resistance ’ 
The :dea 1s exactly parallel to Lucr i. 230-242, Guussani wishes to 
take even ἀπαντᾷ here of internal vibration—a manifest rmpossibility 
The interpretation would be greatly ssmphfied all through if we could 
take τὰ βαρέα, &c., merely of the atoms, but coming immediately aftei 
τὰς ἀτόμους the neuter must be intended to have a wider application. 

8. τὰ βαρέα... τῶν μικρῶν καὶ κούφων, The antithesis is incom- 
plete. Usener may well be nght in suggesting τὰ ζμεγάλα καὶ) βαρέα 
this 18 better than Gassendi’s excision of μικρῶν καί 

4. ὅταν ye... . an emphatic limitation, ‘ provided, that 1s, that...’ 

αὐτοῖς. sc τοῖς μικροῖς 

οὔτε τὰ μικρὰ... ἀντικόπτῃ. It might be held by others that small 
bodies would naturally move faster than large bodies, because they 
Meet with less opposition. Bignone points out that Epicurus ts 
thinking not merely of the natural downward motion of the atoms, 
but also of the motion sideways and even upwards owing to blows, and 
as regards upward motion it might well be supposed that the small 
would move faster than the great. But this too, says Eprcurus, 1s a 
mistake, provided always there ts no collision of atom with atom: 
motron in ajl directions 15 at the uniform maximum speed. Usener’s 


218 I, ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


insertion of βραδύτερον alter τὰ μικρά 15 due to misunderstanding 
and produces a mere tautology: both Giussani and Bignone con- 
demn it. 

δ: πάντα πόρον σύμμετρον ἔχοντα : the expression has already 
occurred in ὃ 47 with reference to the motion of the εἴδωλα. I take 
it to mean here as there ‘ having their whole course uniform ’, i.e. they 
are always moving at the same rate and in the same direction, pro- 
vided that there 1s no collision. Bignone takes it to mean only 
‘having their whole course in the same direction’, but I think that 
the idea of uniform speed 1s also imphed. Guussani here, as in ὃ 474, 
with the idea of the internal ἀντικοπή in his mind, translates ‘ having a 
symmetrical course of all their parts’, ι. 6. having all their component 
parts moving 1n the same direction so that there 1s no internal ἀντικοπή. 
Apart from the strain thus put upon πάντα, such a conception 1s only 
applicable to the atom, which has no separable parts, whereas here 
Epicurus’ idea 1s intended to have a wider application. 

Guussani’s emendation ἐχόντων for ἔχοντα 15 tempting, as it would 
be more natural that Epicurus should apply tms notion to the heavy 
bodies, as a reason why they should not be slower than the hghter 
bodies, but the notion 1s true of either, and it 1s best not to disturb 
the reading of all the MSS. 

μηδὲ ἐκείνοις sc rots μεγάλοις as Opposed to αὐτοῖς above. 

6. οὔθ᾽ ἡ ἄνω... Though the expression 1s still general in form 
Epicurus 15 thinking mainly now of the motion of the atoms in the 
void. They can move either sideways or even upwards owing to the 
blows received in collision with other atoms, but motion in these 
directions 1s still exactly equal in speed to that of their original motion 
downwards owing to their own weight the blow deflects but does not 
diminish the pace—a very important point in the Epicurean cinetics, 

The clause 1s loosely appended and we must carry on the general 
notion, ‘quicker’, Usener would supply θάττων ἢ βραδυτέρα, but this 
15 not necessary either notion 15 sufficient for the general idea, 

4. ἐφ᾽ ὁπόσον γὰρ .. The summary of the preceding propositions 
Once started in any given direction the atom will continue to move 
in that direction at absolute speed until it 1s again deflected either by 
a new blow or by us own natural tendency to move downwards, which 
now counteracts the effect of the blow. In effect these two counter- 
actions would work differently " a new collision will stait an immediate 
change of direction, whereas the tendency to move downwards would 
assert itself gradually and cause a gradual! deflexion. 

8. κατίσχῃ, ‘holds out’, ‘ prevails” 

ἑκατέρα αὐτῶν. The MSS. have ἑκατέρων, for which Usener proposed 
ἑκάτερον in the sense ‘either of the two kinds of motion’, and modern 
editors have followed him. But can ἑκάτερον have this sense? If it 
is retained, it must surely mean ‘either the heavy or the light body’, 
referring back to the opening clauses. I suggest ἑκατέρα αὐτῶν in the 
sense which Usener postulates. 


COMMENTARY. § §§ 61-46» 219 


ἅμα νοήματι, ‘quick as thought’, Epicurus’ regular expression for 
the immeasurably swift motion of the unimpeded atom. Remember 
that thought was to him an atomic motion and the swiftest of all 
motions. 

9. ἕως (ἄν τι) ἀντικόψῃ a necessary insertion of Usener’s: dv τι 
would naturally fall out by ‘haplography ’ before ἀντικόψῃ. 

ἢ ἔξωθεν ἣ ἐκ τοῦ ἰδίου βάρους. A new point: the atom moving along 
at absolute speed im any direction may be checked or deflected 
suddenly by a collision or gradually tend to its natural downward 
motion as the force of the blow is exhausted ἢ ἐκ τοῦ ἰδίον βάρους 15 
used rather loosely with ἀντικόψῃ, for it is not of course strictly a case 
of ἀντικοπή, but ἢ ἔξωθεν leads up to it. 

10, πρὸς Thy τοῦ πλήξαντος δύναμιν, which Usener excludes as a gloss, 
is essential to the sense- the original downward motion asserts itself 
‘against the force of the blow’. Bignone (Appendix, p 228) would 
read τὴν (ἐκ) τοῦ πλήξαντος, pointing out that it is not strictly the force 
of the atom which delivered the blow that is in question, but the 
force of the blow received from it. He may be right, but the com- 
paratively loose expression of the text Is intelligible 

$46. τ. καὶ μὴν cal... ὁμοίωμα λαμβάνει. With some hesitation 
T follow Grussant in inserting here the last two sentences of ὃ 46 
(see notes on ὃ 468) They cannot be in place there for (4) together 
with the opening section of § 47 they mterrupt a close consecutive 
argument, (4) the question of the rate of movement of the εἴδωλα 1s not 
raised till later ὃ 47 ὅθεν καὶ τάχη ἀνυπέρβλητα ἔχει... On the other 
hand, they refer more naturally to the pace of the atoms and, hke the 
beginning of § 47, may have been inserted there to explain the general 
notion of atomic movement as a preliminary to the description of the 
movement of the εἴδωλα. Here they are very much In point 

Epicurus proceeds then to a new point: the atoms, he has said, all 
move at an equal pace: he now passes to the question, What 1s that 
pace? Its true that he has to some extent anticipated the answer in 
the words-dya νοήματι τὴν φορὰν σχήσει above, but that 1s vague and 
general, and this 1s a careful and reasoned statement. The atoms 
moving umninterruptedly through the void can cover any comprehen- 
sible distance m an inconceivably short time: τη fact, the speed of the 
atoms may be described with Giussam as ‘absolute speed’. 

κατὰ μηδεμίαν... γινομένη, ‘if it takes place without a meeting of 
things which might collide’. As we have seen, such collision cannot 
diminish the speed of atomic motion, but only momentarily check it 
and deflect its direction. But it can therefore prevent its covering 
a certain μῆκος, i.e. the distance between two points in a certain time. 
uf starung from ὦ it only ultimately reaches ὦ after a series of 
deflexions, it takes a longer tame for the whole transit than if τὸ passes 
uninterruptedly through the void. 

2. ἀντικοψόντων. The MSS. have ἀντικοψάντων, which seems impos- 
sible. Usener emends to the future, Giussani more violently proposes 


220 1. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


ἀντικοπτόντων : the future will surely stand as ἀπάντησιν does not 
strictly mean the clash but a ‘coming to meet’. 

περιληπτόν, ‘comprehensible as a unit marked off from other periods 
of time’. Cf. §&§ 40, 42, 56 for use of this and kindred forms. 

3. BpdBous yap καὶ τάχους. . . 16, the deflexion of the atom from 
one direction to another has the appearance of greater slowness of 
movement in its transit from one point to another. we think it has 
taken longer to pass from ὦ to ὦ (see note on 1, 1). But of course 
Eprcurus has also in his mind here the compound body, to which he 
is leading up there the internal collisions of the component atoms 
produce the appearance of greater slowness of movement of the whole 
compound body Some MSS. have βραδύτητου, but Bpadovs goes 
more naturally with τάχους 

§ 62. Another very difficult paragraph, in which most editors seem 
to me to have gone strangely wrong. with three small alterations 
(θάττων for θᾶττον (2), τὸν ἐλάχιστον for τῶν ἐλαχίστων (4), and ἀντι- 
κόπτουσιν for ἀντικόπτωσιν (6)) the MS. reading seems to me to make 
perfect sense, which the editors, mainly owing to preconceived notions, 
have missed 

Epicurus passes now from the motion of the free atoms in the void, 
to the motion of atoms in compounds, where the individual atoms are 
of course still moving in void, for even in the most compact bodies 
there is a διάστημα Of vord between atom and atom. Now here, just 
as in the case of the free atoms, hasty considerations might lead to the 
conclusion that some atoms move fasler than others Take the case 
of two compound bodies 4 and 2 moving m the same direction, of 
which 4 is moving at twice the pace of B. even if we narrow our 
observation to the least period of time which 1s contimuous (καὶ κατὰ τὸν 
ἐλάχιστον συνεχῆ χρόνον), A still covers twice the distance that & covers 
We are inclined then to infer (zpoodogaleo Oar) that the atoms which 
compose A are moving twice as fast as those which compose JZ. But 
now let us try to pass beyond the region of sense-perception to what 
we might call ‘atomic’ time (note that the whole idea 1s exactly 
parallel to the nouon of the πέρατα in the question of size, δὲ 57, 58): 
take an instant of time, such as we can only conceive in thought 
(λόγῳ θεωρητὸν χρόνον), a division of time so small that it cannot be 
called continuous at all Our inference from observation might again 
lead us to think that the atoms of A were moving at twice the speed 
of those of B. But let us now try the test of the mental vision 
(ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας.) which we have obtained from our conception of 
the movements of the free atoms in the void. We see now at once 
that our inference was wrong. For we must think of the construction 
of the body, of atoms still, as we have seen, moving in void, but 
restricted by their collisions with one another. In this instant of time 
then, the individual atoms of both bodies are all moving at an equal 
rate, colliding and clashing momentarily, and striking off on their new 
little trayects in all directions. What then is the atomic difference 


COMMENTARY. § 46-62 221 


between the bodies 4 and B which causes the difference in the speed 
of motion of the aggregate body? It 1s simply that in 4 more atoms 
are moving in the direction of the whole body than in #: in B there is 
more ἀντικοπή, it 15 more retarded by adverse atomic motion and 
therefore as a whole body moves slower. Indeed 1t 1s this ἀντικοπή 
alone which renders the motion of bodies perceptible to us (ὑπὸ τὴν 
αἴσθησιν τὸ συνεχὲς τῆς φορᾶς γίγνεται) the atomic motion is far too 
fast for us to perceive: the union of atoms in compounds retards the 
motion by ἀντικοπή till at last, when the compounds are large enough, 
the motion is slow enough for us to perceive it. Once again the idea 
1s exactly parallel to the notion of size, and the whole 1s wonderfully 
clearly brought out by Lucretius in his illustration from the motes in 
the sunbeam (1. 114-141, but especially 132-141) 

{The editors and commentators have curiously misunderstood the 
passage. 

(1) Usener, not seeing the force of ῥηθήσεται, inserts (od) before 
θάττων, reads ἢ μὴ ἐφ᾽ ἕνα, and excises κατὰ τοὺς λόγῳ θεωρητοὺς χρόνους 
asa gloss. How he understands the clause from τῷ ἐφ᾽ ἕνα... ἢ μὴ 
ἐφ᾽ ἕνα I, hike Giussami, fail to perceive. Hicks, who apparently 
follows Usener, except that he keeps κατὰ τοὺς λόγῳ θεωρητοὺς χρόνους 
(and ὃ reads οὐ θᾶττον φορηθήσεται), translates ‘Moreover, of the 
atoms in composite bodies, one will not travel faster than another, 
since all have cqual velocity, and this whether we consider (τῷ !) the 
motion of the atoms in an aggregate in one direction during sensible 
and continuous time or their motions τῇ different duections in times so 
short as to be appiehended only by the reason’. Apart from giam- 
matical difficulties, I take this statement to be quite untrue: the 
‘ motion of atoms in an aggregate 11 one duection during sensible and 
continuous time ’ zs faster in some cases than others . see above. 

(2) Bneger rightly keeps θᾶττον without ov, reads φορηθήσεται, and 
then proceeds to insert and suppose lacunae im his usual wild manner, 
with the general idea that the atom which makes a number of tiajects 
in all directions moves slower than the atom which goes straight in 
one direction (cf. ὃ 47). This idea seems to me quite inapplicable 
and inappropriate here. 

(3) Grussani, to whom I owe a gieat deal for the explanation of the 
general meaning of the passage, has been misled by not observing the 
force of ῥηθήσεται. He therefore accepts Usener’s οὐ, understands ‘ you 
cannot say even in compounds that one atom ts faster than another’, 
and then, being driven to take the τῷ ἐφ᾽ ἕνα clause as giving a reason, 
not for the apparent difference of pace, but for its real equality, emends 
εἰ μή to εἶτα μή and invents a quite gratuitous idea that at the first 
moment of the starting of a compound body after a blow for a very 
bnef continuous period the atoms do all move in one direction, and 
then ἀντικοπή sets in—~an idea surely quite foreign, as Giussan: himself 
seems to feel, to the whole Epicurean cinetics. 

(4) Bignone, who agrees very closely with me in the general sense 


122 1. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


of the passage and has in his Appendix ably expounded the Epicurean 
conceptions of the minimum of time and the minimum of space, which 
correspond with the notion of the mznzmae partes, ke Giussani, takes 
the clause τῷ ἐφ᾽ ἕνα. . . cuvexy χρόνον as an explanation of ἰσοταχῶν : 
‘they are equal in speed because they move in only one direction and 
in the least continuous ume of their motion’. But this imphes ‘each’ 
as the subject, takes καὶ τὸν ἐλάχιστον συνεχῆ χρόνον In an unnatural 
pense, and destroys the parallelism of τῷ ἐφ᾽ ἕνα τόπον. .. εἰ μὴ 
ἐφ᾽ ἕνα. 

ge a the reading of f, must, I think, be accepted for θᾶττον of 
the MSS. The latter could only be keptif we supposed that φέρεσθαι 
had dropped out (or must be ‘ understood’) alter ῥηθήσεται. I have 
shown above that there is no need to insert οὐ before it. 

ῥηθήσεται, ‘it will be said to be’, though as a matter of fact it 1s not. 
The inference from our experience of compound bodies would be 
exactly on a par with the supposition dealt with above that heavier 
atoms will move faster downwards than hghter ones. 

3. ἰσοταχῶν οὐσῶν by itself, ‘though in fact they are all equal in 
speed ’. 

TG... χρόνον then gives the reason of this false assumption. The 
atoms in compound bodies are perceived in any continuous period of 
time, even the shortest (retain καί), to move as an aggregate in one 
direction. But it is wrong to infer from this that each individual atom 
is during that time moving omy in this direction at the speed of the 
aggregate body. 

δ. εἰ ph... γίνηται is really Epicurus’ reply to the false objection, 
though in form he appends it rather oddly as an exception to the 
theory he is contradicting. 

ἀλλὰ πυκνὸν ἀντικόπτουσιν. .. : again the statement of the fact: ‘ but 
in truth they are constantly josthng and by their collisions gradually 
tetard the motion of the whole until it becomes perceptible to us’. 
See above. 

6. ἕως Ov... γίνηται οἵ, Lucr. 1. 138~139: 


sic a principiis ascendit motus et exit 
paulatim nostros ad sensus. 


4. τὸ yap mpoodofaldueroy ... We see compound bodies moving at 
different rates in continuous perceptible periods, and we infer that the 
atoms which compose them are doing the same even in the ideal 
minima of time. But this 1s not the case. In matters of perception 
we must trust αἴσθησις, but in matters beyond its ken we must not 
make hasty inferences by analogy, but think out by an act of appre- 
hension what the truth is. For the general idea of the rpocdofafs- 
μενον see §§ 50, 51. 

9. ἐπὶ τῶν τοιούτων, ‘in the matters under discussion ’, 1. 6. matters 
concerning the character and behaviour of :mperceptible atoms. 

1ο. ἐπεὶ τό ye θεωρούμενον... .. a return on the first principles of 


COMMENTARY. §§ 62-47» 223 


inquiry. In dealing with phenomena αἴσθησις will give us the truth, 
but with regard to ἄδηλα it cannot. 

ἐπεὶ... ἀληθές ἐστιν. See Appendix on ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας, 
pp.259ff Itis this passage which primanly demands the extension of 
the meaning of this difficult phrase beyond the immediate apprehension 
by the mind of images too subtle to be perceived by the senses: for that 
clearly cannot be his meaning here. I have argued in the Appendix 
that the meaning here is to be found in the parallelism of the sentence - 
τὸ θεωρούμενον 1s what Epicurus elsewhere (δ 56) calls τὸ ἐπιβλητικῶς 
λαμβανόμενον τοῖς αἰσθητηρίοις----ἰῃδ result of observation on the part of 
the senses as opposed to passive sensation: 50 τὸ κατ᾽ ἐπιβολὴν Aap- 
βανόμενον 15 the image apprehended as arising from a scientific deduc- 
tion, each step of which has been referred to the test of the αἰσθήσεις 
to make sure that there is no dyripapripyots. We have a passive 
sensation of a moving body by observation we see that each of its 
perceptible parts 1s moving in the same direction as the whole. δόξα 
by combining images apphes this idea at random to the atomic parts 
but the mind apprehends true images of atoms in motion, which is 
derived from a chain of concepts—the atoms, their collisions, their 
resultant vibratory motion in all directions—each of which has been 
scientifically tested the conclusion of ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας 1s there- 
fore true. 

ὃ 47°. τ οὐ μὴν οὐδ᾽ ἅμα =. | have herewith more confidence followed 
Giussani in inserting this section from ὃ 47. It could only with the 
greatest difficulty be forced into significance, where it stands, mn con- 
nexion with the theory of ‘idols’, whereas here it follows on quite 
naturally with the preceding account of the movement of atoms. It 1s 
in fact a precaution against a misunderstanding of the theory just 
stated, and has been brilliantly expounded in most of ats details by 
Guussani (pp. 14-118). The motion of the whole body 1s, it has been 
said, the sum of the motions of its component atoms~ but these 
motions are an infinite semes of tiny trajects in all directions ; it might 
then be supposed that the whole body peiforms this entire seres of 
motions, and arrives at the end of its journey after having followed 
a devious course in all directions. Such an idea 1s really incon- 
ceivable, and would moreover be a direct contradiction of αἴσθησις 
for in that case the whole body will have come from any possible spot 
in any direction from which one of its atoms started and not from the 
place from which we saw it start The objection 1s put in a very exag- 
gerated form, but it is not difficult to see the thought underlying it: if 
the motion of the compound body 18 only the sum of the motions of its 
component atoms, are not those umpercepttble motions alone real and 
is not the motion of the compound a delusion? Epicurus replies with 
an emphatic negative. The motion of the compound 1s a realty, 
determined by the ἀντικοπή of the component atoms: or, if we may 
translate it more literally, the motion of the compound 18 the sensible 
likeness (ὅμοιον) of the sum of the component motions. As separate 


224 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


identities the atoms perform their tiny trajects at infinite speed, but as 
parts of the new unity (ἄθροισμα, or conczium, as Lucretius calls it) 
they combine to perform a new motion. The compound is more 
than an aggregate, it is an entity: its motion is more than the sum of 
motions ; it is a new reality. 

Thus both the motions of the compound, sensible, continuous, 
taking place in perceptible time, and the motions of the atoms, 
imperceptible, constantly broken, occurring in time perceptible only 
in thought, are alike realities. ἐπεὶ τό γε θεωρούμενον πᾶν ἢ κατ᾽ 
ἐπιβολὴν λαμβανόμενον τῇ διανοίᾳ ἀληθές ἐστιν (ὃ 62 fin). The idea 
1s the very foundation of the Epicurean physics: both the sensible 
world and the imperceptible world comprehended by thought are real 
and true. Again, we have exact parallels in the theory of the secon- 
dary qualities the atoms, for instance, are colourless, but by their 
different shapes and collocations they produce colour in the compound 
body: and that colour 1s no delusion but a reality. This 1s the 
natural conclusion of the section on atomic motion, and 1 have little 
doubt that Gtussani’s transposition and general explanation of this 
passage are nght, though I differ from him at one poimt 

οὐδ᾽ (οὐδέ) 1s the 1eading of the MSS. and may be kept: this idea 
or criticism 1s no more to be accepted than the fallacy with which he 
has dealt in ὃ 62. Both Usener and Guussani alter it to οὔθ᾽ to cor- 
respond to the ore which they insert after καὶ τοῦτο below. Bignone, 
who keeps this passage in us original place, can find no reference 
for οὐδ᾽ and reads οὐδαμῇ for οὐδὲ duo. The MS. οὐδέ 1s indeed 
a small but strong argument for the transposition. 

2. καὶ τὸ φερόμενον σῶμα. It is impossible to make sense of the 
MS. κατὰ τὸ φερόμενον, and καί and κατά are frequently confused in 
these MSS.(e g. §38). Bignone, supposing the passage to have special 
reference to the motion of the εἴδωλα, reads καὶ τἀποφερόμενον. 

ἐπὶ τοὺς πλείους τόπους" sc the several places which each of the 
component atoms teaches 1n tts trajects. 

3. Usener, followed by Giussan, confines the parenthesis to the 
words ἀδιανόητον γὰρ καὶ τοῦτο. in that case it 15 necessary to insert 
a negative | in the following clause, which must be οὔτε to correspond 
with the οὔτε which they read τη]. 1. Usener reads οὔτ᾽ ἀφικνούμενον 
(supposing συν a corruplion, which 1s improbable), Giussani οὔτε 
συναφικνούμενον, keeping the significant compound to express the 
motion of the whole body together with its component atoms 
Guussani then explains the sentence by a very subtie and improbable 
idea: he points out that al] the atoms composing a compound must, 
before they entered the compound, have travelled in their course to fai 
distant parts of space: the theory then which would identify the 
motion of the whole body with those of its atoms must suppose that 
with them it has arrived from all these distant parts of space and not 
from the spot from which we have watched its motion. He compares 
especially Lucretius’ description of the formation of Ihghtning, 


COMMENTARY. §§ 47 >-63 225 


vi. 340-345. But such an idea is very far-fetched and, as Bignone 
points out, there could be no reason to identify the motion of the 
body with those of its atoms Jefore they entered the compound, 

Bignone’s own solution is far more satisfactory, and I have followed 
it without hesitanon: he contmues the parenthesis to ἔσται ἀφιστά- 
μενον, and keeps the MS. text without the insertion of a negative. The 
clause then is an additional reason for rejecting the theory just 
enunciated : it 1s unthinkable, and moreover it involves the supposition 
that the compound might arnve not from where we saw it start, but 
from any spot in any direction, as it would if in devious course αἱ 
followed the vanous trajects of its component atoms. 

4. ὅθεν δήποθεν τοῦ ἀπείρου goes then with συναφικνούμενον. 

6. ἂἀντικοπῇ γὰρ ὅμοιον ἔσται the motion of the whole body is the 
outward appearance (ὁμοίωμα ὃ 46 Ὁ 4) of the various internal motions 
of its component atoms. 

μέχρι τοσούτους Guiussani, with his thoughts very much on the 
Lucretian account of the formation of the /u/men, takes this 10 mean 
‘up to the moment of departure ’, 1.e. of the formation of the com- 
pound and the start of the compound motion up till that moment 
the motion of the free atoms was οὐκ ἀντικοπτόν. But it is very hard 
to extract this meaning from the context (τούτου, the reading of BG, 
would make it easier), and it ts sufely inconsistent, for Epicurus 18 
apparently thinking just as much of compound bodies formed long 
ago and at rest before the moment of departure, when it could not be 
said that ‘the speed of the motion was οὐκ ἀντικοπτόν᾽, The natural 
meaning to be extracted from the context 18 “ μέχρι τοῦ αἰσθητοῦ 
χρόνου", and that I believe to be what Epicurus intends. In the 
χρόνοι λόγῳ θεωρητοί the motion 15 the independent motion of the 
individual atoms at atomic speed, οὐκ ἀντικοπτόν, but the moment we 
arrive at ἃ χρόνος αἰσθητός we have the motion of the compound, the 
outward expression of the ἀντικοπή. 

7. dvrikamrdvy: Usener corrected the MS. reading to ἀντικόπτον, but 
the active participle will not make sense, and I prefer to read ἀντικοπτὸν : 
‘the speed of 1ts motion 1s not lable to retardation by collision’. 

χρήσιμον δὴ. . . τὸ στοιχεῖον. Guiussani demurs to transporting 
this clause with the rest of the passage on the ground that it sounds 
odd at the close of a section, and would be more natural in intro- 
ducing a new section But we may compare the parallel phrase at 
the close of the discussion of the nature of vision, ὃ 52 1 καὶ ταύτην οὖν 
σφόδρα ye δεῖ τὴν δόξαν κατέχειν. 


V. Tue Sour, its Naturr AnD ACTIVITIES. 


The next main section of the letter (§§ 63-68) deals with the nature 
of the soul, or vital principle (ψυχή). ‘The main points in Epicurus’ 


theory are (1) that it 1s material in character, a corporeal existence 
3078 Pp 


326 1. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


(σῶμα), constructed like other material existences of atoms in composi- 
tion; (2) that the component atoms are extremely subtle in nature ; 
(3) that the soul particles are most like those of wind and heat, which 
he also conceives as material substances , (4) that added to these two 
elements 1s a third unnameable substance, far finer in structure than 
either of them ; (5) that the soul is distributed over the body and is by 
it preserved from destruction, and in turn communicates sensation to 
the body ; (6) that at the dissolution of the body the soul 18 dissolved 
too and perishes. 

All this 1s in harmony with the general Epicurean account of the 
soul, but it is put very summarily, and when compared with other 
Epicurean sources would seem to have some omissions. In particular 
there are two notable divergencies from the account given by Lucretius 
in Book III. 

(1) To the elements of breath or wind (venfus) and heat (ca/or, 
vapor) Lucretius adds the third element of air or mist (aer) (11. 233). 
This account 1s supported by other Epicurean sources, e.g. Plut adv. 
Cototen 20 (Usener 314) ἔκ τινος θερμοῦ καὶ πνευματικοῦ καὶ ἀερώδους 
and Aet. iv. 3 (Usener 315) κρᾶμα ἐκ τεττάρων, ἐκ ποιοῦ πυρώδους, ἐκ 
ποιοῦ ἀερώδους, ἐκ ποιοῦ πνευματικοῦ, ἐκ τετάρτου τινὸς ἀκατονομάστου. 
Giussani (vol 1, pp. 184 ff ) has ingeniously explained that by this means 
the idea was obtained of atmosphere 1n three different temperatures, hot 
air (θερμόν), air at normal temperature (ἀήρ), and cold air (πνεῦμα). 
There 1s no reason to suppose a discrepancy on this point between 
Epicurus and his disciples, but we must regard the present passage as 
a rough statement, elsewhere elaborated. The ‘ unnameable’ element 
thus becomes in Lucretius the guarfa natura (i. 241). 

(2) Lucretius distinguishes (1. 94-135) between the ama, the 
vilal principle, distributed, as Epicurus says here, al] over the body 
and thus the origin of sensation, and the amzmus, the mind, an aggre- 
gate of pure soul atoms situated m the breast. This distinction had 
already been made by Democritus, and 1s vouched for not only by the 
scholuum on ὃ 67, but by Aetims iv. 4 (Usener 312) and Plut. adv. 
Coloten 20 (Usener 314). It 1s indeed a fundamental idea in the 
system, and st seems strange that Epicurus should have omitted it here 
Brieger has endeavoured to find a reference to it in ὃ 65, but Giussan1 
has, I think, shown conclusively that this 1s not the case. It may be 
that a passage has been lost in which Epicurus mentioned it, but here 
again it seems more probable that he 1s speaking summarily and does 
not refer to what was a cardinal point τῇ the doctrine of the soul which 
would have been familiar to the advanced pupils for whom the letter 
to Herodotus was written. 

(1) The first section (§ 63) deals with the nature and atomic com- 
position of the soul, 

§ 68. 1. συνορᾶν, ‘to consider’, ht. ‘to obtain a comprehensive 
view’: we may notice the verb: thought 1s always to Epicurus a kind 
of visualization. 


COMMENTARY. § 63 227 


ἀναφέροντα, ‘referring to’ the external and internal sensations, 
i.e. using them, as always in the Epicurean system, as standards or 
emteria of judgement. 

3. σῶμα : thisis a point of the greatest importance. The soul is 
purely material and corporeal, and the popular idea that it 1s ἀσώματον 
can have no place in a purely matenahst system: see ὃ 67. 

λεπτομερές, ‘ of fine particles’, 1.e. as we learn from Lucr. ni 177 ff., 
of small round and smooth atoms put together in a subtle structure : 
cf the scholium on § 67 ἐξ ἀτόμων αὐτὴν συγκεῖσθαι λειοτάτων καὶ orpoy- 
γυλωτάτων, πολλῷ τινι διαφερουσῶν τῶν τοῦ πυρός. 

παρ᾽ ὅλον τὸ ἄθροισμα παρεσπαρμένον, mingled in, that 15, with 
the atoms which compose the body all over; but not necessarily, as 
Democritus held, arranged in alternate layers (see Lucr. in. 370-395). 

4. προσεμφερέστατον Lucretius says straightforwardly that it 2s air 
and wind and heat: Epicurus more guardedly that it 1s ‘most hke’ 
breath and heat. 

πνεύματι : we ought perhaps to notice the strange vanant of F 
σπέρματι, though it cannot of course be right. By πνεῦμα Epicurus 
probably means ‘ wind’ rather than ‘ breath’: it hke heat was to him 
a corporeal body. 7 

5 ἔστι δὲ τὸ μέρος, ‘there is also the part. .’, is the reading of all 
the MSS. and should be kept, though it is rather abrupt. We should 
remember that Epicurus is writing to Herodotus, who ts assumed to 
have considerable acquaimtance with the system already. Woltjer, 
followed by Brieger, would prefer ἔστι δέ τι μέρος, which 1s unneces- 
sary Usener’s violent alteration ἐπὶ δὲ rod μέρους has little to com- 
mend it; he does not reahze the introduction here of the ‘nameless ἢ 
element. 

6. πολλὴν παραλλαγήν, ‘a large step in the scale’ of fineness of tex- 
ture. For this idea of παραλλαγή as a series or sequence cf § 55 τὸ, 

συμπαθὲς δὲ τούτῳ μᾶλλον καὶ τῷ λοιπῷ ἀθροίσματι τούτῳ, as 
Usener quite mghtly insists, 15 a dative of cause, and τῷ λοιπῷ ἀθροί- 
σματι 1s governed by συμπαθές. The third μέρος 1s most capable 
of acting in harmony with the rest of the body owing to its subtlety of 
structure, which enables st to interpenetrate the structure of the body 
more completely than can either of the other two elements. Brieger, 
who wishes to read τούτοις μᾶλλον ἢ τῷ λοιπῷ ἀθροίσματι, quite muis- 
understands both construction and meaning. 

8. τοῦτο δὲ wav .. The evidence of all our experience of the soul’s 
nature and actions, &c., makes it clear that the explanation just given 
is the mght one. Cf. Lucretius’ arguments, amplifying this idea at 
great length, ει 417-829. 

δῆλον (ποιοῦσι). Brieger’s addition, adopted by Guussani, is a far 
better correction of a meaningless text in the MSS. than Usener’s 
alteration to διῆγον. Bignone, following Giussani, reads δηλοῦσε the 
Omission 1s more probable than the corruption. 

10. ὧν στερόμενοι θνήσκομεν : hit. ‘the loss of what causes our death’, 


P 2 


328 I, ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


i.e. what passes away when we die: 1f we can find out that we shall 
know what the soul is, and the evidence shows that it 15. particles of 
wind and heat and this other subtle element. 

(2) The second section (§ 64) deals with the origin of sensation. 
This is produced by the movements of the soul-atoms, kept together 
by the body which encloses them, and to which the soul thus com- 
municates sensation, Guussani has called attention here to Brieger’s 
very useful distinction between two sorts of compound bodies in the 
Epicurean system: (1) #xéurae, solid or hquid bodies which are 
capable of holding together by themselves ; (2) /ex/urae, bodies of rarer 
formation, which cannot keep together unless they are enclosed 
(στεγάξεσθαι) in some more sohd body. The soul 1s eminently an 
example of the latter kind: it could not hold together by itself (it 15 
dissipated after death), but when protected by the body it has the 
capacity (δύναμις) of producing the ‘accident’ (σύμπτωμα) of sensa- 
tion by the motion of its own component atoms (notice the purely 
materialist idea), and further of communicating that sensation to the 
body. Thus it 1s that, thanks to the presence of the soul, the body 
does itself feel, but that immediately the soul has departed it ceases to 
feel—for sensation was never a capacity of the body as such. The 
idea 15 subtle and of great importance for the Epicurean psychology, 
and 1s very clearly set out by Lucretius 1n in. 323-416, some passages 
of which show a marked correspondence with the present text. 

11. Thy πλείστην αἰτίαν : notice ths careful expression the soul 
has the largest share in the causes of sensation, for it 1s the soul which 
starts the movement (κίνησις, see below) which produces it but not 
all, for τὸ could not produce sensation, unless through the protection 
of the body that 1s a cause contributed by the body. 

κατέχειν : compare δὲ 52. 2, 47> 8. 

§ 64. τ. ταύτην: sc αἴσθησιν, not τὴν πλείστην αἰτίαν. 

_ 3. ἐστεγάζετο, ‘enclosed’, ‘protected’, ‘held together’. Cf. Lucr. 
1. 323: 
haec igitur natura tenetur corpore ab omn1. 


παρασκευάσαν ἐκείνῃ τὴν αἰτίαν ταύτην : notice again the accuracy 
of the expression: the protection 1s a cause of βεβαίου, afforded by 
the body to the soul. 

3- μετείληφε : the body, as a consequence, has ‘a share’ yn sensa- 
tion. 

συμπτώματος, ‘contingent capacity’, or in the logical sense, ‘acci- 
dent’: cf. §§ 68-73. Sensation is not a ‘property’ (cvpPe_Byxos), 
something essential to the existence of either soul or body, but it 1s an 
‘accident’ or ‘secondary quality” produced by the fact of their com- 
bination. 

4. οὐ μέντοι πάντων. .., ‘it does not possess all the συμπτώματα 
which result from the combination’, e.g. those ef thought and 
visualization, which the mind in the body possesses. This clause 


COMMENTARY. §§ 63-64 229 


again suggests that a passage dealing with the mind has dropped 
out. 

5. διό: and so, when the soul departs, as it has not in itself the 
nght kind of movements to produce consciousness, the body loses 
sensation, Guussani wishes to refer διό not to the previous clause, but 
to the whole preceding descnption. But this is contrary to Epicurus’ 
general practice in this section’ he argues carefully clause by clause, 
and there 1s no real difficulty in the connexion if the body possessed 
all the συμπτώματα of the soul, 1t would be able to continue conscious- 
ness after its departure. but as it only has sensation, and that only 
owing to the presence of the soul, 1t cannot. 

οὐ γὰρ αὐτὸ dv ἑαυτῷ..." for it does not have sensation indepen- 
dently, as a capacity of its own The sequence of thought between 
this and the preceding clause 1s very exactly reproduced by Lucretius, 


m 356, 357 


at dimissa anima corpus caret undique sensu ; 
perdit enim quod non proprium fuit e1us in aevo. 


6. ἀλλ᾽ ἑτέρῳ ἅμα συγγεγενημένῳ αὐτῷ παρεσκεύαζεν : the datives are 
strongly supported by the MSS ἑτέρω. . συγγεγενημένω, and I agree 
entirely with Brieger that it 1s quite rmpossible that Epicurus can have 
used παρασκενάξειν above (I. 2) of something afforded by the body to 
the soul, and later of something afforded by the soul to the body. 
Guussam, preferring Usener’s ἕτερον. συγγεγενημένον, ‘something 
else (sc. the soul) born with it supphed it with this faculty’, argues 
against Brieger, that whereas above it was the opportunity (αἰτία) for 
sensation which the body supplied, here it would have to be the sensa- 
tion itself, and that Epicurus could not have said. But he forgets 
surely the meaning of παρασκευάξειν, which contaims in itself the 
notion of ‘affordmg an opportumity for’. I have little doubt that 
Bneger is right the difference does not, however, as Guussami 
notes, affect the main idea. Bignone also follows Breger with 
confidence. 

4 συντελεσθείσης. .. δυνάμεως - the latent capacity which the soul 
always had 1s now perfected or brought into action: an almost 
Aristotchan expression 

8 περὶ αὐτό, ‘within itself’, and not, as Giussani suggests, ‘ owing 
to its being within the body’. this is much more difficult to extract 
from the Greek, and down to the word ἀπεδίδου Epicurus is thinking 
of the creation of sensation in the soul, and nothing else 

κατὰ τὴν κίνησιν : it is the atomic movement within the soul which 
gives rise to sensation. 

9. εὐθύς, ‘ immediately’, ‘ without external assistance ’, and so ‘ spon- 
taneously ’, 

ὁμούρησιν : the ‘juxtaposition’ of the particles of soul and body. 


3230 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


το. συμπάθειαν : their correspondence of movement; compare §§ 48. 
11, 50. 2, and Lucr. ib. 335-236: 


communibus inter eas conflatur utrimque 
motibus accensus nobts per viscera sensus. 


καὶ ἐκείνῳ, of course, ‘to the body too’. 

εἶπον: sc 1}, 2 and 3 above. 

(3) This section (§§ 65, 66) contains deductions from the combina- 
tion of the soul and body just explained. The soul, being the 
principal cause of sensation, can retain sensation even though portions 
of the body be lost: but the body, which only derives its sensation 
from the presence of the soul, must lose it the moment the soul 1s 
gone. Again, if the body 1s utterly broken up, the soul too must Jose 
sensation, as it no longer has the body to hold it together. The pas- 
sage 1s comparatively simple and straightforward, but has been consider- 
ably vexed by the editors. Bneger, who believes that the third μέρος of 
the soul is, in Epicurus’ view, the azzmus, and 1s alone the cause of sensa- 
tion, thinks that a passage has been lost before this section, in which 
Epicurus made a transition from the anzma to the anzmus, and that 
this section itself deals with the latter. But his whole position has, 
I think, been shown to be untenable by Giussani (pp. 197-208), and 
his view involves, as Giussan1 has noticed, a very unnatural interpreta- 
tion of this first sentence even the clause (ὅσον ποτὲ ἐστὶ... ψυχῆς 
φύσιν) which might be thought to tell most in favour of this view has, 
as I shall have to show, been very seriously muistranslated by both 
Brieger and Guussan. 

§ 66. 2. ἐνυπάρχουσα : quite literally, ‘ contmuing to exist inside the 
body ’. 

ἄλλου τινὸς μέρους ἀπηλλαγμένου, ‘if some other part (of the whole 
structure of soul and body) be lost’. Compare, for stance, 
Lucretius’ descnption 1n ni. 642 ff. of the effect of the loss of limbs in 
battle. Bneger, taking ἡ ψυχή here to mean ‘ the mind’ (amrmus),1 e. 
in his theory the third μέρος, interprets ‘ any other part of the soul’, 
sce. the wind or the heat. ut the expression would be, to say the least, 
extremely ambiguous, and the idea of either of these two elements 
being separately ‘lost’ 1s quite contrary to the general notion of 
Epicurus. 

3. ἀναισθητήσει 1s probably the best restoration (suggested by Kiihn) 
for the ἀναισθήσει or ἀναισθησία of the MSS.: but it 1s a curious 
corruption. 

ἀλλ᾽ ἃ ἂν καὶ ταύτης again seems to be demanded by the sense: 
ἀλλ᾽ ἃ ἄν is given by FP* (as against ἀλλὰ ἄν) and ταύτης 15 fairly 
guaranteed by the curious ταύτῃ of the MSS 

τοῦ στεγάζοντος λυθέντος εἴθ᾽ ὅλου εἴτε καὶ μέρους τινός. I follow 
Bignone here in taking τοῦ στεγάζοντος to mean not ‘the whole body 
which encloses the soul’, but ‘ that which enclosed’ the particular part 


COMMENTARY. ξὲ 64-65 231 


of the ψυχή which is lost, e.g. an arm or a leg suddenly cut off: 
λυθέντος will then be parallel in meaning to διαλνομένου, used below 
(Il. 9) of the whole body. Guussani takes τοῦ oreyd£ovros to refer to 
the whole body: λυθέντος cannot then mean ‘shattered’ because of 
εἴθ᾽ ὅλου : if the whole body is shattered, the soul, as Epicurus says 
below, must perish. He 1s therefore driven to take λυθέντος m the 
unusual sense of ‘shaken’ by a severe shock, and tries to find a 
contrast between 1t and the compound διαλνομένου. But, as Bignone 
points out, this is mere jugghng: the compound is appropriate to 
the whole body, the simple verb to a hmb ‘ioosed’ from the rest 
of the body. 

4. ἐάν wep διαμένῃ, ἔξει : the subject is ἡ λοιπὴ ψυχή, the part of the 
soul which remains, when the portions of it in the lost hmbs are 
removed The construction 1s loose, but intelligible. 

5. ὄξει: the MSS. all agree on ὀξύ, another queer mistake, of which 
ἕξει 18 a certain correction 

6. καὶ ὅλον καὶ κατὰ μέρος: a loosely tacked on apposition 
{cf above): the body will not have sensation either in the whole or 
in any part (e.g. a leg or arm cut off), 3f certain atoms have 
departed. 

7. ἐκείνου ἀπηλλαγμένου... Thy τῆς ψυχῆς φύσιν, ‘if that sum of 
atoms, however small it be, 15 lost, which goes to make up (συντεῖνον 
«ον εἰς) the nature of the soul’. The body can by no means contmue 
to have sensatton, if the tiny collection of soul atoms be lost. Both 
the sense and the construction seem quite straightforward: for 
συντεῖνον εἰς cf ὃ 79 3 πρὸς TO μακάριον τὰς γνώσεις συντείνειν and ὃ 80 2 
πρὸς τὸ ἀτάραχον καὶ μακάριον ἡμῶν συντείνει, and for the general idea 
Lucr, in. 119-123: 


principio fit utz detracto corpore multo 

5846 ΡῈ tamen nobis in membris vita moretur, 
atque eadem rursum, cum corpora pauca caloris 
diffugere forasque per os est editus aer, 

deserit extemplo venas atque ossa relinqurt. 


But the editors have made great havoc. 

(2) Bneger, with his idea that the ψυχή all through this section 15 
the anzmus, the pure third μέρος, would take τἴ ‘if that 1s lost, which, 
however small it be, 18 that which hnks together the vast mass of the 
atoms to the nature of the soul’: 1.e. the breath and heat again, 
which act as a lnk between ‘pure soul’ and body But we have 
already seen the impossibility of this idea. 

(6) Giussam, arguing against Brieger, adopts with some hesitation 
the rendering. ‘if there is lost that guan/um of matter, however small 
it be, which atiunes the mass of the atoms into harmony with the 
animal life’, He then makes the very far-fetched supposition that 
Epicurus 1s arguing against Aristoxenus and those plosophers who 


232 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


thought that the soul was a Aarmonza, and therefore ironically uses the 
musical metaphor συντεῖνον. The guanfum of matter is of course the 
soul itself, which attunes the body into harmony with τὴν τῆς ψυχῆς 
φύσιν. The looseness of Grussani’s translation obscures the difficulty 
that you would then have expected ἑαυτοῦ instead of τῆς ψυχῆς, but 
this, he thinks, may be justified owing to the preceding neuter 
periphrasis. 

But the fatal objection to both these renderings is that they translate 
as if the text were τὸ συντεῖνον τὸ τῶν ἀτόμων πλῆθος. It 1s not, and, 
unless τό be inserted, which 1s quite unnecessary, τὸ συντεῖνον τῶν 
ἀτόμων πλῆθος Must go altogether as nominative. 

I am glad to find that Bignone here agrees with me exactly. 

9. ϑιαλυομένου " of the dissolution of the body into 1ts component 
parts, each of which λύεται Though διαλυομένου is only read by F, 
it is supported by B’s δυομένου against the simply λυομένον of the 
other MSS., and I follow Giussani in adopting it. 

10. κινεῖται. There 1s great probability in Brieger’s conjecture, 
adopted by Guussani, that the words ras αὐτὰς κινήσεις have fallen out. 
Cf. Lucr. 1. 569 moventur senstferos motus. Bignone, to obtain the 
same sense, would read κινήσεις for κινεῖται But the clause will make 
good general sense without it, and on the whole it seems best not to 
‘restore ’. 

§ 66. 1 οὐ γὰρ οἷόν τε νοεῖν . . .- it 18 inconceivable that the soul 
can exist as a sentient being outside the protection of the body. This 
of course paves the way for the essential idea of the Epicurean philo- 
sophy that the soul 15 mortal. 

αὐτὸ. a rough reference to 7 ψυχή. Seeing the many changes from 
feminine to neUter in this passage, 1t may probably be retained: 
Usener’s alteration to τὸ going with αἰσθανόμενον 15 of course easy, 
but unnecessary. 

2. (ὄν), which Usener suggests in his note, is badly needed to com- 
plete the sense and may easily have fallen out before ἐν. 

συστήματι, ‘organism’. 1. 6. the ἄθροισμα of soul and body—another 
word with an Anstotelian flavour. 

4. ἐν οἷς Usener suggests ἐν οἵοις, but it 1s not really necessary. 

At the end of this section there is an interesting scholium in the 
MSS (see crit. app.). 

This supplements the brief account of the letter in several important 
respects: (4) the shape and nature of the soul-atoms ; (4) the division 
between the ‘vital principle’ (τὸ ἄλογον) distributed over the body and 
the ‘mind’ (τὸ λογικόν), situated, as Epicurus thought, in the breast ; 
(c) the origin of sleep (cf. Lucr. iv. 907 ff.), It 1s also a conclusive 
proof agamst Brieger’s view that the present section deals with τὸ 
λογικόν only. 

(4) In the last section of this chapter Epicurus, having established 
his own view, proceeds to refute the popular belief that the soul is an 
incorporeal existence. The only incorporeal existence, he argues, 


COMMENTARY. ξὲ 65-67 233 


which can be conceived of as existing independently (1.6. not as a 
quality or relation or accident of some corporeal entity) is the void, 
Now the void, as st cannot touch or be touched, cannot act or be acted 
on by anything else. The soul then, which manifestly does act and 1s 
acted on, cannot be in nature hke the void, cannot therefore be an 
independent incorporeal existence. It must be tangible and therefore 
corporeal. 

The general sense of the passage 15 clear, but it has considerable 
difficulties in detail, which have been passed over rather summarily by 
the editors. Guiussani, for instance, remarks that it 15 not even neces- 
sary to translate the section. 

§ 67. 2 προσκατανοεῖν, ‘to obtain a clear mental vision of this in 
addition to what we have already seen’. The MSS have ὅτι τὸ 
ἀσώματον λέγει γὰρ κατὰ τὴν πλείστην ὁμιλίαν τοῦ ὀνόματος ἐπὶ τοῦ 
καθ᾽ ἑαυτὸ νοηθέντος dv Three lines of correction are posstble, none 
of which 1s completely satisfactory (1) Usener noting that λέγει γάρ 
18 the regular formula of introduction for a scholum, would remove 
λέγει yap κατὰ τὴν πλείστην ὁμελίαν from the text as a gloss. 
He then writes 6 τι τὸ ἀσώματον, sc. ἐστι, ‘what the incorporeal 
1s’, and takes τοῦ ὀνόματος ἐπὶ τοῦ καθ᾽ ἑαυτὸ vonOévros dv as ἃ 
genitive absolute, and in this 15 followed by Giussam, but neither of 
them gives a hint how the words should be translated- presumably 
‘if the name were to be thought of in reference to the independent 
existence’, But (2) the ὧν is unnecessary, (δ) the next sentence shows 
clearly that rot καθ᾽ ἑαυτὸ νοηθέντος must be taken together. More- 
over, as against Usener’s view in general, the usual form of Epicurus’ 
introduction of new topics demands ὅτι not ὅ τι, and, though λέγει γάρ 
often introduces schoha, the note ‘he 1s speaking in the ordinary 
acceptance of words’ would be a very strange one. 

(2) We may then assume that ὅτι 15 mght. Gniussam: then follows 
the suggestion of Lortzing, who adds after ἀσώματον (od δεῖ κατηγο- 
ρεῖν τῆς ψυχῆς)» ‘that we must not predicate incorporeality of the soul’. 
But there 1s no warrant for such an insertion, and the whole run of 
the section 1s against it. Epicurus speaks first of the incorporeal in 
general, and only apples the idea to the ψυχή in |. 7. Moreover it 
would necessitate καθ᾽ ἑαυτὸ γάρ (not δέ) in the next sentence. 

(3) Far better is the suggestion of Bignone, who retains ὅτι and 
κατὰ τὴν πλείστην ὁμιλίαν (with τοῦ ὀνόματος) and emends λέγει γάρ 
to λέγεται : ‘that the ncorporeal 1s apphed χη the general acceptation 
of the term to that which can be thought of independently’. I have 
with some hesitation followed him. The sense is far better, but 
(2) λέγεται for λέγει γάρ 1s not very probable (nor 1s von der Muehll!’s 
λέγομεν, which would give the same sense), (ὁ) the use of ὁμιλία in 
this sense is unparalleled in classical Greek, and (c) one would expect 
the conclusion to be ‘that which can be thought of independently as 
such’, 1.e. as incorporeal. For κατὰ τὴν πλείστην ὁμιλίαν compare 
§ 70. 3 κατὰ τὴν πλείστην φοράν. 


234 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


§- τὸ δὲ κενὸν... The void cannot act or be acted on because its 
only property is mtangibility (c/acéus, Lucr. i. 454), and for all forms 
of action or suffering touch 18 a necessity. 

6. xlvnow ... παρέχεται : cf. ὃ 40. 

7. ὥσθ᾽ οἱ λέγοντες... .: for the application of the idea to the soul 
compare Lucretius 1. 161-7, where the poet very clearly brings out the 
necessity of touch for action, which is rather implied in the present 
text. 

8. οὔτε πάσχειν. Usener suggests in his notes that we should alter 
to οὐδέ, But the assumption of the first οὔτε of a pair 15 fairly common 
in Greek at all periods. 

9. διαλαμβάνεται. The MSS agree here upon διαλαμβάνει, which 
will not make sense Usener boldly alters to συμβαίνει, which 15 of 
course perfectly easy, and he 1s tacitly followed by Giussam. But the 
alteration is very serious. In ὃ 69 im defining the nature of συμβεβη- 
κότα Epicurus speaks of them as ἐπιβολὰς ἔχοντα ἰδίας... καὶ διαλήψεις, 
sc they can be perceived independently and distinguished. On the 
strength of that statement I suggest that διαλαμβάνεται is the nght 
reading here: the occurrences of ‘both action and suffering are 
separately perceived in reference to the soul’, 1.e we are aware of 
both and distinguish between them Though the sense 15 a little 
difficult, it 1s I think possible, and the change 15 not so unwarrantable 
as Usener’s. Bignone suggests in the same sense διαλαμβάνεις, which 
is palaeographically easier, but the introduction of the second person 
is awkward: there would be less objection to von der Muehll’s pro- 
posed διαλαμβάνομεν. 

10, τὰ συμπτώματα : action and suffering are, of course, in Epicurus’ 
technical sense ‘ accidents’, cf § 70. 

§ 68. 1. ταῦτα οὖν πάντα =. .: the conclusion of the section: these 
general formulae will, by constant reference to the facts of internal 
and external sensation, give sufficient ground for the comprehension 
of the details. 

διαλογίσματα, ‘results of reasoning’, 1.e results of ἐπιβολαὶ τῆς 
διανοίας as opposed to mere προσδοξαζόμενα from sensation: cf 
§ 62 jin. 

2 (rd) is a necessary insertion of Usener’s. 

3. τῶν ἐν ἀρχῇ ῥηθέντων : sc. in §§ 37 and 38 as to the principles of 
procedure. 

ἱκανῶς must go with ἐμπεριειλημμένα, not, as Giussam: apparently 
takes it, with xardwerat. ‘He will see the investigations of reason 
sufficiently embodied im these general formulae to make him...’. 
For τύπος in this sense cf. § 35. 

4. (καὶ τῶν: again a necessary addition, and once more a confusion 
between καί and κατά, this time taking the form of ‘ haplography ’. 


COMMENTARY. § 67-68 235 


VI. ‘Propzrtrizs’ anp ‘ AccIDENTS’. 


Epicurus passes, with a more obvious lnk of connexion than usual 
after his discussion of τὸ ἀσώματον, to consider another class of things 
which might be regarded as ἀσώματα, namely qualities. Of these, 
including time, he treats in the next four sections (δὲ 68-73) the texts 
difficult, and the general theory has been much discussed by the com- 
mentators, He divides qualites into συμβεβηκότα and συμπτώματα. 
We may roughly render these words by ‘ properties’ and ‘accidents’, 
as Lucretius does by the corresponding terms in general use in Latin, 
conuncta and evenia (1. 449, 450), but we must attempt to get more 
closely at the underlying ideas. 

(1) Properties. In the first section (to ὃ 69 fiz) Epicurus deals 
with συμβεβηκότα : these he regards as the qualities, which are essential 
and anseparable physical constituents (though not of course material 
parts) of a corporeal existence. It 1s these qualities which are imme- 
diately perceptible by the senses, and the perception of a body 1s the 
aggregate perception of its properties. To the συμβεβηκότα then it 
owes its continued existence as body, and if any of them were to be 
removed from it, it would mean the break-up of its physical existence : 
cf. Lucr. i. 451-452 (a very careful statement) . 


coniunctum est id quod nusquam sine permitiah 
discidio potis est seiungi seque gregari. 


Smuarly, no συμβεβηκός can exist by itself apart fiom the aggregate 
body, which with other συμβεβηκότα it constitutes: but with them 1t 
has a corporeal existence as a constituent part of a σῶμα 

Much of the eriticism which has been brought against Epicurus’ 
theory of συμβεβηκότα, especially by Brieger and Munro (on Lucr 1 
449 ff.), takes the line of charging him with inconsistency. ‘They argue 
that he has no definite line of cleavage between συμβεβηκότα and συμ- 
πτώματα, that, forinstance, he sometimes classes colour asa συμβεβηκός, 
sometimes as a σύμπτωμα. Griussans, who has dealt carefully with this 
criticism (pp. 33-37), has, I think, completely absolved Epicurus from 
the charge. He points out that the termsare not absolute but relative, 
that what 18 a συμβεβηκός of one thing 1s the σύμπτωμα of another, 
or even of the same thing looked at from a different point of view. 
‘ Slavery ’, for instance, which Lucretius (1. 455) takes as an example 
of an eventum (σύμπτωμα), 15 an eventum of ‘man’, but a συμβεβηκός 
of ‘slave *. ‘Colour’ agai, to deal with the example of the critics, is 
ἃ σύμπτωμα of body, because in the dark a body has not colour, yet 
its physical existence is in no way impaired; but it 15 a συμβεβηκός 
of an δρατόν, for nothing can be seen except as coloured. It 1s strange 
that when Epicurus at the outset had, as we shall see, carefully guarded 
against this misconception, he should have been attacked on this very 
ground. Bignone, who would defend Epicurus on the same lines, 


236 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


seems tO me to go too far in regarding συμβεβηκός and σύμπτωμα not 
as technical terms at all, but almost interchangeable in their applica- 
tion: see note on ὡσανεὶ συμβεβηκότα,] 7. 

The three main points then to be remembered are (1) the essen- 
tially material conception of the συμβεβηκότα as physical constituents 
of body, (2) their immediate relation to the senses, (3) the impossi- 
bility of their existence except im relation to ‘things’. Epicurus is 
throughout arguing both against the Platonic conception of the ‘ideas’ 
and against the Stoic view that quahties were in themselves σώματα. 

6. τὰ χρώματα: we need not then be surprised at the presence 
of ‘colours’ in this list. The other qualities enumerated are the 
properties of all bodies (πᾶσιν below), ‘ colours’ belong to τοῖς ὁρατοῖς, 
which Epicurus has scrupulously added. Similarly sound and smell 
would be qualities belonging to bodies as recognizable (γνωστοῖς) by 
other senses. 

7. ὡσανεὶ συμβεβηκότα. The MSS have ὡς ἂν εἰς αὐτὰ βεβηκότα, of 
which the emendation attributed by Casaubon to Galesius has been 
almost universally adopted, ‘as though they were the concomitant 
properties’. Bignone, however, believing συμβεβηκότα to be a general 
term and not sufficiently explicit in itself, prefers ὡς ἂν det συμβεβηκότα, 
‘as though permanent concomitants ’, distinguished from the occasional 
concomitants which Epicurus usually describes'as συμπτώματα. If, 
however, we follow Grussan 1n his explanation of the relative character 
of the terms συμβεβηκός and σύμπτωμα (see the general note at the 
beginning of the section), this 1s unnecessary, as συμβεβηκότα in itself 
conveys the idea of permanence, and ὡς ἂν dei συμβεβηκότα sounds 
an unnatural form of expression 

8. ἢ πᾶσιν ἢ rots ὁρατοῖς of the examples given by Epicurus above 
σχῆμα μέγεθος and βάρος are συμβεβηκότα of πάντα (all corporeal 
things) and χρώματο of τὰ ὁρατά 

κατὰ τὴν αἴσϑησιν αὐτῶν γνωστοῖς, ‘ recognizable by the sensation of 
these qualities’, 1.e. all concrete bodies are recognized by the percep- 
tion of their qualities: shape, size, and weight apply to all, and beyond 
this some may be known by therr colour through sight, others through 
their taste or smell. This is the reading of the third hand in P and 
seems the best solution The MSS. however all have αὐτοῖς γνωστοῖς, 
and this would, I think, just construe, ‘recognizable for what they are 
by perception’, 1,.e ifwe go into a dark room and smell a certain 
smell we recognize the object for what it 1s,a rose There is certainly 
no need to follow Usener in the drastic emendation σώματος γνωστά, 
‘the συμβεβηκότα which are recognizable tn the perception of the 
whole body ’, and it 1s unfortunate that much of Giussani’s argument 
(pp. 36 ff.) should be based upon it. 

9. οὔθ᾽ ὡς καθ᾽ ἑαυτάς εἰσι φύσεις the properties are not ‘ physical 
existences by themselves ’,1.e¢ independent of other physical existences. 
He 1s thinking here specially of the Platonic conception of the 
‘ideas’. 


COMMENTARY. § 68-69 237 


10. οὗ γὰρ δυνατὸν. . : the usual Epicurean test. we cannot 
‘yisuahze’ shape or weight, &c., existing by itself apart from a body 
of which 3t is a property. 

§ 69. 1. οὔτε ὅλως ὡς οὐκ εἰσίν, ‘nor can we gay that they do not 
exist at all’, a seemingly rather futile addition, but not so, when we 
remember that to Epicurus existence, except in the case of the void, 
means corporeal existence. He has probably in mind here the 
sceptical attitude of Democritus 

2 οὔθ᾽ ὡς ἕτερ᾽ ἄττα... ἀσώματα : they are not incorporeal exis- 
tences, subsisting as accompanments of body: we have seen (§ 67) 
that the only independent incorporeal existence 1s the void: it might 
be supposed that qualities were independent or relative incorporeal 
existences (practically the theory of Aristotle). But this Epicurus 
cannot accept because they are perceptible to the senses. 

οὔθ᾽ ὡς μόρια τούτου ΠΟΙ again are they separable parts of the 
body : something into which it might be physically divided up hke 
the ὄγκοι mentioned below, I. 5. The argument here 1s directed 
against the Stoics, who spoke of properties and accidents alike as 
σώματα. 

3. καθόλου : the body “τη its entirety’ 1s constituted of an aggregate 
of qualities: there 1s no part of τὸ of which this 15 not true: it owes 
its existence as a unity and as a ‘whole’ to its constituent properties, 

(éx) τούτων " a necessary msertion made by Meibom 

4. ἀίδιον, ‘permanent’, lit ‘everlastmg’, not, of course, with the 
imphcation that body 1s eternal, but only that, so long as it exists, its 
existence is continuously and always bound up with its constituent 
properties, 

οὐχ οἷον δ᾽ εἶναι (ex) συμπεφορημένων, ‘yet not such as to owe its 
existence to things that have been brought together to form it’. The 
testimony of the MSS. 1s overwhelmingly in favour of συμπεφορημένων 
and ἐκ must be inserted as above before τούτων. Usener adopts 
συμπεφορημένον from F, but (wz) the parallel of (éx) τούτων above 15 
strongly against this, (4) the compound body could not be said to be 
συμπεφορημένον, but only the particles which composed it (compare 
συμφόρησιν δὲ ἐκ τούτων κίνησιν ἐχόντων .. ., ὃ 59. 10) 

5. ὥσπερ ὅταν... The material parts of a body, the atoms and the 
larger molecules, are of course ‘brought together’ to form the com- 
pound body: with the properties 11 1s not so: they are physical con- 
stituents, but not material parts. 

ὄγκων. in a general sense ‘the parts’, great or small, of which 
a body may be composed, subsequently subdivided into (4) τῶν πρώτων 

μεγεθῶν : the ὄγκων in the technical sense, ‘the first parts’ or ‘ mole- 
cules’, the mznzma of sensation (cf §§ 57, 58), or (4) τῶν τοῦ ὅλου 
μεγεθῶν τοῦδε τινὸς ἐλαττόνων, larger ‘parts’ of the whole body, which 
are still fractions of 1t. ἢ 

6. μεγεθῶν: the MSS. have μεγεθῶν, which may be kept (so 
Bignone): both the order of words and the expression are a litte 


238 I. ΠΡΟΣ HPOAOTON 


awkward and Schneider's μερῶν would make it much easier, but 
there seems no necessity for adopting 3t. 

7. τοῦδε τινὸς ἐλαττόνων, ‘smaller than the body, whatever it is’, the 
idiomatic use of τις (cf. Soph. Amt. 252 ἄσημος otpydrys τις ἦν). 

8. ἐπιβολὰς... ἔχοντα ἰδίας, ‘they have their own occasions of per- 
ception ’, ἐπιβολάς here τῶν αἰσθητηρίων (cf. ὃ 50 and notes) 1.6. they 
are capable of being looked at individually ; we can pay attention to the 
colour of a thing apart from its weight or its size. Bignone translates 
‘intuitions ’, but here it 1s probably not used in the technical sense of 
ἐπιβολὰς τῆς διανοίας. 

ο. καὶ διαλήψεις, ‘and they have their distinctions’: we can make 
a distinction between the various properties ; size, weight, &c. 

συμπαρακολουθοῦντος δὲ τοῦ ἀθρόου : a limitation of the last 
clause, we can ‘look at’ or ‘pay attention to’ the colour of a body, 
apart from its weight or size, but only so long as the whole body is 
there too: it 1s not to be supposed that we could ‘ abstract’ the colour 
and look at it. 

10 ἀποσχιζομένου.. εἰληφότος. Usener has again done violence 
to the text and meaning by altering both these participles to the neuter 
plural nom. " ‘if the properties are never separated from the whole, 
but thanks to the conception of the whole body acquire predication’ 
(so Bignone). 1. 6. the properties are predicable owing to their share 
in the complete comprehension of the body, constituted by the aggre- 
gate of qualities. This 15 quite good sense and not at all inconsistent 
with Epicurean doctrine, but it 1s an unnecessary change. The 
genitives need not be altered. ‘the properties have their own ἐπιβολαί 
and διαλήψεις, provided the aggregate is always with them and is never 
torn from them, but derives its predication as body from the aggregate 
comprehension of the properties’. 1. 6. we call a thing body, because 
we are aware of size, shape, weight, &c., in combmation Again, it 1s 
unfortunate that much of Guussani’s elucidation should be built up on 
Usener’s perversion of the text. 

(2) ὃ 70. Acczdents, Epicurus’ conception of ‘accidents’ 1s rather 
easier than that of ‘ properties’. The ‘ accident in just the same way is 
not an independent corporeal existence, nor 1s it incorporeal, but 
has corporeal existence only in connexion with the body to which 
it 18 attached. But it differs from the property in that it 1 not a 
necessary physical constituent of body, but may or may not attach 
to it at any given time, and does not by its presence or absence 
alter the essential nature of the body. Lucretius (i. 456-458) has 
again put it clearly: 

cetera quorum 
adventu manet incolumis natura abituque, 
haec soliti sumus, ut par est, eventa vocare. 


Thus Socrates remains Socrates, whether he 1s free or slave, good 
or bad, speaking or being spoken to. Secondly, just as the συμβεβη- 
κότα are immediately perceptible in sensation ἐπιβολὰς ἔχοντα, 80 the 


COMMENTARY. §& 69-70 239 


συμπτώματα are an inference from sensation (κατ᾽ ἐπιβολάς τινας). 
Roughly then the συμπτώματα are ‘contingencies’ or ‘accidents’, and 
under them we may class ‘ secondary’ qualities, states, actions, and 
occurrences, but we Must again remember that the term 1s not abso- 
jute, but relative to the body with which it 1s connected and to the 
point of view from which it 1s considered - colour 1s a σύμπτωμα of 
body, but a συμβεβηκός of τὸ ὁρατόν. 

The repetition in this section is almost more noticeable than in the 
last—a sure sign that Epicurus is dealing with a matter of :mpor- 
tance. 

§ 70. 1. καὶ οὐκ ἀίδιον... ἀσώματα. There 15 serious corruption 
here, but editors are not agreed as to where τὲ lies) The MSS have 
καὶ οὐκ ἀΐδιον παρακολουθεῖν (παρακολουθεῖ B) οὔτ᾽ ἐν τοῖς ἀοράτοις Kai 
οὔτε ἀσώματα 

(1) Usener keeps παρακολουθεῖν and marks ἃ Jacuna after it, adding 
in his note “συμπτώματα scriptor defimt’. This is hardly expheit 
enough, and his change just after of καί to ἔσται is not convincing, a 
future 1s not wanted. Guussam follows Usener’s text and 15 content to 
leave the lacuna vague. ἡ 

(2) Bignone marks no lacuna but reads παρακολουθεῖ ἅ γ᾽ (AT 
corrupted to N) οὔτ᾽ ἐν τοῖς ἀοράτοις κζαὶ ἀναισθήτοις δοξαστέον elv)at 
οὔτε ἀσώματα. ‘Theie frequently occur to bodies without permanently 
belonging to them contingencies which we must not suppose to be 
among things invisible and imperceptible nor incorporeal’. But the 
emendation ἅ γ᾽ 1s not very probable, and the supplement 1s τῇ itself 
gratuitous and does not cover what Epicurus would have been likely 
to say. 

(3) If we take the words as they stand in the MSS (a) the infim- 
tive παρακολουθεῖν may well have been explained by something 1n the 
lacuna, if it is necessary to suppose one. (4) οὔτ᾽ ἐν τοῖς ἀοράτοις εἶναι 
οὔτε ἀσώματα 1s clearly a reference to the two Epicurean categories of 
real existence, the atoms (ἄδηλα or ἀόρατα) and the void (ἀσώματον). The 
συμπτώματα, he says, do not come under either of these two heads. 
(c) Would Epicurus have been content to deny these two forms of 
existence to the συμπτώματα or would he have added more? Clearly, 
I think, there must have been a reference to the existence of com- 
pound things (τὸ ὅλον) as above, and further he would most hkely have 
denied, as he did of the συμβεβηκότα, the idea that they did not exist 
at all. (d) εἶναι 1s a more probable restoration of καί than ἔσται. 
I therefore read the passage as τῇ the text, and should suppose that it 
originally ran something hke καὶ μὴν καὶ τοῖς σώμασι συμπίπτει πολ- 
λάκις καὶ οὐκ ἀίδιον παρακολουθεῖν (φαένεται οἷα οὔτε ὅλως ὡς οὐκ ἐστὶ 
δοξαστεόν, οὔτε τὴν τοῦ ὅλου φύσιν ἔχειν) οὔτ᾽ ἐν τοῖς ἀοράτοις εἶναι οὔτε 
ἀσώματα 

3: κατὰ τὴν πλείστην φοράν, ‘ according to common usage": compare 
§ 67. 2 κατὰ τὴν πλείστην ὁμιλίαν, and remember that at the beginning 
of the letter Epicurus laid down the principle that ordinary words were 


240 1, ΠΡῸΣ ΗΡΟΔΟΤΟΝ 


to be used in their ordinary sense. Lucretius (i. 458) faithfully repro- 
duces this point : 


haec solui sumus, u/ par est, eventa vocare. 


4. οὔτε Thy τοῦ ὅλου φύσιν ἔχειν ; see above ὃ 68. 9: like the συμβε- 
βηκότα they are not mdependent corporeal existences. 

5. ὃ συλλαβόντες κατὰ τὸ ἀθρόον σῶμα προσαγορεύομεν, ‘which we 
call body, comprehending it altogether in the aggregate’, sc. of its 
properties , see the last clause of the last section 

6. οὔτε τὴν τῶν ἀίδιον παρακολουθούντων here the σύμπτωμα differs 
from the συμβεβηκός. it 1s not a permanent and essential constituent 
of body. 

ὧν ἄνευ σῶμα οὐ δυνατὸν νοεῖσθαι: Giussani rightly points out 
(p. 30, note) that this must not be taken to mean ‘ without which it is 
impossible to conceive body as such’, for in that case size, shape, and 
weight would be the only three συμβεβηκότα, but 1t must mean ‘a 
body ’, ‘any given body’, thought of enher as body simply, or as an 
ὁρατόν, ἀκουστόν, &C. 

4. κατ᾽ ἐπιβολὰς δ᾽ ἄν τινας the συμβεβηκότα are directly perceived 
in acts of apprehension, but the συμπτώματα only in relation to such 
actS: e.g. we see a man in a certain attitude, &c , and thus know that 
he is writing, ἐπιβολαί is again used here in the untechnical sense of 
‘acts of apprehension’ on the part of the senses. 

παρακολουθοῦντος τοῦ ἀθρόου. the same important provision as in the 
case of the συμβεβηκότα. we cannot infer an ‘accident’ any more 
than we can perceive a property apart from the body to which it 
happens. 

8. προσαγορευθείη, ἀλλ᾽ Ste δήποτε. . . θεωρεῖται. Usener again 
supposes a lacuna after προσαγορευθείη and changes ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε to ἀλλ᾽ 
ὅτῳ, takmg the clause presumably to have run, ‘we can apply the 
name συμπτώματα to them not as independent existences but in con-° 
nexion with whatever body they are seen to be happening to on each 
occasion’. Bignone has however shown that if the MS. text ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε 
is retained, it 15 unnecessary to suppose any loss: ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε. . . then 
becomes a limiting clause, ‘we can call them συμπτώματα but only at 
the moment when each 1s seen to be happening. We may notice, as 
showing the interchangeability of his terminology, that Epicurus here 
uses συμβαίνοντα of the cvzrrwapata—but there 1s an obvious difference 
of meaning between the present and the perfect. 

§ 71. 2. ἀΐδιον : both here and in the several successive places where 
it occurs some or all of the MSS. have corrupted ἀΐδιον into ἀιδίων 
owing to the surrounding genitives. 

3: ταύτην τὴν évapyelay, ‘the immediate vision’, i.e. the perception 
of the συμπτώματα as part of the direct data of sense. there 1s in the 
MSS. the usual corruption to ἐνεργείαν. 


4. ὅτι, ‘because’: the following clause gives the reasons which might 


COMMENTARY. § 70-72 λάι 


lead us to regard the συμπτώματα as not belonging to the real. Hicks 
translates ‘this clear evidence /ha/’, but (a) this 1s an unusual con- 
struction in Epicurus, (4) 1t involves a tautology in the next sentence, 
which he avonds by translating καθ᾽ αὑτά, ‘ permanent existences’, which 
is not justifiable. The συμπτώματα are themselves an ἐναργεία, and 
we must not either deny them reality or think of them as independent 
existences 

The words ὃ δὴ καὶ σῶμα προσαγορεύομεν Which occur in the MSS, 
after συμβαίνει are nghtly excluded by Usener as a gloss derived from 
several similar expressions in these sections. They are, however, 
retained by von der Muehll. 

ἡ. GAN ὅπερ καὶ φαίνεται we must accept as truth just what 1s 
presented to us in sensation—an emphatic declaration of the main 
Epicurean position, of which this notion of the συμπτώματα is the 
direct ‘outcome. 

8. πάνί(τα καγτὰ τὰ σώματα (Bignone) 1s a better correction of the 
meaningless πάντα τὰ σώματα of the MSS than Usener’s πάντα σώματος 
or von der Muehll’s πάντα τὰ τοιαῦτα 

9. τάγμα, ‘a position in the ranks’ of independent existences. a 
rather unusual word for Epicurus 

ἀλλ᾽ ὃν τρόπον... θεωρεῖται the construction breaks off into a 
main clause. Such abruptness 1s not unusual with Eprcurus, and αἱ is 
probably unnecessary to adopt either Bignone’s suggestion ἀλλ᾽ (av) 
ὃν τρόπον or Usener’s θεωρεῖσθαι Or θεωρητέον, any of which would 
mend the construction grammatically 

10. ἰδιότητα, ‘peculiar characteristics ’ (propriefas in Latin) 

§ 73. (3) Zhe naiure of time As a kind of appendix to the 
explanation of the συμβεβηκύτα and συμπτώματα, Epicurus deals 
with the special question of the nature of time The general 
idea is clear, but the expression unusually obscure. Time differs 
from everything else in that we cannot have a general concep- 
tion (πρόληψις) of it, .. 6. a visual mental image resulung from 
a number of individual perceptions (see § 37 note) This we have 
of all classes of objects, and of their properties and accidents. 
We have, for instance, a conception of stone, with which is asso- 
ciated hardness and roughness, and we recognize an individual 
stone as such by reference (ἀνάγοντος) to this πρόληψις. But we 
have not a general conception (a mental image) of ume, nor again 
1s there anything else hke it to which we might refer it (space was of 
course to Epicurus a real existence and nota relation). What then 
can we say about it? We must refer to the test of our experience, as 
usual: and we then perceive that it 1s something that we associate 
(συμπλέκομεν) with day and night, or again with our internal states, or 
with the external states of motion and rest We decide then on the 
basis of this intuition (ἐνάργημα) without waiting for further discussion 
that tme is a special kind of ‘ accident’ associated with these states, 
&c., that are themselves accidents of body. In fact, time is not either a 


2078 Q 


242 i, ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


συμβεβηκός OF ἃ σύμπτωμα of concrete things, but as Sextus Empiricus 
tells us that Epicurus stated (adv. A/ath. x. 219) time 18 a σύμπτωμα 
συμπτωμάτων. The conclusion is in absolute harmony with the Epicu- 
rean principles, and the whole idea is well brought out by Lucretius 
1. 459-463 : 

tempus item per se non est, sed rebus ab ipsis 

consequitur sensus, transactum quid sit in aevo, 

tum quae res instet, quid porro deinde sequatur. 

nec per se quemquam tempus sentire fatendumst 

semotum ab rerum motu placidaque quiete. 


1. προσκατανοῆσαι. used of an additional point connected with what 
has preceded , cf. ὃ 67 znzé. 

2. οὐ ζητητέον, ‘we must not look to find it’. When we use the 
word ‘time’ there does not come up in our minds any mental picture 
of an object with which we associate tt, as there does, for instance, 1f 
we think of weight or redness 

τὰ λοιπά 15 then ‘all other συμβεβηκότα and συμπτώματα᾽, which, as 
has been seen in the last two sections, are invariably connected with 
an ἀθρόον. 

ἂν ὑποκειμένῳ, ‘in an object’. The ὑποκείμενον is that which ‘lies 
beneath ’, i.e the actual thing, which 1s the cause of sensation and 
from which the εἴδωλα, ὅδε, which stir our senses are derived 

4. προλήψεις, ‘concepts ’, It. ‘anticrpations’, the ‘composite photo- 
graphs’ formed in our mind by the combination of many idividual 
impressions, by which we identify fresh objects of sensation. They 
are of course with the αἰσθήσεις and the πάθη (and possibly the 
ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας) the κριτήρια Of truth compare K. A. xxiv. We 
may notice that the idea is so definitely that of mental visualization 
that Epicurus actually uses the participle βλεπομένας, ‘ which are seen’: 
it 18 true, however, that 1t 1s not his usual word for the actua! sensation 
of sight, though τὸ comes near it in ὃ 48 ro 

αὐτὸ τὸ évdpynpa, ‘the actual intuitron’ or ‘sense impression ’ which 
we get of time. The word 1s usually used by Epicurus of the ‘ clear 
vision’ of an object which we get on the nearer view, but here in a 
shghtly extended sense of the ‘immediate perception’ which we have 
of time without any associations of theory or analysis. This we must 
examine (ἀναλογιστέον) to see what it really is and how τὸ arises 

5. συγγενικῶς τοῦτο ἐπιφέροντας, The MSS. have περιφέροντες, 
which it is not easy to make sense of, and Usener’s emendatron to 
ἐπιφέροντες has been generally accepted. This can only be construed 
grammatically with ἀναφωνοῦμεν, * we speak of a short time or a long 
time, applying this (sc. the idea of length or brevity) as we do to other 
things’, 1.e. using for duration the conception of measure, which we 
usually apply to spatial relations. This is not very satisfactory, and 
Bignone 1s probably right in takmg the words with ἀναλογιστέον, only 
if so, it 18 essential to emend to the acc. ἐπιφέροντας. He then trans- 


COMMENTARY. §& 72-73 243 


lates ‘by keeping before us the specific determinate character of these 
modes of speaking’. I do not see how this 1s to be extracted from 
the Greek, and would rather take it to mean ‘ by applying our intuition 
to time as we do to other things ’, i.e just as in other cases we use the 
immediate data of sense to determine the nature of the thing percetved, 
so here we must use our direct intuition to determine the nature of 
time, and if we do so, we find, as he goes on to say, that it 1s really 
a σύμπτωμα associated with vanious συμπτώματα of things. But I feel 
very doubtful about the words. 

6. διαλέκτους, ‘expressions’, almost ‘descriptions’ of tme. Hicks 
notes that time had, for stance, been defined as ‘ number of motion’ 
or ‘measure of motion’. 

κατ᾽ αὐτοῦ : both times the phrase occurs the majority of the 
MSS. have καθ᾽ αὑτοῦ, a mere error due to the occurrence of similar 
phrases in the previous sections 

8. οὔτε ἄλλο τι... We cannot predicate anything else about time " 
we cannot assign it to any special category of existences, for there 15 
nothing else which 1s similar to it in nature. it 1s su generis. He 
must of course here be thinking of some special efforts to class time 
with something else, but it 1s not clear what. 

9. ἔχον, MSS ἔχοντος, a mistake due either to the neighbourhood 
of κατ᾽ αὐτοῦ or possibly to a misunderstanding. Von der Muehll 
retains ἔχοντος, but in what sense 15 not clear. 

ἰδιώματι, ‘a pecuhar’ or ‘unique existence’; cf. ἰδιότητα, § 71. To. 

IO συμπλέκομεν, ‘associate it’, in our ordinary thought or ways of 
speech 

ΤΙ ἐπιλογιστέον, ‘we must turn our thoughts to it’, ‘ reflect on it’, 
m a quite general sense 50 ἐπιλογισμοῦ, § 73. 2. 

§ 78 1. ἀποδείξεως, ‘logical proof’ it 1s not a matter for reasoning, 
but simply of careful attention to our expenence 

2. Tats ἡμέραις καὶ ταῖς νυξὶ συμπλέκομεν. Our normal association 
of time is with the succession of day and might. Now they are them- 
selves συμπτώματα of the earth, or the sky, or the sun, or generally of 
‘our world’ time then 1s ἃ σύμπτωμα of them, or a σύμπτωμα cup- 
πτωμάτων 

4 τοῖς πάθεσι καὶ ταῖς ἀπαθείαις. another association of time is with 
our own feelings or absence of feelings (e.g 1n sleep), because we per- 
ceive these states as Jasting for a longer or shorter penod: so, too, 
with motion and rest 

5. ἴδιόν τι σύμπτωμα, ‘a special kind of accident’: the duration of 
States, &c., 1s an eventum which 15 suz generis. 

πάλιν" 1.6. in the case of πάθεσι, &c., ‘again’, just as in the case 
of day and mght. Usener, looking in this clause for a summary of the 
whole section, reads πάντα for πάλιν, referring ταῦτα πάντα to the whole 
hist ἡμέραις καὶ νυξί as well as those mentioned τη the second clause. 
But this is rewriting, and in fact the section 1s left without any sum- 
ming up. 

Q2 é 


244 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


At the end of the section there 1s a schohum: ‘this he says also is 
the second book of the Περὶ φύσεως and in the Greater Epitome’. 


VII. Worxps, THEIR CreEaTIon, Destruction, SHAPES, 
AND CONTENTS. 


Eprcurus passes with a perfectly abrupt transition to the considera- 
tion of the various worlds contained m the universe. He had already 
dealt with this question in ὃ 45, and shown that there 15 an infinite 
number of worlds: here he deals with their creation, their ultimate 
destruction, their shapes, and their contents. It 1s possible that one or 
other of the sections has been misplaced, and that they ought to be 
brought together, but the letter 1s so disjointed that to secure a logical 
order in τὸ would require a very great readjustment, and it is better to 
leave the paragraphs where they are. The subject 1s dealt with again 
in the letter to Pythocles (§§ 88 ff.) and 1s treated fully in the fifth 
book of Lucretius 

The short paragraph, in which there 1s one considerable lacuna, 
divides itself into three sections : 

(1) In the first section (§ 72) Epicurus states that worlds were 
created out of the infinite by the aggregation of certain nucle1 
(συστροφαί), out of which worlds ‘separated out’, 1e the various parts 
of them went to their respective places, earth sinking down to the 
centre, water lying above it, and the lhghter and more fiery elements 
rising to form air and the heavenly bodies. Just as they have been 
created, so they will ultimately be dissolved into their component 
atoms, whether ow:ng to external blows or to internal disruption. For 
a fuller and very picturesque description of the process we may com- 
pare Lucr v 432-494, and for the general idea of growth, decay, and 
destruction τ. 1048-1089. 

§ 73 7 τοὺς κόσμους. Epicurus’ conception was of an infinite series 
of worlds in different parts of space, each an ordered system of earth, 
sky, and heavenly bodies. 

πᾶσαν σύγκρισιν πεπερασμένην. ‘every compound organism which has 
a limit’. Epicurus does not of course suggest that there are com- 
pound bodies without limit, but merely points the contrast the Irmited 
comes out of the unlimited. It 1s not, however, quite clear what he 1s 
thinking of here, but probably some aggregation of atoms which was 
not definite enough to be called a κόσμος 

8 τὸ ὁμοιοειδὲς τοῖς θεωρουμένοις πυκνῶς ἔχουσαν - Bignone translates 
‘hke in kind to the things which we constantly see’, but the order of 
words is strongly against this, and πυκνῶς must go with ἔχουσαν, not 
with θεωρουμένοις. It will mean then ‘exhibiting continuously, 
Le. throughout its extension, a Itkeness in appearance to the things we 
see’. The expression 1s ἃ little obscure, and it is possible that Epicurus 
is intending to exclude from his statement the bodies of the gods, 
which, though of atomic structure, were not made ‘like the things 
we see’. 


COMMENTARY. §§ 73-74 245 


10. συστροφῶν : vague masses of matter forced by the aggregation 
of atoms and void, congressus matertai, Lucr αἱ. 1065. There may 
be the added notion that they move round m a whirl (δῖνος), as in the 
old atormc motion. We may compare the modern conception of 
nebulae. 

ἀποκεκριμένων, ‘separated out’, another early cosmogonical notion 
going right back to Anaximander’s ‘ separating out of opposites ’ 

11 καὶ πάλιν διαλύεσθαι πάντα an important point in the Epicurean 
physics: as all worlds (hke all other compound bodies) have a begin- 
ning, so they are all ultymately dissolved compare Lucr v. 235-379 

τὰ pev .. πάσχοντα the main causes of dissolution would be 
external blows, such as the collision with another κόσμος and the 
gradual internal disruption due to the cscape of atoms shooting off 
from the κόσμος into the surrounding void 

18 πάσχοντα" there 1s considerable divergence of reading in the 
MSS. which seems to be due to a blot or erasure, but there 1s httle 
doubt that πάσχοντα 1s right It 1s, however, awkward standing by 
itself, and there ts much to be said for the reading of the second hand 
in II τοῦτο πάσχοντα, Of winch a trace may also be found in BQ’s 
τοῦτο σχύα 

At the end of the section follows an interesting scholhum 566 
cnt app Bignone takes τῶν μερῶν to be the four elements, but 
there seems no justification for this, and it 18 more natural to under- 
stand it of the local physical pats of a world which become dislocated 
afier long mtcinal atomic vibiation The reference in the last clause 
is to the idea set outin Lucr v 534 ff, that the earth 1s sustained m 
its place by a gradual thinning out of its structure underneath, which 
acts at once as a link with the surrounding air and as a kind of 
‘spring-matiress’ Von der Muchll may be mght in retaimng the 
words δῆλον οὖν ws as part of the text, Supposing a lacuna after them. 

§ 74 (2) Shapes of the wilds The worlds are not all of the 
same shape At this point there 1s a Jacuna owing to the intrusion 
of a considerable scholium, see crit app. We may conclude that 
Epricurus stated that worlds were of different shapes, yet not of all 
possible shapes, and then enumerated some of the shapes. 

2 ἔχοντας We can deduce the form of the text which was ousted 
by the schohum There must have been a verb, probably γεγονέναι, 
after νομίζειν, then the second οὔτε clause, probably οὔτε αὖ πᾶν σχῆμα 
ἔχοντας Then possibly a reason for this ‘behef and a statement of the 
shapes that are found among κύσμοι as in the schohast’s quotation 
from the NJIth Book of the Περὲ φύσεως 

(3) Contents of he worlds A strange addition 1s made by Epicurus 
in the idea that other worlds than ours contain animals, plants, &c , such 
as we see here. The section must have begun in the lacuna, and 
Usener has suggested that it ran something as follows. ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ 
πᾶσι τοῖς κόσμοις δεῖ νομίζειν ζῷα καὶ φυτὰ καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ τὰ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν 
θεωρούμενα ἐνεῖναι. 


246 I, ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


οὐδὲ γὰρ ἂν... οὐκ ἂν ἐδυνήθη. Usener has most acutely seen the 
meaning of this sentence, which at first sight might seem the reverse of 
what would be expected. The emphasis hes on καί before οὐκ ἂν 
ἐμπεριελήφθη. ‘No one could prove that in one kind of worlds these 
seeds might have been included (or might not, as chance dictated) ; 
and that in another they could not have been included ’, 1. 6. there are 
two kinds of supposed worlds, one 1n which the inclusion or exclusion 
of such things was, so to say, ‘ optional’ and due to chance, the other 
in which they were excluded, and both kinds are contrasted with our 
world, in which they are included. It 1s Epicurus’ general conception 
of icovouia which makes him decide that such formations are τῇ fact 
impossible. 

3. (ἔν) Is a necessary msertion, and may well have dropped out 
before μέν. 

5. (ra) Is again a necessary insertion ; 1t dropped out after the last 
syllable of πάντα. 

6. At the end of the section the MSS. have the not very illuminat- 
ing schohum ὡσαύτως δὲ καὶ ἐντραφῆναι. τὸν αὐτὸν δὲ τρόπον καὶ ἐπὶ 

ἧς νομιστέον. Won der Muchl! would retain the words from τὸν αὐτὸν 

‘4 supposing them to be the beginning of a section dealing with animal 
and plant hfe. 


VIII. Tue Deveropment or CivirizATION AND THE 
OrIGIN oF LANGUAGE. 


Another rather sudden transition From the consideration of the 
κόσμοι in general Epicurus passes to our earth and the development 
of civihzation among men 

ὃ 75. (1) In the first sentence he announces his general theory 
that suriounding circumstances first compelled men to certain actions 
or that nature gave them an example these actions they subsequently 
developed by deliberate reflection leading to improvements and new 
inventions. The whole idea 15 elaborated at great length and with 
many examples by Lucretius (v 925-1457): we may notice especially 
the passages in which he explains that hghiming taught men the use 
of fire (1091-1104), and the action of the sun the melting and mould- 
ing of metals (124 1~1280) 

1, ὑποληπτέον. We may perhaps notice the less forcible word than 
the usual νομιστέον this is not a matter of ‘faith’, of immediate 
deduction from the main Epicurean principles, but a conjecture as to 
probable occurrence at the same time we may observe the regular 
Epicurean progress from αἴσθησις to λογισμός. 

τὴν φύσιν. not here ‘nature’ in general, but ‘human nature’, and - 
so throughout this section: perhaps ‘their nature’ would more exactly 
represent it. compare phrases like ἡ τῆς ψυχῆς φύσις and Lucretius’ 
usage of nafura in such places as 11. 17 

ἃ. ϑιδαχθῆναί te καὶ ἀναγκασθῆναι the distinction is clear. some 


COMMENTARY. § 74-75 247 


things, e.g. the clothing of their bodies to avoid cold they were com- 
pelled to do. others, like the hghting of fire, they learnt from the 
example of natural phenomena 

3. ὕστερον : καὶ ὕστερον MSS, but it is not easy to make sense of 
καί (perhaps ‘later again’, like the καὶ ἐλάττους below), and we may 
follow Usener in excluding it. 

5. ἐν μὲν τισὶ περιόδοις. ἐλάττους. A corrupt and very difficult 
clause, of which I do not think that the solution has yet been 
discovered. 

(1) Usener emends ἀπὸ τῶν ἀπὸ τοῦ ἀπείρον to ἀποτομὴν ἀπὸ τοῦ ἀπεί- 
pov and then excludes it as a gloss, probably originally part of the scho- 
hum on $74 2—a very arbitrary proceeding, such as Usener has taken 
in other places (cf.§ 62). He then supposes a lacuna which would 
have contamed something hke μείζους λαμβάνειν ἐπιδόσεις, ‘in certain 
epochs and at certain times it made greater progress at others again 
less’. This makes admirable sense, and is ndeed what one would 
expect Epicurus to say, but the text can hardly be treated with such 
violence 

(2) Bignone would retain the words ἀπὸ τῶν ἀπὸ τοῦ ἀπείρου, and 
with great ingenuity compares K. A ΧΙ" τῶν ἄνωθεν ὑπόπτων καθεστώ- 
των καὶ TOV ὑπὸ γῆς Kal ἁπλῶς τῶν ἐν τῷ ἀπείρῳ τὰ ἐν TS ἀπείρῳ, he 
argues, were the chief cause of fear in the carly history of man, and 
one of the main marks of progress would be hberation from them 
He would therefore suppose the sentence to have run ἐν μὲν τισὶ 
περιόδοις καὶ χρόνοις ἀπὸ τῶν ἀπὸ TOD ἀπείρου (φόβων μείζους παρασκευά- 
ἔεσθαι λύσεις), ἐν δὲ τισὶ καὶ ἐλάττους, ‘and that in certain epochs and 
at certain times it provided greater hberation from the fears resulting 
from the infinite, at others again less’. But (1) the suggestion 15 
grammatically improbable: (4) K A. χ τὸ φοβούμενον λύειν shows 
that Epicurus would have written τῶν φόβων λύσεις and not ἀπὸ τῶν 
φύβων, (4) it would surely have been τῶν ἐκ τοῦ ἀπείρου φόβων, 
(ὦ could one speak of a μείζων or ἐλάττων Avors? (2) The early part 
of ths section 1s meant to lead up to the discussion of language, and 
itis improbable that Epicurus would have introduced a reference to 
superstiuous fears which, however important, are irrelevant. 

I think the sense must have been something simple on Usener’s 
lines, but I do not yet see how to deal with the words ἀπὸ τῶν ἀπὸ τοῦ 
ἀπείρου, which seem to be quite genuine. 

(2) The origin of language In the second part of the section 
Epicurus passes to the particular question of the omgin of language. 
His theory :s subtle and carefully worked out and should be noted 
particularly, as later Epicurean tradition, especially as represented in 
Lucretius ἵν. 1028-1090), only imperfectly preserved it. (Giussami’s 
essay, vol. 1, pp. 267-284, 18 very iluminatng and important.) There 
was always a question in antiquity whether language originated φύσει 
or θέσει. Epicurus’ answer is twofold. Approaching the question as 
a problem in the actual history of pnmitive man, he manntains that 


248 i. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


Janguage in its earliest stage was developed φύσει: it was a natural 
emussion of sounds corresponding to emotions and impressions received. 
Later, in the stage that corresponds to that of λογισμός above, it was 
regulated, developed, and extended deliberately (θέσει). Lastly, as 
new things and new ideas were introduced, names were found for 
them partly by natural imitation or suggestion, partly by deliberate 
invention or analogy. His speculation 1s singularly acute and should 
be reckoned among his best contributions to anthropology—a subject 
on which Epicureanism was notably successful in its conjectures. 

1. ἐξ ἀρχῆς μὴ θέσει. closely and emphatically together, “τῇ origin 
names were not deliberately imposed ’. 

8. καθ᾽ ἕκαστα ἔθνη. . φαντάσματα: this curious idea that the 
emotions and impressions of different races were actually different 1s 
a weakness in Epicurus’ theory, but 1s to be accounted for, as we have 
seen, by his conception of the brevity of the whole process 

9. τὸν ἀέρα ἐκπέμπειν. for the physical process of the uttermg Οἱ 
sounds, from which Epicurus derives this very literal expression, cf. 
§§ 52, 53. : 

10, στελλόμενον, ‘formed’, ‘shaped’, ch σχηματίζεσθαι in the 
parallel context, § 53. 

12. εἴη of the MSS may be retained, as it might be on each occa- 
sion, though Usener’s 7 would produce a more normal construction 
afier ὡς ἄν. 

8 76 1. κοινῶς, ‘by common action’, or almost ‘common consent’, 
avery strong expression of the deliberate nature of the process of the 
second stage. 

3. ἀλλήλοις, ἀλλήλαις MSS : a very good correction of Meibom. 

οὐ συνορώμενα πράγματα, ‘things previously unseen’, 1 6. those 
either introduced from foreign tribes or invented for the first time. 
Surely not ‘tried to imtroduce the notion of things not visible’ 
(Hicks) 

5. τοὺς (μὲν) ἀναγκασθέντας ἀναφωνῆσαι, ‘being constrained by 
necessity to utter some of the sounds’. The MSS have τοὺς alone, 
which Usener omits taking ἀναγκασθέντας ἀναφωνῆσαι with the whole 
clause, and assuming that here again ἀνάγκη was always the cause In 
that case it must apply also to the second clause τοὺς δὲ τῷ λογισμῷ 
ἑλομένους, and if so, it would be better, as Giussani points out, to 
adopt Schneider’s conjecture ἑπομένους : there was a necessity even in 
obeying the dictates of reason’ I greatly prefer, however, as does 
Bignone, to follow Schneider here in inserting pév. In the introduc- 
tion of new words at this stage both the causes ἀνάγκη (or φύσις) and 
θέσις work side by side e.g. when a foreign thing was brought in, 
ἀνάγκη would compel the imitation of its foreign name, when a new 
thing was invented, it would be given a new name θέσει. 

6, τοὺς δὲ... ἑλομένους, . οὕτως ἑρμηνεῦσαι: as so often in 
Epicurus (e g. § 71- 9) the construction breaks off into a main clause, 
‘and some names they chose by reasoning and thus expressed their 


COMMENTARY. §§ 75-76 249 


meaning’. Bignone, anxious to preserve the exact parallelism, 
would construct ἑρμηνεῦσαι after αἰτίν this 1s doubtful Greek, 
and it would be better, af strict syntax 1s required, to read (rod) 
οὕτως ἑρμηνεῦσαι but Epicurus’ laxness in these matters makes τὲ 
unnecessary, 

κατὰ Thy πλείστην αἰτίαν : cf κατὰ τὴν πλείστην ὁμιλίαν, ὃ 67. 2, and 
κατὰ τὴν πλείστην φοράν, § 70. 3, ‘In accordance with the usual cause’, 
1.6. the usual method of formation in such cases, se. normally analogy. 
I agree with Giussan: and Bignone that there is no reason to suppose 
with Usener that αἰτίαν is corrupt: the suggestion in his note, darra- 
σίαν, 1S quite unnecessary 


X CeELestrAL PHENOMENA 


Epicurus passes from the earth and its mhabitants to a new 
department of inqury There ts in this letter no full exposition of 
the nature Gr causes of celestial phenomena, as there 1s 1n the letter to 
Pythocles, but only a careful and elaborate precaution against the 
theological view of their creation and government, and a statement of 
the attitude which the true Epicurean should take up and the lnes 
of study which he should pursue 

(1) In the first section (§§ 76, 77) he protests agamst two distinct 
forms of the belief in the divine character of celestial phenomena We 
must not believe either that the motions of the heavenly bodies are 
controlled by any divine being (for that 1s tnconsistent with our behef 
in the untroubled blessedness of the divine naturc), nor again must we 
suppose that the heavenly bodies are themselves divine, for they are 
merely material atomic conglomerations We must be careful not to 
derogate from our idea of the majesty of the divine nature. All 1s, 
on the contrary, due to regular atomic motion proceeding directly 
from the development of the orginal congcries mto a world For 
the general «lea we may compare Lucretius v. 78-go 

8 (καὶ τὴν a necessary addition of Usener’s, vouched for by the 
opening of almost every section of the letter 

ἐν τοῖς μετεώροις" τὰ μετέωρα are for Epicurus celestial phenomena 
in general, tncluding besides the action of the heavenly bodies also the 
phenomena of weather. 

φοράν the normal! course of the heavenly bodies in the sky com- 
pare Ep. αὶ, ὃ 92, and Lucr v 509-533. 

τροπήν. regularly used of the ‘ turning’ of the course of the sun at 
the tropics (tporai) compare Ep n, § 93, and Lucr. v. 614-649 ° 
here also probably of other heavenly bodies as well 

9 ἔκλειψιν the ‘eclipses’ of sun and moon cf Ep, n, ὃ 96, and 
Lucr. v. 751-770. 

ἀνατολὴν καὶ δύσιν cf Ep. u, § 92, and Lucr. v 650-655 

τὰ σύστοιχα τούτοις, ‘ questions in the same category as these ’, such, 
for instance, as the origin of the moon’s hght, the equinoxes, the size 


250 I, ΠΡΟΣ HPOAOTON 


of sun and moon, which are dealt with in the parallel] passages of the 
second Epistle and Lucretius v. 

10, λειτουργοῦντος tivds: the first of the false explanations of popu- 
Jar mythology, that the movements of the heavenly bodies are con- 
trolled by some divine being, who either has ordered them once for all 
or continues to do so. 

11. διατάξαντος. the mayonty of the MSS read the fut. participle 
διατάξοντος, which Usener has placed 1n his text. But the distinction 
must be between the two ideas about the Supreme Being, (1) that 
he continues to control the revolutions, &c., of the heavenly bodies, 
(2) that at the Creation he set them once for all on a course which 
they then pursue automatically We should therefore adopt the aorist 
participle from GHZ 

§ 77. r οὐ γὰρ συμφωνοῦσιν ... the idea of such labours 1s incon- 
sistent with the hfe of tranquillity which we attribute to the gods and 
regard as an essenual in the conception of blessedness: compare 
Κύριαι Δόξαι τ. Lucretius argues in the same way v. 82 ff. 

8. μήτε αὖ πῦρ ἅμα ὄντα συνεστραμμένον .: the second of the false 
explanations, that the heavenly bodies are themselves divine beings, 
who voluntarily take upon themselves these recurrent motions. The 
MSS here show signs of corruption, but there seems no reason for 
abandoning the text to which they point πῦρ ἅμα ὄντα συνεστραμμένον, 
‘as they are only aggregations of fire’, Usener, following up a sug- 
gestion of M. Casaubon, emends very ingeniously to πυρὸς ἀνάμματα 
συνεστραμμένου, ‘rekindlings of fire gathered together ’, in allusion to 
Herachtus’ famous theory of the ἡλίου ἄναμμα, that the sun was 
extinguished every mght and rekindled in the mornmg by a fresh 
gathering of fire ‘This 1s quite gratuitous and indeed improbable, as 
Epicurus did not regard Heraclitus’ theory with much favour and 
15 therefore not likely to have placed 1t here as his only statement 
of the nature of the heavenly bodies. Moreover, συνεστραμμένον is a 
clear reference to the συστροφαί at the creation of the world to which 
he refers below, |. 7 

5. κατὰ βούλησιν, ‘of their deliberate choice ’ 

6. τὸ σέμνωμα. the idea of divine majesty (in perfect tranquillity and 
blessedness) which we attribute to the divine beings. 

κατὰ πάντα ὀνόματα φερόμενα sc not only the titles and epithets 
which we apply to the divine beings, but also in all statements which 
we make about them. Both the ideas stated above are really a 
degradation of the idea of the divine majesty, because they attribute 
πραγματεία to the divine beings. The φερόμενα of the MSS. makes 
quite good sense, and there 1s no need to follow Usener in reading 
φερόμενον with σέμνωμα. 

τὰς τοιαύτας ἐννοίας "1. 6. the conceptions of tranquillity, peace, 
blessedness, absence of care, ἄς, which we attribute to the gods. 

7. ἵνα μηδ᾽. it seems necessary to adopt this emendation of Usener’s 
for the MS. ἐὰν μηδ᾽, It is true that Epicurus hkes putting an smportant 


COMMENTARY. §§ 77-78 ἀδτ 


point in a subordinate conditional clause (cf. ὃ 62. 5 εἰ μὴ ἐφ᾽ ἕνα...) 
but we can hardly take it so here: we must keep the idea of σέμνωμα 
pure, in order that our opmions may not be contradictory. ἐὰν μηδὲν 
ὑπενάντιον . . . δόξῃ, Meibom’s conjecture, which 1s adopted by von 
der Muehi], seems an unnecessarily large departure from the tradition. 

γένωνται another necessary addition ; the clause must have a verb 

8. εἰ δὲ μή, ‘ otherwise ’, ‘if we do not preserve the céuvwpa’. 

τὸν μέγιστον τάραχον compare a stnking parallel to the general 
idea in Lucr. vi. 68-78. 

IO κατὰ once again has become καί in the MSS. 

τὰς ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἐναπολήψεις τῶν συστροφῶν : a shghtly different :dea οἱ 
the συστροφαί to that In ὃ 73.10 There they are the great agglomera- 
tuons, each of which ulumately resolves itself into a world, here 
smaller agglomerations ‘caught up’ within the larger one, and ulti- 
mately forming into sun, moon, or star. 

αι. τὴν ἀνάγκην ταύτην καὶ περίοδον should be taken closely together, 
almost as ἃ hendiadys, ‘ this necessary revolution’, so ‘ the law of their 
revolution ’. 

§ 78 (2) Auman knowledge and happiness} picurus turns from 
the divine aspect to the human aspect Just as 1 15 an insult to the 
divine majesty of the gods to attribute to them the contro} of the affairs 
of the world, since 1t would be a disturbance to their eternal repose, 
SO an accurate knowledge about the nature of these things 1s an 
essential for human happiness, as it removes those fears which anse 
as long as we beheve celestial phenomena to be due to the arbitrary 
action of divine powers Moreover, in the acquisition of this know- 
ledge hes man’s greatest happiness. But this 15 only true of the first 
essentials and the ultimate nature of things celestial. The details of 
celestial phenomena, the causes of rsings and settings, eclipses, &c , 
cannot in themselves remove our fears nay, by the awe which they 
arouse, they may even increase thum. Such knowledge in itself con- 
tributes nothing to human happiness, though in combination with the 
knowledge of the essenuals 11 may go to increase 1t In such par- 
ticulars then we must not be disappointed if we are not able to fix on 
some one cause as the sole cause the phenomena may be produced 
m several ways, or we may not be able to say for certain which of 
several causes 1s the one which operates in our world But as regards 
the ultumate nature of τὰ μετέωρα we must be certain. The introduc- 
tory paragraphs of the second letter should be compared, and the 
whole of Lucretius’ astronomical section (v. 509-770) affords constant 
ulustrations of the principles. 

1 (7d). again a necessary addition of Usener the article with the 
infinitive seems specially hable to be lost. cf §§ 47% 3, 57 10. 

τῶν κυριωτάτων, ‘the essential facts’, 1.e. the comprehension of the 
divine nature and the knowledge that celestial phenomena are not 
produced by it. Cf. § 35. 6, where the word 1s used in a broader sense 

2. φυσιολογίας, ‘the science of φύσεις ᾽, of the underly:ng structure 


252 Ι, ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


and character of things: compare Lucretius’ rerum natura. It is con- 
trasted here with ἱστορίᾳ (§ 79. 2), the inquiry into details of special 
phenomena. 

τὸ μακάριον. of course here ‘human happiness’: compare below, 
8 80 2 τὸ. . μακάριον ἡμῶν. The peace of mind (ἀταραξία) which arises 
from the comprehension of the fundamental principles given to man, 
the nearest approach to the blessed life of the gods. 

3. ἐν τῇ περὶ μετεώρων γνώσει: there seems no reason to follow 
Usener 1n exclnding these words as a gloss. 

ἐνταῦθα ; Usener’s suggestion that (re) should be added seems 
unnecessary καὶ ἐν 7S... 15 appended as an afterthought, 

4 τίνες : the τινάς of the MSS, 1s a mere mistake. 

5. συγγενῆ πρὸς τὴν eis τοῦτο ἀκρίβειαν, ‘have an affinity to accurate 
knowledge for this purpose’, 1.e. to the knowledge requisite for human 
happiness (τοῦτο 18 τὸ μακάριον, as Usener points out in his note) 

«vy 1s quite natural and Usener’s alteration to συντείνει gratuitous 
so Bignone. 

τὸ πλεοναχῶς, ‘that which may happen in several ways’, e.g as 
Epicurus believes, echpses or the waxing and waning of the moon; 
see Lucr. v. 705 ff., 751 ff. 

6. ἐν τοῖς τοιούτοις : sc. the knowledge of the ultimate nature of 
celestial things, in which alternative causes have no place : there 1s here 
one fina] certainty. 

Td ἐνδεχόμενον καὶ ἄλλως πὼς ἔχειν, ‘that which can happen some- 
times in one way, sometimes in another’, e.g thunder and hghtning, 
see Lucr. vi 96 ff Bignone retains the reading of the majority of the 
MSS τὸ ἐνδεχομένως as parallel to τὸ πλεοναχῶς, but it seems an 
almost impossible formation 

8. τῶν, . . ὑποβαλλόντων, ‘things which suggest uncertainty as to 
their real cause, or alarm because we do not understand their cause ’, 
1.e. phenomena of which there may be several explanations 

9. καὶ τοῦτο ἁπλῶς εἶναι, ‘of this (se the nature of the celestial 
bodies and their independence of the gods) we can know that it 15 
absolutely ’, 1.e. when we have worked on atomic principles to the 
night explanation we can be perfectly certain of 1 

§ 79. Epicurus now turns to the other side of the picture The 
knowledge of detailed causes 1s not necessary for happiness, and 
indeed it may even increase our fears, unless we are acquainted with 
the ultimate nature of the heavenly bodies and the true causes of their 
movements 

1. τὸ δ᾽ ἐν τῇ ἱστορίᾳ πεπτωκός : ἱστορία 15 the detailed investigation 
of particular causes as contrasted with φυσιολογία, which 1s the know- 
ledge of the ultimate principles The genitives τῆς δύσεως, &c., are 
connected with ἱστορίᾳ. 

3. πρὸς τὸ μακάριον τῆς γνώσεως, ‘for the blessedness which know- 
ledge confers’, a possessive genitive, a favournte device of Epicurus’, 
as Bignone points out, Usener unnecessarily alters to ras γνώσεις, 


COMMENTARY. §§ 78-80 253 


which he then takes with τῆς δύσεως, &c., leaving τὸ ἐν τῇ ἱστορίᾳ 
πεπτωκός In Suspense. 

4. ἄλλ᾽ ὁμοίως . . προσΐδεισαν ταῦτα : as Bignone notes, Epicurus 
1s probably thinking here of astrologers and other superstitious persons 
who, although they have observed the detailed movements of the 
heavenly bodies and may know something of their immediate causes, 
yet postulate a divine agency behind ali and regard celestial pheno- 
mena as an indication of the divine will 

ὁμοίως goes with καὶ εἰ μὴ προσήδεισαν ταῦτα, ‘just as much as if 
they had not learnt these things’. 

5. κατιδόντας, ‘when they have perceived them’: Epicurus regards 
the knowledge of the detailed causes of celestial phenomena as a 
matter of observation rather than of reasoning. It is quite unneces- 
sary to alter with Usener to κατειδότας 

7. πλείους sc φόβους ἔχειν 

9. οἰκονομίαν, ‘ordering’, ‘regulation’ a curiously personal word 
for Epicurus to use, when he 1s so carefully disclaimmg personal 
agency. 

διὸ δὴ κἂν πλείους . εὑρίσκωμεν. we must accept Usener’s correc- 
tion for the καὶ... εὑρίσκομεν Of the MSS In many such cases of 
detail Epicurus piopounds several causes which are not contradicted 
by the evidence of the senses without deciding between them (see the 
second letter and Luc: v 509-770 pass?m) We must here be con- 
tent with such uncertain knowledge, and it 1s all that 1s required for 
our happiness 

10. τῶν τοιουτοτρόπων an ingemous coriection of Meibom’s for τῶν 
τοιούτων τρύπων (Or τροπῶν) Of the MSS. τρόπων could hardly be used 
in the sense of ‘occurrences’, and the corruption is probably due to 
the neighbourhood of τροπῶν. 

11, ὥσπερ καὶ ἐν τοῖς κατὰ μέρος γινομένοις ἦν 1€ 1 Such investiga- 
tions as aie contained im the letter to Pythocles, which would be fami- 
liar to the more advanced disciples for whom the present lettcr was 
written. ἦν agai seems a necessary correction of the MS 7 or ἡ 

δ 80 1. χρείαν, ‘investigation’, ‘inquiry ” 

3 ὥστε παραθεωροῦντας . A practical conclusion The mght 
method of procedure in mnquiring into the details of celestial pheno- 
mena is by the analogy of things within our experience on earth. We 
must investigate kindred phenomena there, and consider in how many 
different ways they might be produced, and then apply our conclusions 
to the heavenly bodies, which owing to their distance from us we never 
can investigate closely. And even though we think that one explana- 
tion is the mght one, we must be prepared to recognize that there may 
be others, and not allow the discovery to disturb our peace of mind, 
This is a typically Epicurean conclusion, and a good instance might 
be found in Epicurus’ theory of echpses (Zp ad Pyth, ὃ 96, Lucr. 
v 751 ff.). We consider in bow many different ways the hght on earth 
May be obscured. Then, though we think that the cause of the sun’s 


254 1, ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


echpse is the passing of the moon between earth and sun, we are yet 
prepared to admit that τὲ may be that some other body intervenes or 
that the sun’s fires are temporarily damped. 

παραθεωροῦντας : probably ‘ considering 1n companison with’ celestial 
phenomena. 

5. παντὸς τοῦ ἀδήλου : ἄδηλα to Epicurus fell under two categories, 
phenomena hke the celesual which are too far off for us to investigate, 
and those like the atoms and the atomic structure of things, which are 
below the ken of our senses. In both these cases we should reason 
from our experience of earthly things 

τῶν οὔτε. . ἀταρακτῆσαι " sc. ordinary unphilosophic persons who 
do not investigate at all or distinguish between different classes of 
knowledge or reahze the importance of their distinction. 

οὔτε (τὸ), Gassendi’s correction of the MS. οὐδέ, which is practically 
demanded by the corresponding οὔτε τό. 

q. (ἐπὶ τῶν) Thy . παραδιδόντων. L have adopted with some hesita- 
tion Bignone’s correction of the clause, ‘in the case of things which 
provide an impression of themselves from a distance’, 1.e the first 
class of ἄδηλα, the celestial phenomena to which we can never get 
near enough to obtain an évapynya, Usener reads τήν τ᾽, .. παριδόν- 
των, ‘but neglect the impression made on us by phenomena at a 
distance’ (Hicks), 1.e. presumably, base their behef on προσδοξαζόμενα 
instead of considering the evidence of sensation, but the expression 15 
forced, and his main point here 1s that in considering the heavenly 
bodies we cannot get sufficient evidence from the senses. I think st 
would, as a third course, be just possible to accept Usener’s τήν 7’ and 
retain παραδιδόντων, ‘but are content to hand on the traditional 
account based on the appearance of phenomena from a distance’; 
a description of the ordinary conventional man who 15 content with 
the first-sight appearance of celestial phenomena withoul reasoning by 
analogy and would be satisfied, e g. to say that the sun passes round 
the earth without considering Heraclitus’ theory ‘that it 1s ht up afresh 
every day. But Bignone’s restoration seems to bring the sentence 
nearer to Epicurus’ general phraseology and to the particular drift of 
this passage. 

g. καὶ ὧδί πως, ‘in some such way as this’. if, that 1s, we think 
that we have reached an approximate explanation which is. night, we 
must still be prepared to admit that there may be several explanations 
and must not be upset by that conclusion. 

καὶ ἐφ᾽ οἵοις ὁμοίως ἐστὶν ἀταρακτῆσαι, ‘and that in circumstances 
where we may be equally at peace in mind’, even if there are several 
explanations, 1.¢. in the consideration of the detailed causes of celes- 
tial phenomena. Usener omits both καί and ἐστίν, which 1s only the 
reading of GH. ἐστίν seems necessary to the construction, and 1 think 
καί may be retained. Bignone would read καὶ (éxew) on the analogy 
of τὸ μοναχῶς ἔχον ἢ γινόμενον, |. 5, which may be the mght solution. 

TO αὐτὸ τὸ ὅτι πλεοναχῶς. ἀταρακτήσομεν. sc. our recognition 


COMMENTARY. § 80-81 255 


of the possible plurality of causes will not disturb our peace any more 
than if we knew that there was one approximate cause. 

(3) Zhe causes of men’s fears At the end of this long discussion of 
τὰ μετέωρα Epicurus swings rcund to the practical moral conclusion, 
The two chief causes of mental disturbance, the opposite of the ideal 
ἀταραξία, are firstly this belef that the heavenly bodies are divine 
beings, performing actions quite contrary to the divine nature, and 
secondly the fear of death, whether it be of punishment in another hfe, 
or of the anmhilation of sensation as something felt by ‘us’. Peace 
of mind, on the other hand, consists in the release from these fears. 
The argument of the whole section is quite straightforward, and 1s 
repeated in many passages by Lucretius, compare especially i. 80-- 
135,11 41-93, V 1194-1240. 

ὃ 81 2 τάραχος Usener suggests the insertion of μέν to balance 
ἡ δὲ ἀταραξία below, § 82. 1, but that clause may well be an after- 
thought. 

3. ταῦτα ce the heavenly bodies, of which he has been speaking 
in the preceding sectons Von der Muehll’s ταὐτά 15 ingemous but 
hardly necessary. 

δοξάζειν Usener’s addition (εἶναι seems unnecessary. it can be 
supphed m thought. 

4 τούτοις sc. τὸ μακάριον καὶ ἄφθαρτον, easily extracted from 
the previous clause _Usener’s ‘correction’ τούτῳ 15. no improve- 
ment. 

5 airtas’ here ‘motives’, 1e anger and favour compare ὃ 77.1 ff. 

ἀεί for καί, a good correction of Usener’s 

6. εἴτε καὶ αὐτὴν. κατ᾽ αὐτούς anew point Some men do not 
fear punishment in another life, but fear the annihilation of sensation 
as though it were something that would affect ‘them’. but, as 
Epicurus would say, when the soul has once left the body and 
dissolved, ‘they’, who are a combination of soul and body, no longer 
exist compare Lucr mm 838-842 and 870-893 καὶ αὐτήν 15 a good 
correction of Casaubon’s for xara ταύτην the constant confusion of 
κατά and καί occurs again in the MSS just below, |. 7 

8. ϑόξαις as the result of an inference of opimon from phenomena: 
cf the constant use of δοξάζειν and προσδοξάζξειν, 

ἀλόγῳ γέ τινι παραστάσει, ‘an uNnTcasoning presentation of a picture 
to the mind’, ‘imagination’ not even grounded on an inference, how- 
ever false, from phenomena Hicks translates ‘an irrational perver- 
sity’, but 1s there evidence for παράστασις in this sense? 

9. μὴ Spifovras, ‘not lmiting ’, 1 6. not knowing the hmits of pain, 
which in the Epicurean system are set by the right comprehension of 
what man needs and the hmits of his suffering, and the knowledge 
that the gods do not intervene in the world and that death 1s nothing 
to us 

το. ὡς εἰ καὶ ἐδόξαζον ταῦτα constructed in sense after ἴσην. With 
some hesitation I propose the substitution of ὡς for MS. τῶ (or τό). 


256 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


Usener, keeping τῷ, proposes the much more violent change, τῷ 
εἰκαίως δοξάζοντι ταῦτα : but Epicurus would not have admitted that 
any one held these opimions εἰκαίως. Hicks’s translation ‘than if we 
held these beliefs’ seems to imply ὡς or ἡ τῷ would give this sense 
too, but is very harsh. 

ὃ 82. 2. τό, I can see no reason for following Usener in his 
alteration to τῷ, with which presumably ἐν 1s to be supphed from the 
construction of the previous sentence : ‘ peace of mind zs freedom from 
these fears and the recollection of the main principles ’ 

(4) Trust in the senses. As the conclusion of the whole discussion 
which started from the consideration of celestial phenomena, Epicurus 
comes back to the position which he enunciated at the beginning of 
the letter. The only safe principle in hfe is always to trust to the 
direct evidence of our external sensations and our internal feelings. 
Inference from them (δόξα) may be false, and may lead, as he has 
shown, to conclusions which greatly mihtate against our peace of 
mind ; but the sensations are always true This 1s the ulumate basis 
of the whole Epicurean system, physical and moral, and forms a fitting 
conclusion to the argument of the letter 

4. πάθεσι : all the MSS. have the curious mistake πᾶσι. 

τοῖς παροῦσι, ‘those present to us’, so ‘immediate’. see § 38. 5 
τὰς παρούσας ἐπιβολάς. 

5. κατὰ μὲν τὸ κοινὸν... ταῖς ἰδίαις Bignone has shown the meaning 
of this, We must trust the common sensanons of mankind (Lucretius’ 
communis sensus) when we are considering common experiences or 
wish to correct individual experiences of our own, which are due to the 
particular state of our organism (e g. When fever warps our taste). 
We must, on the other hand, trust our individual sensations when we 
are considering matters on which we can pronounce judgement, 
e.g. our own feelings of pleasure or pain. K A. xxxvi affords an 
interesting example, where Epicurus distinguishes τὸ δίκαιον which 15 
κοινόν to all mankind, from that which 15 ἴδιον to particular nations or 
peoples. 

6 καθ' ἕκαστον τῶν κριτηρίων : sc the senses and feelings, the 
πρόληψις Or general concept, and possibly also the ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας, 
which combines perceptions and concepts into ideas which have 
validity in the region of the ἄδηλα. 

ἡ. dvapyeia . the ‘clear vision’ or ‘ intuition ’, as usual 

9. ἀπολύσομεν probably goes not with τὸ ὅθεν ὃ τάραχος. but 
with ὅσα φοβεῖ τοὺς λοιποὺς ἀνθρώπους. 

10. τῶν ἀεὶ παρεμπιπτόντων, ‘things that occur casually from time 
to time’, 1.e, sporadic as opposed to normal recurnng phenomena. 

Conclusion, The last paragraph of the letter returns to the ideas of 
the exordium. The advanced student, absorbed in the examination 
of details, must have a careful statement of the general principles 
always in his mind, to which he may constantly refer. This was the 
primary purpose of the present treatise, but it will also, as Epicurus 


COMMENTARY. §§ 82-83 257 


adds at the end, enable even those who cannot enter into details to 
obtain a ‘ bird’s-eye view’, which will be sufficient to secure their peace 
of mind (γαληνισμός). The language of this secton should all through 
be compared with that of the exordium. The general drift 1s clear, 
but the text in several places uncertain. 

11. κεφαλαιωδέστατα is apparently an adverb going with ἐπιτετμη- 
μένα, but there 1s a strong temptation to read (τὰ) κεφαλαιωδέστατα, 
‘the most important heads’, which would give a better sense. 

12. τῶν ὅλων, ‘the general principles’ or ‘the system as a whole ’. 
Cf. § 36. 10 τῆς συνεχοῦς τῶν ὅλων περιοδείας. 

§ 88 1. ὥστε ἂν γένοιτο οὗτος ὁ λόγος δυνατὸς κατασχεθῆναι, ‘so that 
this account would be able to be comprehended’, The MSS. have 
κατεσχέθη, except that H wnites κατασχέθη, which suggests κατασχεθῆναι 
as the obvious correction with this change the MS text can be kept. 
Usener, followed apparently by Bignone, places a full stop at ἐπιτεσμη- 
μένα, changes ἂν γένοιτο to ἐὰν γένηται, adopts δυνατὸς οὗτος ὃ λόγος 
from F, κατασχεθείς from Gassend:, and places a comma at ἀκριβείας, 
‘so that, 1f this account becomes effective, being grasped accurately, 
I think...’ This seems quite unnecessary, and the participle is a 
much less hkely emendation of κατεσχέθη than the infinitive, 

2. οἶμαι : a lapse into a rather more colloquial style quite consistent 
with the turn to the personal address to Herodotus 

3. ἀκριβωμάτων : compare ὃ 36 6 τοῦ παντὸς ἀκριβώματος 

4 ἀσύμβλητον, ‘incomparable ’, going closely with πρὸς τοὺς λοιποὺς 
ἀνθρώπους The man who knows the mam principles will be mn a far 
superior position as regards the fears which attack men There 15, 
I think, no reference to the ἀσφάλεια ἐξ ἀνθρώπων of K. A xm 
and xiv 

ἁδρότητα, ‘mpeness’, ‘strength’ a Homeric word which reappears 
m later Greek as a techmcal term of rhetoric 

5 καθαρά, ‘free from difficulties’, ‘clear’, an unusual word for 
Epicurus 

6. κατὰ τὴν ὅλην πραγματείαν compare τὸν τύπον τῆς ὅλης πραγμα- 
τείας, ὃ 35. 8. 

ἢ βοηθήσει" compare βοηθεῖν αὑτοῖς δύνωνται, ὃ 35 6 

8. (καὶ τά). again Jost by ‘haplography’ before κατά 

9. ἱκανῶς ἢ καὶ τελείως, * sufficrently for practical purposes or even 
with scientific completeness ’. 

10, ἐπιβολάς. again in the semi-technical sense in which it appears 
in the exordium . ‘acts of apprehension’, so ‘ survey ’, almost ‘ princi- 
ples’. Cf. § 36. 3 ἡ κυριωτάτη ἐπιβολή 

τῶν περιοδειῶν. cf τῆς συνεχοῦς τῶν ὅλων περιοδείας, ὃ 36 τὸ 

Ir. ὅσοι δέ. Epicurus reverts to the thought οὗ 1.3 even those 
who are not intending to go into the full details of the system can use 
it as an epitome to give them the general ideas, and so to secure their 
peace of mind. 

τῶν ἀποτελουμένων, ‘those who are being perfected’, i.e. those who 

2098 R 


258 1. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


work through the whole Epicurean system and so attain perfection. 
A word which wonld suggest initration. 

12. εἰσὶν of, ‘some’, picking up and limiting ὅσο. This seems the 
obvious correction of the MS. εἰσὶν 9, though its sense 1s not very 
convincing. Usener conjectures ἱκανήν (ic = «) taking it with πρὸς 
γαληνισμόν : the sense would be good, but it seems a rather violent 
correction. Bignone reads ὅση δὴ 7, ‘2 hasty view m so far as it can 
be obtained by the method without oral instruction’: again a rather 
violent change. 

κατὰ τὸν ἄνευ φθόγγων τρόπον apparently ‘ by instruction and not 
orally’, for most of the disciples learnt the doctrine from the Master 
m person. But it is a curious phrase, and there may be some corrup- 
tron: you would expect him to say ‘by the method without details’. 

13. ἅμα νοήματι, ‘quick as thought’, ‘hasty’. Here in an even 
ayy untechnical sense than when he applies it to atomic movement 
in δ 6r. 8. 

πρὸς γαληνισμόν, ‘for peace of mind’ (ἀταραξία), which was the 

aim of the Epicurean, and to which the knowledge of the pnnciples of 
φυσιολογία contributed the greatest part: cf. ὃ 37 3 μάλιστα éyyaAnvi- 


luv τῷ βίῳ. 


APPENDIX 


On the meaning of ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας. 


Or all the technical terms of the Epicurean philosophy none 18 
nearly so obscure and elusive as ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας. We are con- 
fronted with it or its equivalent five' times in the Letter to Herodotus 
and once? in the Κύριαι Adgac; Diogenes ἢ further tells us that the 
‘Epicureans’ added it to Epicurus’ three criteria of truth: yet each 
fresh context seems at first only to shed further obscurity on its 
meaning. Nor can it be said that modern critics and historians of 
philosophy have for the most part assisted much towards its elucida- 
tion finding it in a prominent place in the Epicurean philosophy they 
have felt bound to give some equivalent for it, but most of them have 
been content to make wild guesses * without, as it seems, any careful 
consideration of the contexts im which it occurs: yet the very diver- 
gence of these guesses shows how little the phrase conveys a direct 
indication of ils meaning. Only two® scholars, so far as I know, have 
made a really critical study of the subyect, Tohte® and Giussani,” and 
they again differ widely in theirconclusions. I should be loth to enter 
the discussion, but that I feel bound to justify the views assumed in 
the translation and commentary, and also believe that something may 
yet be said, which may help towards a solution. 

It will be conventent, before entering the details of the discussion, 
to give in full the passages of Epicurus dealing with the subject, which 
will frequently be required for reference, and to state summarily the 
conclusions at which this note will arrive. 


1 §§ 38, 50, 51 (twice), 62, 2 xxiv. δχ 3r (V2.). 

4 We may instance Zeller, ‘sensible impression’, Uberweg, ‘intuitive apprehen- 
sion of the understanding’ (which 1s nearer to part of the mght idea than most 
conjectures), Ritter and Preller, ‘a form of πρόληψις not differmg from images seen 
in delirium or sleep’; Steinhart, ‘the free activity of the :maginatton’ 

5 Bnege f contribution (Lehre von der Seele, pp 19, 20) 15 50 vague and 
uncritical that it does not really come into question, though, as will be seen, he 
has grasped one essential part of the full meaning F Merbach (De Zpreurt 
Canonica, pp. 28-35) has some interesting pages on the subject, in which he agrees 
in the main with Tohte, but does not touch the crucial difficulty of § 62 of the Letter 
to Herodotus 

5 Epikurs Kriterien der Wahrhest, pp. 30-24 

T Lucretius, vol. i, pp. 171~182. 


R 2 


260 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


I, Letter to Herodotus : : 

A. § 38 ἔτι re! κατὰ τὰς αἰσθήσεις δεῖ πάντα τηρεῖν καὶ ἁπλῶς 
(xara) τὰς παρούσας ἐπιβολὰς εἴτε διανοίας εἴθ᾽ ὅτου δήποτε τῶν κριτη- 
ρίων, ὁμοίως δὲ κατὰ τὰ ὑπάρχοντα πάθη, ὅπως ἂν καὶ τὸ προσμένον καὶ 
τὸ ἄδηλον ἔχωμεν οἷς σημειωσόμεθα. - 

Β, ὃ 50 καὶ ἣν ἂν λάβωμεν φαντασίαν ἐπιβλητικῶς τῇ διανοίᾳ ἢ τοῖς 
αἰσθητηρίοις εἴτε μορφῆς εἴτε συμβεβηκότων, μορφή ἐστιν αὕτη τοῦ 
στερεμνίου, ywouern κατὰ τὸ ἑξῆς πύκνωμα ἢ ἐγκατάλειμμα τοῦ εἰδώλου. 

C. $51 ἥ τε γὰρ ὁμοιότης τῶν φαντασμῶν οἷον ei} ἐν εἰκόνι λαμβανο- 
μένων ἢ καθ᾽ ὕπνους γινομένων ἢ κατ᾽ ἄλλας τινὰς ἐπιβολὰς τῆς διανοίας 
ἢ τῶν λοιπῶν κριτηρίων οὐκ ἄν ποτε ὑπῆρχε τοῖς οὖσί τε καὶ ἀληθέσι 
προσαγορευομένοις, εἰ μὴ ἦν τινα καὶ τοιαῦτα προσβαλλόμενα. 

Ὦ. § 51 Giamadiately following the preceding) τὸ δὲ διημαρτημένον 
οὗκ ἂν ὑπῆρχεν, εἰ μὴ ἐλαμβάνομεν καὶ ἄλλην τινὰ κίνησιν ἐν ἡμῖν αὐτοῖς 
συνημμένην μὲν (τῇ φανταστικῇ ἐπιβολῇ)" διάληψιν δὲ ἔχουσαν. 

E. ὃ 62 ἐπεὶ τό γε θεωρούμενον πᾶν ἢ κατ᾽ ἐπιβολὴν λαμβανόμενον 
τῇ διανοίᾳ ἀληθές ἐστιν. 


11. Κύριαι Δόξαι xxiv εἴ rw’ ἐκβαλεῖς ἁπλῶς αἴσθησιν καὶ μὴ διαιρή- 
σεις τὸ δοξαζόμενον κατὰ τὸ προσμένον καὶ τὸ παρὸν ἤδη κατὰ τὴν 
αἴσθησιν καὶ τὰ πάθη καὶ πᾶσαν φανταστικὴν ἐπιβολὴν τῆς διανοίας, 

, ‘ Ν \ , θ , a , 86. ῳ Ἂν , 
συνταράξεις καὶ τὰς λοιπὰς αἰσθήσεις τῇ ματαίῳ δόξῃ, ὥστε τὸ κριτήριον 
ἅπαν ἐκβαλεῖς. 

To these passages οἵ Epicurus must be added two others of great 
importance : 

Diog. Laert. x. 31 ἐν τοίνυν τῷ Κανόνι λέγων ἐστὶν ὃ ᾿Επέκουρος 
la ~ , a4 Ν » , Ν ia Ἂν; x ᾿ 
κριτήρια τῆς ἀληθείας εἶναι τὰς αἰσθήσεις καὶ προλήψεις καὶ τὰ πάθη" 

οἱ δ᾽ ᾿Ἔπικούρειοι καὶ τὰς φανταστικὰς ἐπιβολὰς τῆς διανοίας, 

Clem. Alex. Strom 1. 4, p. 157 (Usener, ST 255) πρόληψιν δὲ ἅπο- 

1? 4 5 a a 
δίδωσιν ἐπιβολὴν ἐπί τε ἐναργὲς καὶ ἐπὶ τὴν ἐναργῆ τοῦ πράγματος 
ἐπίνοιαν. 


Briefly put, the line of argument which 1 propose to pursue 15 as 
follows: (1) The natural meaning of ἐπιβολή used of operations of the 
senses or the mind is a ‘ projection upon’, and so ‘attention to’, and, 
with the added notion of the result, ‘ apprehension ’ and even ‘view’. 
(2) Epicnrus in several of the crucial passages implies an ἐπιβολή of 
the senses, as ‘apprehension’ by ‘looking’ as opposed to passive 
seeing. (3) ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας corresponds exactly to ths and 
means firstly (2), the immediate apprehension by an act of mental 
attention of certain subtle ‘images’, too fine to be apprehended by 
the senses, and, in particular, of the ‘images’ of divine beings: 
secondly (4), the immediate, or ‘intuitive’ apprehension of concepts, 


1 For the text see the notes on the passages 


᾿ἘἘπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας 261 


and in particular of the ‘clear’, 1 e. self-evident concepts of scientific 
thought. With this preface, which may be of assistance in the course 

of a rather intricate and necessarily controversial argument, we may 
proceed to full discussion. 

1. It was one of the cardinal principles of the Canontca } (δ 38) that 
‘words must be used in their first and obvious meaning, and‘“though it 
may well seem to us at times that Epicurus has hardly succeeded in 
carrying out his principles, yet his intention suggests that the best start- 
ing-poit for inquiry 1s to ask what is the natural meaning of the word 
ἐπιβολή. Proceeding from such hteral usages as ἐπιβάλλειν τὰς χεῖρας 
it is natural to conclude that ἐπιβάλλειν (τὸν νοῦν or the hke) will mean, 
hke the commoner ἐπέχειν, ‘to project the mind towards ’, ‘to turn the 
attention to’ an object. so Diod Sic. xx. 43 has πρὸς οὐδὲν ἐπέβαλλε 
τὴν διάνοιαν, ‘he paid no attention to anything’ In an absolute sense 
without the accusative we find τοῖς κοινοῖς πράγμασιν ἐπιβάλλειν ἴῃ 
Plut. Cic. 4 aS an equivalent of rem pudblicam capessere, and in a 
famous passage of St Mark xiv. 72 καὶ ἐπιβαλὼν ἔκλαιε. The verb 
1s used in ths way m an Epicurean passage of some importance, 
Aet iv 8 το, P 395 (Usener /r 317) Λεύκιππος Δημόκριτος ᾽᾿Ἐπέκουρος 
τὴν αἴσθησιν καὶ τὴν νόησιν yer Gan εἰδώλων ἔξωθεν προσιόντων μηδενὶ 
γὰρ ἐπιβάλλειν μηδετέραν χωρὶς τοῦ προσπίπτοντος εἰδώλου, and again in 
Tambl. Profr 4.56 ἡ ὄψις τοῖς ὁρατοῖς ἐπιβάλλει for the moment we 
will suspend the question of the exact sense in these rather technical 
places 

ἐπιβολή, the substantive, should then mean ‘a projection towards’, 
‘attention to’, and so with the added notion of the result of such 
attention, ‘view’ or ‘apprehension’. the substantive is thus used by 
Clem, Alex. 644 ἐπιβολὴ τῆς ἀληθείας, a ‘ grasp’ or ‘apprehension’ of 
the truth. The simple ἐπιβολή without further qualification occurs 
81x times in the Letter to Herodotus. (1) In § 35. Epicurus 1s speak- 
ing of the reason for wnling an epitome, τῆς γὰρ ἀθρόας ἐπιβολῆς 
πυκνὸν δεόμεθα, τῆς δὲ κατὰ μέρος οὐχ ὁμοίως, ‘for we have frequent 
need of the general view of the system, but not so often of the detailed 
exposition’. (2) In ὃ 83 again, summing up the uses of the Letter, he 
says that even those who are working out the system in detail will be 
able εἰς ras τοιαύτας ἀναλύοντας ἐπιβολὰς τὰς πλείστας τῶν περιοδειῶν 
ὑπὲρ τῆς ὅλης φύσεως 'ποιεῖσθαι, ‘to carry out the greater part of their 
investigations into the nature of the whole by conducting their analysis 
with reference to such a survey as this’. (3) With these two passages 
goes the earlier of two mstances im ὃ 36 βαδιστέον μὲν οὖν ἐπ᾽ ἐκεῖνα 
καὶ συνεχῶς ἐν τῇ μνήμῃ τὸ τοσοῦτον ποιητέον, ἀφ᾽ οὗ ἦ τε κυριωτάτη 
ἐπιβολὴ ἐπὶ τὰ πράγματα ἔσται, ‘it 15 necessary to go back on the main 
principles and constantly to fix in one’s memory enough to give one 
the most essential comprehension of the truth’. The meaning in 
these three passages 1s direct and clear. Slightly more technical are 


1 Ep 1, § 38. 


262 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


(4) ὃ 69, where he is speaking of the properties (συμβεβηκότα) of com- 
pound things καὶ ἐπιβολὰς μὲν ἔχοντα ἰδίας πάντα ταῦτά ἐστι καὶ 
διαλήψεις, ‘all these properties have their own peculiar means of being 
perceived and distinguished ’, and (5) ὃ 70 κατ᾽ ἐπιβολὰς δ᾽ ἄν τινας. 
ἕκαστα προσαγορενθείη, ‘as the result of certain acts of apprehension . 
they might each be given this name’. Here we are clearly approach~ 
ing a more esoteric use, though still on the same hes, and the last 
passage, (6) ὃ 36 τὸ ταῖς ἐπιβολαῖς ὀξέως δύνασθαι χρῆσθαι Must wait for 
the results of the general discussion. Similarly the passage in Clement 
of Alexandra quoted above, in which it 18 stated that πρόληψις 18 an 
ἐπιβολή towards an ἐναργές, must be kept over for the present. 
ἐπιβολή then would appear 10 mean an ‘act of attention’, and so 
‘view’ or ‘apprehension’, Both Tohte and Gzuussani, however, 
believe that it has also in Epicurus the ‘ passive ’ or ‘ objective ’? mean- 
ing of the ‘impression’ resulting from such an act of apprehension 
It 1s true that there are close parallels in Epicurus’ technical phraseo- 
logy for this derivative passive sense: αἴσθησις 15 certainly used both 
for the act of sensation or perception and also for the passive sensation 
or perception received, and zpoAnyrs, which should strictly mean the 
* act of anticipation’ 1s never, I think, used in this sense by Epicurus,? 
but always of the ‘ general concept’ or ‘compound image’, which 1s 
the basis of such an ‘act of anticipation’. But, although it 1s some- 
times possible that the passive sense rather than the active may be 
intended, it 1s never* necessary, and its mdiscriminate introduction 
has, I believe, done a good deal to confuse issues. 

ἃ. We may get much light on the meaning of ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας 
if we ask first whether Epicurus contemplates any other kind of 
ἐπιβολή besides that of the mind. The answer 1s not far to seek, 
though 1s importance seems not to have been sufficiently noticed "ἢ 
Epicurus clearly recognizes an ἐπιβολή of the senses. They are not 
(at any rate, not always) the merely passive recipients of an impression, 
but by an ‘act of attention’ they apprehend the :mages which are 
flowing in upon them: they ‘look’ or ‘ hsten’ as opposed to merely 
‘seeing ‘ or ‘hearing’. In that case it 15 clear that ἐπιβολή will be 
connected with the process of ἐπιμαρτύρησις, the close view of the 
ἐνάργημα, which is to check the rash inferences of δόξα, and tell us with 
certainty the true nature of the object. The passages 1n the Letter to 


1 Giussant, loc cit., p 180. 

3 It seems, however, to be so used in the Epicurean passage from Clem. Alex 
quoted above, 

3 Except possibly in § 38. 

* Tohte remarks it (p. 21) and points out that 1t 1s τὴ distinction from the ἐπιβολὴ 
of the senses that Epicurus speaks explicitly of ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας, So also does 
Merbach (pp 31, 33) Guussani seems not to realize it at all, and 13 cule geri 
driven to a very unnatural interpretation of some of the passages in which τἴ is 
referred to. : 

δ This connexion, which seems to me both necessary and extremely important, 
has escaped both Tohte and Grussan.. ᾿ 


᾿ ᾿Ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας 263 


Herodotus which mention or imply this ἐπιβολή of the senses are four 
in number, and it will be convenient to consider them in the order of 
their increasing difficulty. 

B. § 50. The clearest and easiest of the passages 1s that in which 
Fpicurus most emphatically and duectly sums up his doctrine as to 
the value of ἐπιβολή in general. The idea here seems exactly to bear 
out what has been said. ‘The image which we obtam by an act of 
attenuon or apprehension on the part of the senses (we must leave out 
the mind for the moment) of the shape or property (e g the colour) of 
an object, 1s in fact its shape (or property). This is exactly the idea 
of éripapripyots which Epicurus has just been expounding in the 
preceding context, Our first passive sensation of a distant object 18 
‘true’, for the image ts a faithful representation of the successive 
‘idols’, but it is not until we have ‘ looked at’ the close, clear vicw 
(τὸ παρόν, τὸ ἐναργές), that we can be sure that the mage exactly 
reproduces the shape and colour of the object. ἐπιβολή 1s required 
for the confirmation (or non-confirmation) of the δόξα founded on the 
original passive perception. 

E. ὃ 62, though a very different passage from the point of view of 
the ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας, stuongly confirms this notion of the ἐπιβολή 
of the scnses. Epicurus is considering the motion of the atoms in 
a moving compound body: by ‘ looking’ we perceive that the motion 
of a whole body 1s the sum of the motions of all its perceptuble parts 
in the same direction as the whole (e g. an army). δόξα applies this 
analogy to the motion of the atomic parts of 2 moving body and infers 
that it will be the same, whereas ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας shows that it 18 
different. Here τὸ θεωρούμενον (what is seen by * looking’ as opposed to 
τὸ δρώμενον) 15 clearly equivalent in sense to τὸ ἐπιβλητικῶς λαμβανό- 
μέενον͵ τοῖς αἰσθητηρίοις In Β, and the general idea is the same as τῷ the 
previous passage. The ἐπιβολή of ihe senses gives us the certain 
image of a σύμπτωμα (in ths case movement) of a στερέμνιον. 

We are now in a position to deal with the other two passages, where 
the sense 1s slightly more obscure 

A § 38 After speaking of the necessity for keeping the terminology 
of our mvestigations in exact correspondence with the ideas which it 
Tepresents, Epicurus proceeds to consider the methods of investiga- 
tion. For clearness’ sake we may extract the words which refer to the 
ἐπιβολή, of the senses: xara τὰς αἰσθήσεις δεῖ πάντα τηρεῖν καὶ ἁπλῶς 
(κατὰ) τὰς παρούσας ἐπιβολὰς. .. ὅτου δήποτε τῶν κριτηρίων, 
ὅπως ἂν... τὸ προσμένον .. ἔχωμεν οἷς σημειωσόμεθα : ‘in order that we 
may have certain mdications by which to judge the :mage awaiting con- 
firmation (: e. the onginal rage of the distant object), we must keep 
everything under the control of the senses (1.e free from the additions 
of δόξα), and im particular of the close apprehension (τὰς παρούσας 
ἐπιβολάς 15 equivalent to ras ἐπιβολὰς ἐπὶ τὸ παρὸν ἤδη κατὰ τὴν 
αἴσθησιν, cf, K. Δ. xxiv) of any οὗ the standards of judgement’. The 


264 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


κριτήρια here are clearly the individual senses; sight, hearing, &c., the 
αἰσθητήρια of B, which are indeed κριτήρια because they are the instru- 
ments of αἴσθησις : the expression is a little loose, but the meaning in 
view of the paralle] passages quite unmistakable. The general notion 
of the passage 1s then exactly the same as that of the two preceding 
quotations, but 1t 1s much more clearly and elaborately stated. The 
ἐπιβολή οἵ the senses, the προσμένον and the process of ἐπιμαρτύρησις 
are all brought into close connexion. The all-important matter for 
scientific investigation in the region of perception 1s the pure sensa- 
tion, and in particular the observation of phenomena in the close 
view, which will give us the certainty that the sense-1mage corresponds 
to objective reality. 

C. § 51. Epicurus is here arguing for the exact resemblance of the 
sense-images to the obyects from which the ‘idols’ emanate. Extracting 
again the portions relaung to the ἐπιβολή of the senses, we pet’ ἢ re 
yap ὁμοιότης τῶν φαντασμῶν οἷον εἰ ἐν εἰκόνι λαμβανομένων... κατὰ τὰς 
ἐπιβολὰς τῶν λοιπῶν κριτηρίων οὐκ ἄν ποτε ὑπῆρχε τοῖς οὖσί τε καὶ 
ἀληθέσι προσαγορενομένοις, εἰ μὴ ἦν τινα καὶ τοιαῦτα προσβαλλόμενα, 
‘unless “idols” came to us, which are exact reproductions of the 
object, we could not be certam of the exact resemblance of the 
images obtained by the ‘‘apprehensions” of the senses’, that 18, 
the images seen by observation in the nearer mew. The expression, 
as far as concerns the ἐπιβολή of the senses, is exactly parallel to what 
we have already met: the present passage adds no new ideas, but 
once more confirms our conclusion. 

There is now no difficulty in interpreting the phrase of Iamblichus, 
which was noted on p. 261. ἡ ὄψις τοῖς ὁρατοῖς ἐπιβάλλει Expresses 
clearly enough the act of ἐπιβολή on the part of the sense of sight in 
immediate relation to its own peculiar object, visible things. Before 
leaving the ἐπιβολή of the senses, we may notice that the whole notion 
of the act of attention on the part of the senses and the resulting 
apprehension 1s clearly brought out by Lucretius iv. 807-810 (as an 
illustration of similar ‘attention’ on the part of the mind). 


nonne vides oculos etiam, cum tenvia quae sunt 
cernere coeperunt, contendere se atque parare, 
nec sine 60 fien posse ut cernamus acute? 


The ideas of the ἐπιβολή and the ‘clear view’ could ‘hardly be ex- 
pressed more accurately. 

3 (az). It 13 now time to pass to the consideration of the ἐπιβολὴ 
τῆς διανοίας, and it 1s clear that the first question to be asked 1s whether 


3 Giussani (p. 177), not realizing the ἐπιβολή of the senses, takes κριτήρια here 
to be ‘signs’ (σημεία as Epicurus ordinarily calls them), and, since he naturally 
feels that ‘signs’ could not be standards of reference, does not insert κατά, but 
leaves the ἐπιβολαί both of the mind and of the κριτήρια subordimate to αἴσθησις in 
genera]: but apart from all other obyections (see notes on the passage) the parallel 
of § 51 makes this impossible. 


"Em Body τῆς διανοίας 265 


there is any act performed by the mind 1n Epicurus’ psychology which 
1s analogous to the apprehension of an image by an act of attention on 
the part of the senses? We are at once reminded of course of the 
very subtle ‘idols ’ which, being too fine to be perceived by the senses, 
pass on into the mind and are there immediately apprehended by it, 
the images seen in sleep, the visions of dead persons, above all the 
‘images’ of the gods. In these cases there seems to be a very close 
parallel: the act of apprehension by the mind 15, as it were, a kind of 
subtle sense-perception, and moreover we are informed by Lucretius? 
that such images are so fine, that, even when they have penetrated to 
the mind, they cannot be perceived by it except by a special act of 
attention, so that we see them most often in sleep, when the senses 
are dormant and the mind 1s undisturbed This seems to be exactly 
what we should expect of the ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας, the perception of 
what 15 really a sense-image by an act of attention on the part of the 
mind. It is necessary to see how this notion talhes with the passages 
in Epicurus it will again be convenient to take them in the order 
which will most naturally develop the idea. 

D § 51, the passage in which Epicurus is arguing for the exact 
correspondence of the scnse-images 10 the object from which they come. 
We are now concerned with the lst of ‘images’ whose lkeness 1s 
guaranteed by that of the idols. They are ‘the images perceived as a 
kind of hkeness (1 e the normal images of sensation) or those occur- 
ring in sleep, or owing to any of the other apprehensions of the 
mind...’ It would be impossible to have clearer confirmation than 
this: the images of sleep are perceived by one kind of ἐπιβολὴ τῆς 
διανοίας, and there are others (such as the images of the gods and the 
visions of the dead) perceived by other similar ἐπιβολαί. All of these, 
just like the sense-images perceived by the ἐπιβολαὶ τῶν αἰσθητηρίων, 
require as the guarantee of their truth the correspondence of ‘idols’ to 
object, J 

Β § 50. ‘ Any image which we obtain by an act of apprehension 
on the part of the mind. ., whether it is of shape or quahtty, 18 
(1.e exactly represents) the shape (or quality) of the object.’ Is this 
true of our present notion of the ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας ἢ It certainly 18 
true of the images of the gods, for they are formed by a succession of 
‘idols’ which come directly from the divine beings to the mind; the 
‘1dol’ is thatewhich was once the ‘body’ of the god. It 1s equally 
true of visions of the dead, for again they are caused by ‘ idols’ which 
came from their bodies when alive. But there are certain other kinds 
of images similarly perceived by the mind, which cannot here be 
passed over, for example, the συστάσεις, the strange, grotesque, com- 
pound images which form themselves in the air, and the visions of 
delirium. In neither of these cases does the ‘:mage’ correspond to an 
external reality. Epicurus saved himself in such cases by arguing that 


1 Compare iv. 757~776 with 800-815. 


266 1, ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


the image 1s ‘true’, because it corresponds to the ‘idols’, and‘ it is 
a mistaken inference of δόξα to assume that the ‘idols’ in their turn 
represent actual realities. But 1t would perhaps be the truest account 
of the case to say that Epicurus is in the present passage thinking 
primarily of the other kinds of ‘mental apprehensions’, and in par- 
ticular, as Tohte* believes he usually is, of the images of the gods. At 
any rate this passage again 1s a strong confirmation of the present view. 

A. ὃ 38 contams nothing which is mconsistent with this interpre- 
tation. The objects known to us by this mode of cogmition, the 
immediate apprehension by the mind, are necessarily ἄδηλα, because 
they are imperceptible by the sense-organs. Selecting then the por- 
tion of the aphorism which concerns us, we get the principle ‘in 
order that we may have standards by which to judge the mpercep- 
tible, we must keep all under the control of the senses, and in 
particular of the close apprehension of the mind’. This suits well 
enough with our present idea, but seems to suggest that it 1s not yet 
complete. for there seems nothing in the perception by the mind of 
the subtle mages to correspond to ‘a judgement on the imperceptible 
by means of the close view’, or at any rate to get it we should have 
to press facts a httle. Here then there 1s no contradiction of our 
present position, but a distinct hint for the.first time that the ἐπιβολὴ 
τῆς διανοίας covers something more 

D. ὃ δι and E. § 62 must still be left aside for the present, but we 
are now in a position to consider the reference m Κύριαι δόξαι xxiv, 
and it will be seen to sum up admirably the account at present given 
of the ἐπιβολαζ both of the senses and of the mind In xxui, which 
is closely connected with it, Epicurus has said ‘if you rey€ct all 
sensations, you will have no standard by which to judge even those 
which you say are false’, In xxiv he pushes his argument still 
farther: ‘if you reject any single sensation and fail to distinguish 
betwéen the conclusion of opinion as to the appearance awaiting 
confirmation on the one hand, and on the other the close view made 
by sense-perception or feeling, or every kind of mental apprehension 
of an image, you will confound all other sensations as well by your 
groundless Opinion, so that you will lose all standard of judgement’. 
This agrees excellently with what has been said: ahke in cases of 
sense-perception and mental apprehension we must respect the 
validity of every sensation and attend to the close wew, carefully 
distingwshing between the vague image of the indistinct view and the 
clear vision obtained by an act of apprehension. But here once 
again there is a suggestion of something more in the ἐπιβολὴ τῆς 
διανοίας than we have yet discovered: how does it obtain a clear 
vision 1n contrast to an image awalting confirmation? and what 15 


1 Sex. Emp. adv, Math.vin 63 (Usener 253) ἡ μὲν αἴσθησις ὑπ' εἰδώλων κινουμένη 
ἀληθὴς ἦν (ὑπέκειτο γὰρ τὰ εἴδωλα), ὁ δὲ νοῦς οἰόμενος ὅτε στερέμνιοί εἰσιν ᾽Ερίνυες 
(he is taking the case of Orestes) ἐψευδοδόξει. 


5 Op. cit., p 23. 


᾿Ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας 267 


meant by ‘every ἐπιβολή of the mind’? Surely something more than 
the apprehension of the various kinds of subtle image. 

So far we have concluded that the ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας 15 a ‘ mental 
apprehension of an image perceived directly by the mind without the 
imtervention of the senses’, and we might naturally suppose that 
Epicurus insisted on its truth and, even if he did not quite class it as 
ἃ κριτήριον, yet named it so frequently among the κριτήρια, mainly in 
order to support his theological contention that our mental viston of 
the forms of the gods 1s evidence of their existence. This 1s in effect 
the view of Tohte, except that he leans (unnecessarily, as I think) to 
the passive interpretation, and would speak of the ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας 
as an ‘impression received by the apprehension of the mind’. And if 
this were all the evidence we had, we might be content with his 
explanation. But it has already been noted that this view does not 
seem to cover the ful] meaning required either in A. § 38 or in 
K A xxiv> we have, moreover, been compelled at present to leave 
over D ὃ §1, as there seems nothing in what has been said to explain 
it, and an examination of E. ὃ 62 in 115 context will show at once that 
1t can have nothing whatever to do with the mental apprehension of 
subtle images. Ifa complete explanation of ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας 18 to 
be discovered, it wiJ] be necessary to make further inquiry. 

3 (ὁ) We must ask then, can the ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας grasp or 
apprehend anything else besides these subtle images, exactly analo- 
gous to the images of normal sense-perception? At this pomt the 
passage quoted above? from Clement of Alexandria becomes of 
crucial importance ‘Epicurus’, he says, ‘explains “anticipation ” as 
an apprehension of something clear or of the clear thought-image of 
the thing.’ Now from our knowledge of the nature of πρόληψις this 
1s not difficult to explain the ‘act of anticipation ’—for πρόληψις * 18 
here used, contrary to Epicurus’ usual custom, In an active sense—is 
the apprehension of the general or compound image, made up of many 
mdividual sense-images. This ‘apprehension’ must be mental—must 
be an ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας, for the general 1mage can only be perceived 
by the mind and not by the senses, and what now 15 Its object? Not 
a sense-Image, nor anythmg analogous to it, but a concept An 
ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας then can grasp a concept, and with this new 
Notion in mind we may turn to the examination of the difficult 
passage in the Letter to Herodotus, which has been left over for 
consideration. 

E. § 62. The particular question at issue in the context 1s What 15 
the nature of the atomic motions in a compound body? ‘ We know’, 
says Epicurus meffect, ‘that the perceptible parts of a moving body are 
all moving in the same direction as the whole body: this 15 the 
truth guaranteed to us by an ἐπιβολὴ τῶν αἰσθητηρίων (τὸ θεωρούμενον 
1s clearly that which is grasped by the senses when “ looking” at the 
close view, 1.e. by an ἐπιβοχή). By analogy we apply the same idea in 


1D. L x. 31, quoted on p. 260 2 p. 260, 5 See p. 262, n. 2 


268 I, ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


thought to the imperceptible atomic parts and suppose that they too 
are all moving in the same direction as the whole: this is the work of 
opinion (δόξα) combining images and forming what Epicurus would 
call techmically an ἐπίνοια κατ᾽ ἀναλογίαν. But we know as the result 
of scientific investigation that the atoms are really in a constant state 
of vibratory motion (πάλσις) 1n all directions, and this conclusion must 
be true as against our previous supposition, decanse εἰ ts obtained by an 
ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας. What does ths mean? how do we know this 
fact by an ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας and why 1s it therefore certainly true? 
Guussani, largely on the strength of this passage, but influenced also 
by his general theories of the process of thought in Epicurus, has 
argued for a far wider sense of ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας than that proposed 
by Tohte. ‘The ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας for Epicurus comprehends both 
what Tohte supposes, but not that alone, and πρόληψις, as Brieger 
wishes, but not it alone, and scientific concepts in general, including 
the concepts of those d8yAa—be they real or conzuncta or evenfa—which 
do not give off “idols”. In fine the ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας 18 mental 
representation 1n general.’? The one fatal objection to this all-em- 
bracing view of the ἐπιβολή 15 to my mind just this passage (§ 62) on 
which it is based. Seeing that all mental operations, including δόξα 
itself, are carried on, according to Epicurus, by visuahzed images or 
‘mental representation’, it 1s impossible that Epicurps could have said 
that ‘everything that is grasped by mental representation 1s true’. 
Guussani went farther, I think, in this last clause than he really meant, 
and wished to distinguish the ‘ concepts of science’ from the images 
formed by opinion, but that 1s just the crux of the whole matter. 

Turn once more to the instance in ὃ 62. We have a problem : 
What is the motion of the aioms in a moving compound body? Two 
solutions are offered, one that they are all moving in the same direc- 
tion as the whole, the other that they are moving in imperceptible 
little trajects in all directions. The former is the solution of opinion 
based on the analogy of the perceptible, and it 15 false: the latter 1s 
the solution of ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας, and it 1s true. Why? What 18 
the’ difference in process by which the two solutions are aimed at? 
‘Opimon ’, Epicurus himself tells us—for we may now make use of D. 
ὃ 51-—~‘1s a movement of the mind closely connected with the ἐπιβολὴ 
τῆς διανοίας, but distinct from it?’ What 1s the distinction? Why is 
one lable to produce false results, while the other can only give us what 
is true? If we could answer that question with certainty, we should 
have solved not merely the particular problem before us, but much 
of the difficulty of the Epicurean theory of knowledge. Wuth some 
hesitation I venture to give an answer. So far what we know of 
ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας in the secondary sense 1s that it can apprehend 
concepts, aS In πρόληψις (Clem. Alex.), and that its operation is in 
some way parallel to that of the ἐπιβολὴ τῶν αἰσθητηρίων in the 


1 Loc, cit., p. 179 fin 


Ἐπιβολὴ ‘ris διανοίας 269 


process of ἐπιμαρτύρησις (A. ὃ 38 and K. A. xxiv). Let us attempt to 
apply these ideas to the problem of atomic motion. δόξα frames the 
theory that the atoms in the moving compound all] move in the direc- 
tion of the whole body, as do the perceptible parts of the body How 
is this theory to be tested? According to the ordinary rule of the 
Canontca in dealing with ἄδηλα by reference to the senses. But in 
this case, ether the senses would give us no criterion of judgement, 
or, as in the case of celestial phenomena, several possible theories 
might meet with no ἀντιμαρτύρησις and be equally true Scientific 
theory requires a greater accuracy than this, and as a matter of fact 
Epicurus does not test the δοξαζόμενον by reference to the senses, but 
by reference to an ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας = Scientific thought then about 
the ultimate realities is conducted on some different hnes, and results 
in a ‘one and only’ truth. I suggest that in Epicurus’ view the con- 
cepts of science are built up step by step by the juxtaposition (σύνθεσις) 
of previous concepts, each in their turn grasped as ‘clear’ or self- 
evident by the immediate apprehension of the mind (ἐπιβολὴ τῆς 
διανοία) What is important here is to show that this conclusion 1s 
forced upon us by the passage in question. Epicurus refers the 
δοξαζόμενον not to the senses, but to ‘that which 1s grasped by ἐπιβολὴ 
τῆς διανοίας. What 1s it that is thus apprehended? Clearly the 
‘vision’ or ‘image’ or ‘concept’ of the atoms still, even inside the 
moving compound body, themselves moving 1n every direction And 
how is that vision (ἐναργές) formed? Clearly by the juxtaposition of 
the previous concept of the movement of free or uncompounded atoms 
(itself similarly formed by the apprehension of other ‘clear visions’ in 
juxtaposition) with the concept of atoms enclosed in a moving 
ἄθροισμα ; such a juxtaposition can only make one new image or 
concept—only form one picture and not several alternative pictures— 
and that concept, because it 1s ‘clear’ or, as we might say, ‘self- 
evident’, 18 1mmediately or, as we should say, ‘intuitively’ appre- 
hended by the attentive mind in an ér:Zody. And the moment that 
concept 1s apprehended, 1s seen to be true, we know that the previous 
δοξαζόμενον, founded on an arbitrary analogy, 15 false. Here then 1s 
an exact illustration of what I conceive to be Epicurus’ idea of the 
process of scientific thought Moreover, we now see that this process 
is in reality exactly paralle] to the ἐπιμαρτύρησις. The δοξαζόμενον of 
thought 1s tested, just as is the δοξαζόμενον with regard to a sense- 
impression, by the apprehension—now mental—of a ‘clear’ image, 
seen, as it were, in the nearer view : that apprehension declares against 
the supposition of opimion, and at the same time, as the near view 
should, gives the one and only truth. Finally, it 1s now possible to 
say that the difference between opimion and mental apprehension is 
that whereas δόξα arbitrarily combines many kinds of concepts with 
each other or with the images of sense, ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας 1mmMe- 
diately apprehends a new concept as the necessary result of the com- 
bination of concepts, themselves similarly apprehended. ἐπιβολὴ τῆς 


270 I, ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


διανοίας then, as it plays its part in the highest mental operation of 
scientific thought, is the immediate ‘ apprehension by the mind of the 
concepts of scientific truth’, which 1s concegved of as a chain of 
necessarily connected and self-evident visuahzations, 

It remains to test this 1dea by reference to the other passages in 
Epicurus. 

B. § 50 deals solely with the form and qualities of στερέμνια. The 
secondary sense of ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας has no place here, and we may 
say confidently that Epicurus 15 thinking solely of the primary sense of 
the mental apprehension of ‘subtle 1mages’. C, ὃ 51 1s similarly 
concerned with the theory of ‘idols’, Again the ‘mental appre- 
hension’ involved there 1s solely the semi-sensational apprehension 
of the subtle 1mages. But in A. ὃ 38 the new conception supphes 
exactly the lack which was felt on the first examination of the passage. 
In it the parallel between the two kinds of ἐπιβολή, that of the senses 
and that of the mind, 1s very promment, as also 1s the conception of the 
mpoopevoy and ἐπιμαρτύρησις. Including the second meaning of ἐπι- 
βολὴ τῆς διανοίας it 1s possible to complete the parallel: ἐπιβολὴ τῆς 
διανοίας 1s a test by which to judge the ἄδηλα, not merely because some 
ἄδηλα give us direct mental impressions, but because by the process 
of the ‘near view’ of scientific concepts, hypotheses about the :mper- 
ceptible may be tested and the truth ‘clearly ’perceived. The passage 
1s given a fullness of meaning which was before notably Jacking. Once 
again in K. A. xxiv the secondary sense 1s, though not perhaps so 
clearly, included. The ἀπορούμενον of scientific mquiry 1s, hke the 
distant view, ἃ προσμένον as Opposed to it 1s the ‘near view’, τὸ παρὸν 
ἤδη κατὰ τὴν ἐπιβολὴν τῆς διανοίας. If these be not kept distinct, 
science, hke everyday hfe, will be confounded with groundless 
opinion. 

I do not of course wish to substitute this new conception of the 
ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας for that of Tohte, but to add it to it: ‘mental 
apprehension’ 1s of course concerned with the subtle images, but also 
with the concepts of science. If we now turn back to Giussam’s 
summary, and exclude the rash generahzation of the final clause, we 
shall see that it precisely represents the conclusion we have reached, 
only that we now know the reason for the inclusion of all its parts 
“The ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας comprehends both what Tohte supposes 
(for there it 1s the immediate apprehension of an image perceptible 
only by the mind), but not that alone, and πρόληψις, as Brieger wishes 
(for the act of πρόληψις 15 again an immediate apprehension by the 
mind of an image that can exist only in the mind and 1s itself a 
criterionof truth), and (what Giussani wishes, but does not clearly express 
or explain) scientific concepts (for in their case ἐπιβολή 15 the act of 
apprehension in the nearer view of clear and self-evident concepts).’ 
But ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας 18 not ‘mental apprehension in general’, for 
that would include also the operations of δόξα, which are lable to 
error. The result then of this long investigation is to confirm what 


"Em Born τῆς διανοίας 411 


I beheve Giussani really meant, only I hope that the process of 
investigation has put his theory on a firmer basis for parts of my 
argument I cannot, I fear, claim complete ἐπιμαρτύρησις in the 
authorities, but I fully believe there 1s no ἀντιμαρτύρησις ; and as I 
may certainly claim that the whole subject 1s ἄδηλον, that 1s as much 
as can be demanded 

There remain over certain additional problems which are closely 
connected with the main question. 

1. It 1s not difficult now to see that ἐπιβολαζ in ὃ 36 15 used in 
a technical sense, but also in the widest possible meaning, including 
all ἐπιβολαί both of the αἰσθητήρια and of the διάνοια ‘The most 
essential thing ’, for a scientific inquirer, ‘1s to be able to conduct 
acutely his acts of observation or apprehension, both with the senses 
and in the mind’ Similarly we can now say that the passage from 
Aetius quoted on p. 261 1s technical, and concerns ἐπιβολαί both of 
the senses and of the mind. 

2. It will be noticed that in some of the extracts! there is prefixed 
to ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας the epithet φανταστική, The question has 
often been raised whether the φανταστικὴ ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας differs 
from any other form of ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας, and if so, what the 
difference 1s. Both Tohte and Giussam, though for different reasons, 
deny the difference, Tohte because it 1s obvious that the only ἐπιβολή 
he conceives—the direct apprehension of the subtle 1mages—is always 
necessarily φανταστική, Glussani because, since all thought 1s con- 
ducted by visual images, 1t 15 impossible to imagine an ἐπιβολή (or 
even a δόξα) which 1s not φανταστική. I should be inclined to agree 
m denying the difference, of course for Giussam’s reason, but I also 
think that in the passages where the epithet 1s used, Epicurus 1s think- 
ing primarily of the ἐπιβολή of the subtle φαντασία of the gods, &c , 
and not of that of scientific concepts, for 1t 1s more obviously and 
immediately φανταστική 

3. A more difficult and important problem 15 the question why 
‘the Epicureans ’* made the φανταστικὴ ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας a criterion 
of truth, with sts almost equally difficult corollary, why Epicurus, after 
his constant coupling of it with the other criteria, did not. I hope 
that the previous discussion has thrown some light on this point. In 
justice to ‘the Epicureans’ we must in the first place notice how 
exceedingly elose Epicurus himself comes to calling it a criterion. In 
E. § 62 he affirms that the conclusions reached (or, as we should 
rather say, the images grasped) by ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας are always 
true: in B. § 50 he states similarly that the image of the form of 
a concrete object apprehended by ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας 18 mn fact Its 
form: in A. ὃ 38 he speaks of the ἐπιβολαί ‘of the mind or of any of 
the κριτήρια ᾿ (used here, as we have seen, in an active sense, of the 
senses which make the ἐπιβολαί, = αἰσθητήρια), and in C ὃ 51 even 


1 §§ 31, 57 3η., K. Δ xxiv. 2D. L. x. 31. 


212 I. ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


more explicitly of ‘the ἐπιβολαί of the mind or of the rest of the 
κριτήρια᾽ : finally in Κύριαι Δόξαι xxiv the φανταστικὴ ἐπιβολὴ τῆς 
διανοίας is ranked alongside with αἴσθησις and the πάθη. The cumula- 
tive impression of these passages 1s certainly that of a tacit acceptance 
of ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας as ἃ κριτήριον, apd one feels that ‘the 
Epicureans’ had but a very small step to take. Yet Epicurus never 
in so many words states that the ἐπιβολή is a κριτήριον of truth and 
his authoritative lst of the κριτήρια does not contain it. Can we 
explain his reluctance to make this identification as contrasted with 
the Epicureans’ apparent insistence upon it? I think I can give an 
answer. Epicurus did not mclude the ἐπιβολή ἷ mainly, I believe, for 
two closely allied reasons * (1) that he felt uneasy about the ‘ truth’ of 
certain of the images directly apprehended by the mind, about the 
visions, that is, of delirium, the συστάσεις and some of the images of 
sleep , (2) that in spite of all his insistence on the truth of αἴσθησις, 
he felt similarly uneasy about the passive sensation, and im particular 
about the ‘distant view’. In other words, to put these two difficulties 
together, Epicurus did not wish to raise in any form the question of 
‘truth ’ involved in the relation of the image, the ‘idol’ and the real 
object, for any such ‘ stirmng of the mind’ might have impenlled his 
whole system, There are plenty of similar indications of the same 
hesitation at different points in his psychology. On the other hand, 
where their Master feared to tread, the Epicureans rushed in and 
included the ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας τῇ the criteria Their reasons were, 
I beheve, somewhat as follows (1) They strongly maintainéd the 
truth of the ‘image’ on the ground of its correspondence to the 
‘idals ’: 1t was then necessary to admit that the ‘idol’ of the ‘ distant 
view ’ (e.g. the small round tower) was untrue as a representation of 
the concrete object ἐπιμαρτύρησις and the ‘near view’ obtained by 
ἐπιβολή Is then the only method of securing full truth, 1.6. complete 
correspondence of object, ‘idol’ andimage (2) Similarly in the region 
of thought the only method of distinguishing the certain concepts of 
science from the false hypotheses of δόξα, was by insistence on the 
truth of ideas obtained by ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας. (3) They were anxious 
(as Tohte has suggested) to maintain the certainty of the knowledge 
of the gods as obtained by the immediate mental apprehension of their 
images. The Epicureans had already been denounced on the ground 
of atheism, and it was necessary to rebut the charge. * 

4. In conclusion we must consider certam expressions .in Latin 


1 Notice that all the passages in the Letter to Herodotus give us just as much 
justification for the inclusion of the ἐπιβολή of the senses as a criterion, as they do 
for that of the ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας the passage in the Kvpia: Δόξαι alone places the 
φανταστικὴ ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας on a different footing. 

3. Tt seems odd at first sight that they did not also put in ἐπιβολὴ τῶν αἰσθητηρίων, 
but the reason clearly 15 that 2t was already sncladed under αἴσθησις, whereas in 
Epicurus’ list there was no mental κριτήριον at all, under which ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας 
might be subsumed. 


"Em fod} τῆς διανοίας 273 


authors, which appear to have a connexion with the ἐπιβολὴ τῆς 
διανοίας. In one passage of Cicero and two (possibly three) in 
Lucretius such an echo seems clear: we must ask whether it is the 
result of mere coincidence or of translation, and if the latter, what 1s 
the exact relation of the Latin passages to Epicurus’ theory. 

(a) Cic. de Nat. Deor. i. 54 ‘si 1mmensam et interminatam in 
omnis partis magnitudinem regionum videretis, in quam se inrczens 
animus ef tntendens ita \ate longeque peregmnatur, ut nullam tamen 
oram ultimam videat, in qua possst insistere” The mind 1s here 
‘ projecting and straining ttself towards (or snto)’ the infimty of space 

(δ) Luer. ii. 1044-1047 : 


quaerit enim rationem animus, cum summa loci sit 
infinita fons haec extra moenia mundi, 

quid sit 1b1 porro quo prospicere usque velit mens~ 
atque anim: tactus fiber quo pervolet 1pse. 


The mind is here similarly ‘ projecting itself freely’ snto infinite space 
to ask what there is outside our world. 

(c) Lucr. 1. 739-744. The poet has stated that the atoms are 
colourless, and wishes to forestall the objection that we can have no 
mental pictures which can give us knowledge of such atoms. 


in quae corpora si nullus tibi forte videtur 
posse anim: tnuecfus fien, procul avius erras. 


scire hcet nostrae quoque menti corpora posse 
verti in notitiam nullo circumlita fuco. 


We can ‘ project our mind’ to bodies without colour: they can form 
a concept in our mind. 
(4) Lucr. τ. 1080 would, 1f Winckelmann’s conjecture 


in primis animahbus inice mentem 


be right, offer us another example of the similar idea, ‘turn your 
attention to the animals’, but (4) τς with the ablative animalzdus as 
compared with zm with the accusative in the other passages 13 not 
satisfactory, or indeed natural, (6) I doubt if the sense 1s nght, as we 
my see subsequently. The MS. text :ndice mente should probably be 
ept 

(e) To these passages we must add, though the expression is 
different, another already quoted in connexion with the ἐπιβολή 
(iv. 802~817), and note especially : 


et quia tenvia sunt, misz σας contendii,’ acute 
cernere non potis est animus; proinde omnia quae sunt 
praeterea pereunt, nsf st ad guae se tpse paravit. (802-804) 


? Compare Cicero’s ‘animus. . . se tzsfendens’ τῇ (a) above. 
2078 5 7 


274 Il, ΠΡῸΣ HPOAOTON 


and 
et tamen in rebus quoque apertis noscere possis, 
st non advertas animum, proinde esse quasi omni 
tempore semotum fuertt longeque remotum. (811--813) 
- 


It 18 clear in the first place that none of these passages (except the 
last, which has no phrase which can be a direct translation of ἐπιβολὴ 
τῆς διανοίας) 18 concerned with the direct mental apprehension of 
subtle images. Tohte’ therefore, who restricts ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας to 
this sense, though he admits that the Latin az imuecfus, ὅζο,, 15. a 
translation of Epicurus’ term, yet concludes that ‘ Lucretius and Cicero 
have used these expressions in another sense from that in which 
Epicurus used the corresponding Greek’. But Giussani* has rightly 
insisted that the very oddness of the Latin phrases, the coincidence 
between the expressions of Cicero and Lucretrus, and the occurrence 
of Cicero’s term τὴ a passage where he is obviously following his 
Epicurean text carefully, will make 11 certain that the Latin expressions 
were an intentronal and careful translation of Epicurus’ technical term. 
Guussani, who of course approached the whole problem from the point 
of view of Lucretius, was m fact largely tnfluenced by the apparent 
width of ideas embraced im these Latin passages to conclude that 
ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας is a wide term for ‘mental representation in 
general’. As we have seen, that contentton will not hold and must 
be limited. Is there anythmg in these Latin passages which is 
mconsistent with our general conclusion about the ἐπιβολή ὃ 

In (a2) and (4) the tdea is the same, the ‘projection of the mind’ 
into the infinity of space: here we have exactly the notron of the 
ἐπιβολή, 28 we have explained it: it 1s the mental examination of 
a scientific concept. The Epicurean parallel 1s E. ὃ 62. In (c) we 
have a particularly interesting instance of the same idea: we can have 
an ἐπιβολή of the colourless atoms, for again it 1s an image based on 
πρόληψις (nofham, τι. 745, 3s always Lucretius’ technical translation of 
πρόληψις). In (d) I think Winckelmann’s emendation cannot be nght, 
for we should not have an ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας of ‘animals’ either as 
a dtrect mental apprehension of a subtle image, or as a scientific 
concept (though we might of course have an ordinary πρόληψις of 
‘animal’), Lucretius would more naturally have said simply, ‘look at 
animals’, as he practically does in n. 342 ff. If anece menfem 15 right, it 
3s a loose use of the phrase. Finally, in (ὁ we have an instance without 
a technical term of the general idea of the ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας in the 
primary sense of the apprehension of subtle (éenvza) images. 

It may fairly be said then that the Latin passages, so far from 
creating any difficulty or being in any way inconsistent with Epicurus’ 
phraseology, strongly confirm the general view we have taken, and 


especially the second sense of ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας as the apprehen- 
sion of a scientifically venfied concept 


Ὁ ps 34. 2p. 171. 


LETTER TO PYTHOCLES 


Tue authenticity of the Epistle to Pythocles appears to have been 
a matter of doubt even im antiquity, as we learn from a note! of 
Philodemus, the Epicurean, found among the rolls of Herculaneum. 
The work itself, as Usener has clearly shown,? strongly confirms this 
suspicion. The sections dealing with different topics are not united, 
as are those in the other epistles, by any link of thought or even by 
the famihar introductory phrases καὶ μήν, ἀλλὰ μὴν καί, &c.: ther 
order 1s unsystematic, and the stars are dealt with twice in §§ go—98 
and §§ 111-115, the latter passage being added as an afteithought. 
We may add that the style 1s neither the highly technical and crabbed 
writing of the first letter, nor the polished and more elaborate dicuon 
of the third, but ἃ slipshod composition suggestive of abridgement. 
It might perhaps be answered to Usener’s objections that the subyects 
with which the letter deals do not admit of much co-ordimation, and are 
always put together in Epicurean documents in a rather haphazard 
manner, as in the sixth book of Lucretiuy the double treatment of 
the stars, too, 1s not a greater dislocation than we find in the text of 
the first letter, as we now have it. But in fact the letter throughout 
bears the clearest marks of being an abridged compilation from some 
larger work, the gist of Epicurus’ teaching being put down rather 
hastily into a small compass Yet, as Usener has himself shown, this 
very fact allows us to place complete confidence in the authority, if 
not the authenticity, of the letter we may be confident that, with the 
exception of the introduction, we have the exact teaching and in many 
cases probably the exact words of the Master himself. The letter 15 
not of such great interest as the other two, either in the subjects 
treated or the manner of treatment, but it helps greatly, when com- 
pared with the sixth book of Lucretius, to fill in the details of the 
Epicurean system 

Pythocles, to whom the letter 1s addressed, was a young dis- 
ciple of great “beauty, of whom Epicurus was very fond. He thought 
him, we are told,? a sort of Alcibiades, and a fragment of a 
letter addressed to him speaks of Epicurus waiting for ‘the coming 
of lus lovely and godlike presence’. In another place® we find 


1 Voll Hercul coll. alt, 1 1, f. 152 ὑποψ[ία)ν τινὰ AaluBarlely, ὡς περὶ τινῶν 
ἐπιστολ[ῶν) καὶ τῆς ἱπρὸς Mu@loxAéa πὶ εἸρὶ [pelrewpar ἐπιτομῆς. 
pp xxxvil-xh. 
5. Alciphro, Ep τὶ 3 ᾿Αλκιβιαδην τινὰ Πυθοκλέα νομίζει. 
4 Fr. 34 καθεδοῦμαι προσδοκῶν τὴν ἱμερτὴν καὶ ἰσόθεόν σον εἴσοδον. 
5 Fr, 33 παιδείαν δὲ πᾶσαν, μακάριε, φεῦγε τἀκάτιον ἀράμενος. 
S 2 : 


276 Il, ΠΡῸΣ TITOOKAEA 


Epicurus adjuring him to ‘unmoor his bark and flee from all cul- 
ture ’, in the idea doubtless that he should give himself up to the study 
of Epicurean philosophy. A letter to Idomeneus ' addresses him appa- 
rently as a sort of apelin of Pythocles, and suggests that his conduct 
needed control. It was then natural that he should be selected by 
the compiler as the recipient of this letter. 


Inrropuction (§§ 84-88). 


The introduction is, no doubt, the work of the computer, and 15 
closely modelled in thought and diction on the introductions to the 
other letters, but by an occasional strange word or phrase seems to 
show that it is not by Epicurus himself. §§ 84, 85 are the usual 
epistolary opening, the request from Pythocles for a treatment of 
τὰ μετέωρα and Epicurus’ consent, together with the hope that it will 
be of value to other disciples as well: all this might be suggested by 
the opening of the letter to Herodotus 


§ 84. τ. Κλέων 1s otherwise unknown, and is possibly a quite 
imaginary person. 

2. διετέλεις. .. πειρῶ * of course epistolary imperfects. 

3. eis μακάριον βίον, ‘to a life of happiness’, which results from the 
knowledge of, and obedience to, the Epicurean philosophy: cf. τὸ 
μακαρίως ζῆν, Ep. tii, § 128, ἄς. 

4. ϑιαλογισμῶν : cf. διαλογισμόν and διαλογίσματα below, but other- 
wise not an Epicurean word, and suggestive rather of other schools of 
philosophy in which discussion and dialectic played a larger part. 

5. περὶ τῶν μετεώρων ‘the phenomena of the sky’: a regular term in 
Epicurus of wide connotation, including not merely what we should 
now call meteorology, but astronomy and, indeed, all the phenomena 
of the sky, and certain subterranean phenomena as well: cf. e.g. 
K. A. x, XL 

abtreplypaor, ‘easy to be drawn in outline’ or ‘sketched’ Again 
otherwise unknown in Epicurus. 

8. βαστάζεις : the MSS. have Baorafew, which would, of course, 
continue the construction of εἶναι, but 1s made impossible by the 
parenthetical ὡς ἔφης. The choice lies between Casaubon’s Baorages 
and Usener’s βαστάζοντι, and in spite of the prevalence of epistolary 
imperfects, the simpler emendation 1s the better; it is adopted by 
Bignone and von der Muehll. The literal meaning ‘ you have in your 
hands’, for purposes of study, 1s more probable than the derivative 
‘you carry in your mind’, which would hardly be possible without 
some addition. Cronert proposes the more violent change to 
κἀδύνατον .. . βαστάζειν. 

9. συνεσχέθημεν: 1.e “1 am constramed’ by the great hopes I have 
of your future to accede to your request. 


1 Fr, 28 εἰ βούλει πλούσιον Τνθοκλέα ποιῆσαι, μὴ χρημάτων προστίθει, τῆς δὲ 
ἐπιθυμίας ἀφαίρει. 


COMMENTARY. §§ 84-85 277 


§ 85. τ. τὰ λοιπὰ πάντα, ‘all my other writings’, a slightly odd 
expression, which would not however be improved by Usener’s sugges- 
tion τὰ λείποντα. 

4. φυσιολογίας : Epicurus’ regular technical term for the knowledge 
of nature and natural laws: cf. Ep.1, ὃ 37,1 23 K. A. x. 

γνησίου, ‘ genuine’, i.e. the Epicurean science as opposed to any 
other. 

τοῖς εἰς ἀσχολίας .. ἐμπεπλεγμένοις, ‘ for those involved too deeply 
{se.to have time for full philosophical study) in one of the route 
occupations’, For ἐγκύκλια im this sense cf. Fr. Ivin τοῦ περὶ τὰ 
ἐγκύκλια καὶ πολιτικὰ δεσμωτηρίου, 

6 περιόδευε, " go through from point topomt’ <A good Epicurean 
word: cf. Ep 1, § 36,1 10 τῆς συνεχοῦς τῶν ὅλων περιοδείας. 

4. ἂν τῇ μικρᾷ ἐπιτομῇ πρὸς Ἡρόδοτον ἀπεστείλαμεν. an attempt to 
link on this letter with the first that suggests doubts as to its genuine- 
ness. It 1s interesting to find that as early as the composition of this 
letter—in the first or second generation of Epicurus’ pupils—the letter 
to Herodotus was known as the μικρὰ ἐπιτομή in distinction to the 
μεγάλη ἐπιτομή, which was probably a more complete but less elaborate 
exposition of the whole system, intended for novices. Bignone notes, 
however, that in the Vi/a £picurz, § 135, a passage 1s quoted as from 
the μικρὰ ἐπιτομή Which does not occur in the letter to Herodotus. 
this throws some doubt on the identification. It was the μεγάλη 
ἐπιτομή in all probability which was used by Lucretius see Grussan, 
vol, 1, p. 10. 

88 85~87 are concerned with the purpose of this investigation of the 
phenomena of the sky and the principles of its conduct. The sections 
are entirely based on two main ideas and their interconnexion, and 
are modelled both in diction and subject on δὲ 78-80 of the letter 
to Herodotus (1) The purpose of this branch of inquiry, as of all 
others in the Epicurean philosophy, is to prepare the way for the 
tranquil hfe so long as we have any disquieting suspicion that the 
movements of the stars οἱ pliases of the weather are due to divine 
action and portend or express the attitude of divine beings to men, we 
cannot live undisturbed: we must learn that they are all caused by 
the action of natural law (2) In the method of inquiry we shall find 
a difference from the procedure employed in ethics and in the explana- 
tion of earthly phenomena. In both those spheres it is possible to 
trace any given effect to us one single cause, but in dealing with τὰ 
μετέωρα we shall often have 10 suggest several causes for the same 
phenomenon—and this for two reasons firstly, that in these greater 
phenomena of nature there often 1s more than one cause which can 
produce the same effect , secondly, that, as we are not able to observe 
them as closely as earthly phenomena, we cannot be sure of the 
exact cause in any given case. We must then be ready to accept any 
probable explanation, provided it does not conflict with the data of 
sense-perception. But this plurality of causes need not gause us any 


a78 1. ΠΡῸΣ TITOOKAEA 


disturbance—and here the two ideas draw together—for it 1s not due 
to any arbitrariness or uncertainty in the sequence of occurrences, 
or to any breach in the laws of nature, but merely to the natural 
difference of the phenomena themselves and our relation to 
oe These two notions are repeated ad nauseam throughout the 
etter, 

At the end of § 87 Epicurus proceeds more closely to the question 
of method, and says that we must use the analogy of earthly pheno- 
mena to explain the heavenly, but never in doing so lose sight of the 
exact sense-impression which the phenomena in question makes 
upon us. 

9. pH... νομίζειν this direct general prohibition with μή and the 
infiniuve is not characteristic of Epicurus’ own style: he would usually 
say ob δεῖ νομίζειν or οὐ νομιστέον. For this reason Kochalsky pro- 
posed to alter ἐκ, which Usener regards as suspec/um, to εἰκός. But 
μή (not of) makes this rmpossible, and also invalidates Bignone’s 
explanation that we should understand δεῖ or δυνατόν or ἐνδέχεται. 

10, κατὰ συναφήν, ‘in connexion’ with the other doctrines of the 
system, physical or moral: see below for the distinction which 
Epicurus makes. For the expression οἵ, ὃ 88, ]. 2 τὰ συναπτόμενα 
τούτῳ. 

αὐτοτελῶς, ‘independently’, as a department by themselves. For 
the general idea of the ultimate moral purpose of all physical mnvestiga- 
tion cf. Ep 1, § 82, l. 1 ἡ δὲ ἀταραξία τὸ τούτων πάντων ἀπολελύσθαι κτλ. 
and K. A. x1. Bignone notes the supremacy of the mora] interest in 
philosophy after the time of Aristotle : 

§ 86. 1. μήτε: notice the very slight connexion. As Usener 
remarks, Epicurus himself would have wnitten ἔπειτα μήτε Kochalsky 
would transfer καὶ from after ἀδύνατον before μήτε. 

τὸ ἀδύνατον καὶ παραβιάζεσθαι, ‘to try actually to force that which 15. 
impossible ’, 1 e. to force on phenomena an explanation derived from 
prejudice, but mconsistent with the evidence of the senses. An 
expression quite in Epicurus’ manner, the sense of which 18 resumed 
In ἀξιώματα κενὰ καὶ νομοθεσίας below, 1. 9. 

καὶ is ἃ little forced, and 1s omitted in several of the MSS, Cronert 
would expunge it, and Bignone thinks that it attached a second 
adjective which has fallen out, and would read καὶ (ἄπρακτον), ‘and 
would not lead to practical results’, Ithmk καὶ may be retained as 
emphasizing παραβιάζεσθαι. 

2. τοῖς wept βίων λόγοις, ‘the theories on various types of lives’, 
i.e. on ethics. The expression is odd, but doubtless intended as 
a link with Epicurus’ treatise, Περὶ βίων (cf. D.L. x. 27 30). this 
again seems to point to a compiler. 

3. τῶν ἄλλων φυσικῶν προβλημάτων : i.e. the problems of earthly 
phenomena and the problems of the ἄδηλα concerning the ultimate 
composition of the universe, in both of which there is only one 
Tight explanation. 


COMMENTARY. §§ 85-87 279 


3. κάθαρσιν, ‘explanation’, ‘clearing up’, a very unusual use, but 
paralleled just below, § 87. 4, by ἐκκαθαιρομένων. 

4. ὅτι τὸ way ...: a quotation from Ep 1, § 39, |. 7. 

σώματα. the MSS. have σῶμα, and the passage in Ep.i 1s not 
decisive owmg to a lacuna, but Epicurus elsewhere always uses 
σώματα in the plural. The atomic theory does not conceive of matter 
as one body, but an infinite number of bodies. We should, therefore, 
accept Usener’s correction. 

ἀναφὴς φύσις : sc the void. Cf. Ep 1, § qo, lL. 2, and note there. 

ὅτι ἄτομα (τὰ) στοιχεῖα : cf. Ep. 1, § 41,1, 1. Usener’s insertion of 
the article 1s necessary. 

5. τὰ τοιαῦτα δὴ ὅσα is Bignone’s correction for the MS τὰ τοιαῦτα 
ἢ ὅσα" this seems better than Usener’s omission of #, which it 1s hard 
to account for. 

ὅσα povaxhy ἔχει. .., ‘all things that have only one method of 
harmony with phenomena’, i.e. can only be explamed in one way 
which 1s consistent with the evidence of the senses. 

7. πλεοναχὴν ἔχει καὶ ms γενέσεως αἰτίαν not ‘have a complex 
cause of birth’, but ‘ several possible causes of birth’ ; see introductory 
note above, and compare Ep. 1, ὃ 80, 1. 10 πλεοναχῶς γίνεται. 

8, τῆς οὐσίας... κατηγορίαν, ‘an account of its existence’, xary- 
γορία 1s again not a normal word in Epicurus, though he uses the 
verb. ᾿ 

9. ἀξιώματα κενά, ‘propositions assumed without ground’, τ 6. @ 
2Τιογι statements not founded on the evidence of the senses: 80 κενός 
always in Epicurus; e g κενῆς δόξης, ὃ 87, 1 2, below, and K. A, xv, 
XXIX 

νομοθεσίας ᾿ similarly the ‘laying down of principles’ before inquiry. 

8 87. 1 ἤδη ἀλογίας has the best MS authority, but B and other 
MSS. read ἰδιαλογίας, which may conceal ἰδιολογίας in the sense 
of ‘personal prejudice’, which would not be unlike Epicurean lan- 
guage. With the text as it stands ἤδη means ‘now that we have 
learnt the right method’. 

2. τοῦ ἀθορύβως... ζῆν is of course the Epicurean ideal of life. So 
in the corresponding passage, Ep. 1, ὃ 80 ἀταρακτῆσαι, ἀταρακτήσομεν. 

πάντα... γίνεται ἀσείστως corresponds to τὸ ἀθορύβως... ξῆν: 
the idea] is fulfilled, and all life runs without disturbance. 

κατὰ πάντων (τῶν). . . ἐκκαθαιρομένων with some hesitation I have 
adopted the emendation of Bignone, ‘all goes without disturbance in 
regard to all of the phenomena explained in several ways in harmony 
with our experience, when one admits convincing explanations of 
them’: 1e. if you once accept the prinaple that all convincing 
explanations must be admitted, then you can have the same ἀταραξία 
with regard to the celestial phenomena as you can have in morals and 
eaithly phenomena. HPQ have πᾶν τῶν and the other MSS. have 
κατὰ πάντων without the article, which will not stand. Bignone’s 
reading involves an unusual meaning of κατά with the genitive, but 


280 1. ΠΡῸΣ ΠΥΘΟΚΛΕᾺΑ 


is better than the alternative κατὰ πᾶν τῶν. Usener alters κατά to καί, 
‘even when all things are explaimed in several ways’, but that 15 
against Epicurus’ teaching, for he only admits such plural explanations 
in regard to celestial phenomena. Cronert would omit κατά, making 
the construction an awkward genitive absolute. 

6. καταλίπῃ, ‘leaves undisturbed ’, does not try to get rid of it: so 
ἀπολέπῃ in the next clause as opposed to ἐκβάλῃ. 

8. ἐπὶ... τὸν μῦθον, ‘to superstition’, for the characteristic of the 
religious explanation of phenomena 15 that it asserts one theory to the 
exclusion of all others, and claims certainty where it cannot be attaimed 
by reason. 

σημεῖα, ‘indications’ earthly phenomena cannot give us certain 
explanations of heavenly phenomena, but they can afford hints and 
analogies, which we can follow up. 

g. δ᾽ ἐπί: Usener’s text, which, on the whole, seems the best solu- 
tion. The MSS. are divided between δέ τι, from which Usener’s 
conjecture ts demved, and δέ τινα, which would just construe, though 
the repetition of rua just below would be very awkward Bignone 
conjectures δὲ πι(θα)νά, carrying on the idea of τὸ πιθανολογούμενον ἸΏ 
1, 5, but this 1s going very far away from the text. 

10. 9. a brilliant correction of Woltjer's for the meaningless 4 of 
the MSS. 

καὶ οὐ τὰ... φαινόμενα. almost concessive in effect, ‘though we 
cannot observe celestial phenomena’, The clause would certainly be 
made easier by Cronert’s οὐχ ὡς (based on F’s οὕτως), but the change 
18 not necessary. 

8 88. 1, τὸ... φάντασμα : the actual appearance of the phenomena 
1n sense-perception. 

ἑκάστου: there seems no reason for accepting the conjecture in 
Usener’s note ἕκαστον, which 15 derived from the ἑκάστων of Froben’s 
edition. 

τηρητέον, ‘must be kept to’, a favourite word of Epicurus’ in this 
sense: cf. Ep. i, § 38, 1. 4 κατὰ ras αἰσθήσεις δεῖ πάντα τηρεῖν. A 
good instance of this principle 15 Epicurus’ theory that sun and moon 
are actually the size we see them ; αἴσθησις here gives us information 
and we must not try to get behind 1t. 

καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ συναπτόμενα.... πλεοναχῶς συντελεῖσθαι : Jit. ‘and as re- 
gards what ts associated with the actual appearance we must distingursh 
those things of which there 1s no evidence in our experience against 
several causes’. ra συναπτόμενα are the opimons (προσδοξαζόμενα) 
which we associate with the actual perception of sensation. In deal- 
ing with celestial phenomena we must distinguish those opinions, 
which may al] stmultaneously be true, from those which are certainly 
true or certainly false. This is Bignone’s explanation of the passage, 
and I have little doubt that 1t is mght. Usener reads ἔτι for ἐπὶ and 
puts a comma at διαιρετέον, ‘we must distinguish from the actual 
appearance that which 1s associated with it, and of which there 1s no 


COMMENTARY. §§ 87-88 281 


evidence against several causes’. But this is not so satisfactory, since 
among the συναπτόμενα of an appearance there may be some where 
there is no question of several opinions. 

2. ἃ οὐκ ἀντιμαρτυρεῖται : another technical expression of Epicurus’ : 
we must bring our several explanations to the test of our experience 
and reject any which are refuted by it: there may still be several left 
uncontradicted. 


I. Wortps. 


The compiler of the letter plunges at once into the physical theory 
of Epicurus, and deals first with the nature and formation of worlds 
As he 1s obviously putting together his account from different sources 
{sometimes apparently from the letter to Herodotus), the result is 
a little disjointed and here and there obscure But we are not justified 
in rejecting as glosses statements, for which there 1s good evidence 
elsewhere, on the ground that they do not fit in very well with the 
context (see notes on lines 5 and 6). A world is first defined as 
a circumscribed portion of sky: then its boundaries and shape are 
discussed. We are next told that there are infinite worlds, and their 
creation and growth are described with comments on certain false 
theories, All these are well-known Epicurean topics, and the details 
will be better discussed in the individual notes. §§ 45, 73, and 74 of 
the letter to Herodotus should be compared together with Lucr. ἢ. 
1048-1174 and v. 416-508, 534-563 

4. κόσμος Epicurus’ conception of a ‘world’, lke that of all 
ancient philosophers, was of a system in which the earth was the 
centre, and around it moved in orbits ever more distant, moon, sun, 
planets, and stars, the circumference of heaven forming the outer 
boundary. He differed from most of his predecessors in conceiving 
that there was an infinite number of such κόσμοι besides our own. 

περιοχή τις οὐρανοῦ: 1.6. a certain portion of sky circumscribed by 
a boundary (πέρας) 

ἄστρα : including sun and moon as well as stars: cf. § go, 1.6 ἥλιός 
τε καὶ σελήνη καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ ἄστρα. Lucretius similarly uses @s/ra in 
an inclusive sense, v. 509. 

γῆν, ‘an earth’, a body like our earth to be the centre of the system. 

5. πάντα τὰ φαινόμενα : both astronomical and meteorological ; mn 
fact, those with which he deals in the rest of this letter. 

5, 6. From this point the rest of the sentence is very confused in 
the MSS. it runs ἀποτομὴν ἔχουσα ἀπὸ τοῦ ἀπείρου καὶ καταλήγουσα 
ἐν πέρατι ἢ ἀραιῷ ἢ πυκνῷ καὶ οὗ λυομένου πάντα τὰ ἐν αὐτῷ σύγχυσιν 
λήψεται καὶ λήγουσα ἢ ἐν περαγομένῳ. . περιγραφήν. It 1s, I think, 
clear that this has been put together from various sources, but we are 
not justified im assuming with Usener (who expunges καὶ καταλήγουσα 
εν ἢ πυκνῷ and καὶ οὗ Avoyévov . . . λήψεται as two separate glosses) 
that the composition was affected by any one other than the original 
compiler of the letter. It is surely more reasonable to suppose some 


282 IL ΠΡῸΣ MYOOKAEA 


dislocation. οὗ Avopeévouv . . . λήψεται is clearly part of the definition 
and should come first: then follow certam descnptive participral 
clauses, (1) of its nature ἀποτομὴν . ἀπείρου, (2) of its boundary καὶ 
καταλήγουσα.. .. στάσιν ἔχοντι, (3) of its shape καὶ στι ὕλην... 
περιγραφήν. καὶ λήγουσα then, which occurs in the MSS. after 
λήψεται, Should be omitted as a mere repetition of καὶ καταλήγουσα 
above caused by the misplacement of the clause οὗ λυομένου. .. 
λήψεται, and a participle (ἔχουσαν must be supplied with the last 
clause. We thus obtain a consistent and reasonable statement, and 
are not excluding phrases which add much force to the description. 
Bignone follows Usener in excluding the two clauses, but notes that 
they hang closely together . it 1s because the worlds have a definite 
boundary that their dissolution implies the destruction of all within 
them. 

5. οὗ λυομένου .. λήψεται" 1.6. the περιοχή 18 not any casual piece 
of sky ‘cut off’, but an orgamzed whole, the dissolution of which implies 
disturbance in all its parts. The masculine od goes back, shghtly 
irregularly, to κόσμος τη spite of the intervening περιοχή. 

6. ἀποτομὴν ἔχουσα. . .: 1.6. 1 18 a portion cut off from the infinite 
universe. This 1dea had been already stated by Leucappus: D.L 1x. 
31 γίνεσθαι δὲ τοὺς κόσμονς οὕτω φέρεσθαι κατ' ἀποτομὴν ἐκ τῆς ἀπείρου 
(sc. φύσεως) πολλὰ σώματα, παντοῖα τοῖς σχήμασιν εἰς μέγα κενόν. For 
ἀποτομὴν ἔχουσα equivalent practically to ἀποτμηθεῖσα cf. στάσιν 


ἔχοντι, |. 8 

Ἴ. καὶ καταλήγουσα ἐν πέρατι : 1.6. a world has a quite definite 
boundary : cf. Ep. 1, § 73,1. 7 τοὺς κόσμους. . . καὶ πᾶσαν σύγκρισιν 
πεπερασμένην. 


ἢ ἀραιῷ ἢ πυκνῷ this boundary may in 115 composition be either 
dense or rare: that of our world, the ‘flammantia moenia mundi’ (Lucr. 
1. 73), is rare: cf. Aetiusn 7 3, Ὁ 336d (Usener, /r 303) ’Exixoupos 
ἐνίων μὲν κόσμων ἀραιὸν τὸ πέρας, ἐνίων δὲ πυκνόν, καὶ τούτων τὰ μέν 
τινα κινούμενα τὰ δ᾽ ἀκίνητα. 

ἢ ἂν περιαγομένῳ ἢ ἐν στάσιν ἔχοντι. the outer circumference may 
either move round, as most probably, according to Epicurus, does 
that of our world (§ 92), or be stationary . cf. the passage from Aetius . 
just quoted. Gassendi corrected the MS. error ἔνστασιν to ἐν στάσιν. 

8. καὶ στρογγύλην . . . περιγραφήν: for this possibility of vanation 
in the shape of worlds cf. Ep 1, ὃ 74, 1. 1 ἔτι δὲ καὶ τοὺς κόσμους οὔτε 
ἐξ ἀνάγκης δεῖ νομίζειν ἕνα σχηματισμὸν ἔχοντας. . : and the scholion 
on that passage, ots μὲν γὰρ σφαιροειδεῖς, καὶ φοειδεῖς ἄλλους, καὶ 
ἀλλοιοσχήμονας ἑτέρους. Bignone notes that the Pythagoreans con- 
ceived of a triangular world and Empedocles of an egg-shaped world. 

9. (ἔχουσα): the only alternative to inserting a participle here seems 
to be toread κατὰ στρογγύλην for καὶ στρογγύλην as does the Tauchnitz 
text, But though the confusion of καί and κατά 15 very frequent in 
these MSS., the sense 1s unnatural, and the sentence becomes still more 
incoherent. Usener and Bignone follow the MSS. with no alteration, 


COMMENTARY ὲ 88-89 283 


construcung περιγραφήν presumably after ἔχοντι, but this 1s very 
awkward and hardly sense : a πέρας cannot have a περιγραφή 

πανταχῶς : including, I think, all the previously mentioned alterna- 
tives, the density or rareness and movement or stationary character of 
eth πέρας, as well as the vaneties of shape. The variant πανταχοῦ 18 
a mere error. 

10, τῶν γὰρ φαινομένων... an application of the principle above, 
Ἰ, 2 ἃ οὐκ ἀντιμαρτυρεῖται τοῖς παρ᾽ ἡμῖν φαινομένοις πλεοναχῶς συντε- 
λεῖσθαι. Though our world has ἃ πέρας which 18 ἀραιόν and περιαγό- 
μένον, and 1s in shape σφαιροειδής, there 1s no evidence that there are 
not elsewhere worlds tn which these details differ. 

(dv) τῷδε ἃ necessary correction of Usener's for the MS, rade. 

11. λῆγον οὐκ ἔστι καταλαβεῖν. we cannot advance to the end of 
the world and ourselves perceive its nature: καταλαβεῖν here of sense- 
perception. 

§ 89. 2, εἰσὶν ἄπειροι τὸ πλῆθος ᾿" so Ep. 1, § 45, 1 3 ἀλλὰ μὴνκ ὶ 
κόσμοι ἄπειροι εἰσίν, which may be the source on which the compiler 
draws. but the idea is an Epicurean commonplace. cf, Lucr. un. 1r048~ 
1089. 

καταλαβεῖν. here of mental perception we can quite well picture it 
in our mind, and, as Lucretius shows (loc. cit.), can adduce many 
reasons to prove it must be so. 

8. ἐν κόσμῳ a curious idea, which I do not know elsewhere: a new 
world might form itself within an existing world, presumably as the 
old world dissolved. 

4. καὶ (ἐν): the addition seems necessary, and Usener had already 
suggested κἄν in his notes 

peraxoopiw: a famous technical word of Epicurus’ There being 
in the universe all these κόσμοι of various shapes, there must be 
intervals between them, in which new worlds might be formed It 
was in the μετακόσμια that Epicurus placed the abodes of the gods. 
Cicero, de Vat. Deor. i 8 18, translates the word by infermunata. 

ἐν πολυκένῳ τόπῳ: it would be a place in which there was much 
void, but not entire void, for there 1s no large space of that character 
in the universe : Leucippus then (τινές) was wrong 1n believing it to be 
a ‘great space of pure void’ cf. μέγα κενόν in the passage quoted 
above on § 88,1. 6 

5. ἄν μεγάλῳ εἰλικρινεῖ, sc τόπῳ. There ig no need with Zeller to 
write ἐν μεγάλῳ καὶ εἰλικρινεῖ xevo. Bignone notes the difficulties 
which arose because the atomists did not sufficiently distingutsh 
between space = extension and empty space The phrase μεγάλῳ εἰλι- 
κρινεῖ καὶ κενῷ 1S an attempt to express the latter, like Lucretius’ ‘locus 
mtactus, inane, vacansque’, 1. 334. 

6. mwés Casaubon’s correction for τινα, an obvious error 

ἐπιτηδείων τινῶν... The Epicurean theory of the formation of 
a world many conditions are requisite besides the mere aggregation 
of atoms in a void: (a) they must be atoms of the right kind to form 


284 1. ΠΡῸΣ MTITOOKAEA 


combinations, ἄς. ; (6) they must be capable of uniting (προσθέσεις) and 

forming organized bodies (διαρθρώσεις) and causing changes of posi- 

a ; (ὦ they must be able to supply the right material to the right 
ces. 

ἢ 8. προσθέσεις : the juxtapositions of matter which are creative of 

things. . 

δεκρθρώσεις, ‘articulations’, i.e. they must be able to form bodies 
which are organized: Bignone takes 1tto mean more defimtely ‘con- 
nexions’, but it mphies the notion of separation as well as that of union. 

μεταστάσεις : the moving of portions of matter to their appropriate 
places, e. g. of the fiery materials to the sky, where they can form the 
heavenly bodies and ether. 

9 ἐπαρδεύσεις, ‘Irrigations’, not merely of hquid maternal, but of 
the constant supply of appropriate material to the appropriate quarter. 
The whole descnption should be compared with Lucr. v. 449-494, 
and especially with 1i. 1112-1119, where the diction 15 very like that 
here : 

nam sua cuique locis ex ommbus omnia plagis 
corpora distribuuntur et ad sua saecla recedunt, 
umor ad umorem, terreno corpore terra 

crescit et ignem ignes procudunt aetheraque aether, 
donec ad extremum crescendi perfica finem 

omnia perduxit rerum natura creatnx, 

ut fit ubi nilo 1am plus est quod datur intra 

vitalis venas quam quod fluit atque recedit. 


10. ἕως τελειώσεως, ‘until the period of completion’. Epicurus 
held that with worlds so with bodies there was a process of gradual 
growth, new material being always absorbed, until a hmut of comple- 
tion was reached, and from that σης began the process of decay, in 
which more was given off than taken in: cf. Lucr. un, 1105-1174. 

καὶ διαμονῆς, ‘and stability’: Epicurus recogmized such a period 
between those of growth and decay. It 1s unnecessary to follow 
Usener in altering to διαμονήν (δε ποιούντων), which is very awkward 
in construction. 

11. τὰ ὑποβληθέντα θεμέλια : the atomic foundations on which the 
world is built: 1.6. the original nucle: which uniting im their turn 
formed ‘ things’. . 

τὴν προσδοχὴν δύναται ποιεῖσθαι - i.e. as long as they are capable of 
assimilating new material. See Lucr. u. loc cit.,and particularly 
1122-1130, 

§ 90. 1. οὗ γὰρ ἀθροισμὸν Sei μόνον. a mere aggregation of atoms 
in ἃ void, such as Leucippus had supposed, is not sufficient to make 
a world: the atoms must have these other characteristics, which will 
produce the proper unions, and enable the process of assimilation to 
take place. 

οὐδὲ Bivov; he passes from Leucippus to Democritus, τῶν φυσικῶν 


COMMENTARY. §§ 89-90 285 


καλουμένων τις, who thought that a world was produced mechanically 
by an atomic whirl, caused in its turn by his convenient ‘ maid-of-ail- 
work’ ἀνάγκη, acting thus in a purely arbitrary manner: Epicurus 
thus asserts his independence of both his predecessors in the atomic 
theory. 

2. κατὰ τὸ δοξαζόμενον, ‘according to the mere fancy of the 
imagination’. Democmtus’ supposition of the whirl created by ἀνάγκη 
rests on no evidence of the senses, and it is directly opposed to 
φαινόμενα (see below), it was an ἀξίωμα κενὸν καὶ νομοθεσία = Epicurus 
had of course another quarrel with Democritus’ notion of ἀνάγκη in 
the region of morals, 

3 αὔξεσθαί te: we must supply τὸν κόσμον. Democritus’ notion 
apparently was that the whirl went on gradually increasing in size by 
the assimilation of external particles, until 1t grew so big as to come 
into collision with another world, and then followed destruction: cf. 
Hippol. 565. 13 ἃ φθείρεσθαι δὲ αὐτοὺς ὑπ᾽ ἀλλήλων προσπίπτοντας 

τῶν φυσικῶν: said contemptuously. οἱ φυσικοί, for Epicurus, are 
the earlier cosmologists, whom he associates with the unbending apph- 
cation of ἀνάγκη, and therefore with determinism. cf. Ep. ni, § 134. 1 
ἐπεὶ κρεῖττον ἢν τῷ περὶ θεῶν μύθῳ κατακολουθεῖν ἢ τῇ τῶν φυσικῶν 
εἱμαρμένῃ δουλεύειν: but he is always thinking principally of 
Democnitus. 

4. τοῦτο γὰρ. . . τοῖς φαινομένοις : this might be very diffi- 
cult to explain, if we had not got the illuminating passage at the 
end of Lucr. 11, for of course we have no sense-evidence of the 
creation and destruction of worlds, Epicurus clearly refers to 
the analogy of the growth of bodies, where we see the process of 
assimilation up to a point, after which decay sets in owing to the 
excess of matter lost over that taken in. 


II. Tue Heaventy Bopigs. 


The second main section of the letter, which extends to § 99, deals 
with the heavenly bodies as constituent parts of their respective worlds. 
A variety of points 1s dealt with in the order traditional in Epicurean 
works. The epitome is very bnef, but can be supplemented from 
other Epicurean sources, and especially from the fifth book of 
Lucretius. $he general ideas are founded on the notions of 
Epicurus’ predecessors, and particularly of Democritus, but there 
are many characteristic additions and alterations. It 1s hardly neces- 
sary to add that the whole conception is geocentric 

(a) (6) ὃ θ0. 6-11 deal with the creanon and constitution of the 
heavenly bodies. They were not independently formed and then 
included m a world, but were gradually fashioned inside the world, as 
appropriate bodies were hnked on to them. these bodies were rare in 
texture, and of the nature of wind or fire. All these are doctrines of 
the Atomic School. . 


286 IJ. ΠΡῸΣ TITOOKAEA 


6. τὰ λοιπὰ ἄστρα : the sun and moon being themselves included as 
ἄστρα, a8 in § 88, |. 4, above. 

(od) is an old and necessary addition: the sentence must have been 
negative, as 1s shown by ἀλλ᾽ " 7), and proved by our general know- 
ledge of Epicurus’ theories. Bignone has pointed out that there is no 
real contradiction between this passage and De Placzéis, i. 4 (Usener, 

J®. 308), in which the air is said συμπεριλαμβάνειν τὰ ἄστρα in its 
rotation: this does not necessanly imply that they were onginally 
outside the κόσμος. 

καθ᾽ ἑαυτά, ‘independently ’, outside the κόσμος. 

4. For the gloss after rod κόσμου see note below 

8. εὐθύς, ‘from the start’,1.e from the origin of their own existence 
and that of the κόσμος : as soon as a world was formed, the heavenly 
bodies began to be created in it. cf Lucr. v. 443-454. 

προσκρίσεις : a technical term of Anaxagoras, here used exactly in 
his sense, and possibly with intentional remimscence. From the 
original chaos bodies of ke texture were separated out (κρίσις) and 
joined one another (πρός) " cf. Lucr. v. 443 56." 


diffugere inde loci partes coepere paresque 
cum panbus 1ungi res et discludere mundum 
membraque dividere et magnas disponere partis. 


9. ϑινήσεις, ‘ vortices’, referring to the independent rotation of the 
revolving nuclei, and not to the δῖνος which causes the movement of 
the heavenly bodies through the sky 

λεπτομερῶν, ‘of hight parts’ the idea being that the lighter bodies 
were ‘ squeezed out’ between the heavier, which formed the earth, and 
80 lifted into the sky to form sun, moon, &c.. cf Lucr. v. 453. 


expressere ea quae mare sidera solem 
lunamque efficerent et magni moenia mundi. 


πνευματικῶν, ‘of the nature of wind’, and therefore volatile, and 
capable of rising and subsequently performing the revolution. 
Bignone translates ‘ gaseous’, but that seems to introduce too modern 
an idea. 

10, πυροειδῶν, ‘of the nature of fire’, and therefore capable of 
giving out heat and light. . 

ἡ αἴσθησις : perception cannot of course give us any information 
as to the creation of the heavenly bodies nor directly as to their 
composition: but it does show them to us moving through the sky 
and giving out light, and we must therefore infer their nature on the 
analogy of similar phenomena on earth. 

In the course of the sentence at different places in different MSS, 
but in most after τοῦ κόσμου and αὔξησιν ἐλάμβανεν, are found the 
words καὶ ὅσα ye δὴ σώξει and ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ γῇ καὶ θάλαττα. The 
vanation of their position in the MSS. would alone justify us in 


COMMENTARY. § 90-91 287 


following Usener and excluding them as glosses, but the internal 
evidence is also strong. καὶ ὅσα ye δὴ σώζει was an ill-expressed note 
to include, e.g. comets, falling-stars, and other heavenly phenomena, 
which hardly come under the head of τὰ λοιπὰ ἄστρα, but σώξει 13 ἃ 
word Epicurus would not have used in this sense. Gassendi’s proposal 
to attach the words to the other gloss, ‘the earth and the sea and all 
that in them 1s’, does not help, nor 1s it improved by Usener’s sugges- 
tion συζῇ, and the Tauchnitz reading ὅσα ye δὴ ζῴων 18 very irrelevant. 
Bignone regards them as continuimg the construction of ὑπὸ τοῦ κόσμου, 
‘by the world and those parts of it which serve as its defence’, 
1e the fammaniia moenia mundt, but this seems very far-fetched. 
Similarly ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ γῇ καὶ θάλασσα was meant to note that earth 
and sea too were not an independent creation: this 1s of course quite 
good Epicurean doctrine, but it cannot have been im the text here, as 
sea and earth are certainly not composed of Aerropepeis φύσεις, ἤτοι 
πνευματικαὶ ἢ πυροειδεῖς. 

(c) 891. The size of the heavenly bodies is in reahty either the 
same or slightly larger or smaller than we see them. This 1s one of 
the most characteristic of Epicurus’ doctrines both in its boldness and 
its childishness, It was of course based primarily on his complete 
trust in the evidence of sense-perception. We see sun, moon, and 
stars as of a certain size; we have no right to attempt to go behind 
the evidence of our senses therefore they are that size. But he 
based it also on terrestrial analogies in the case of earthly fires, we 
notice that we cease to feel their heat before they appear through 
distance to diminish in size (Lucr. v 566-573): but we are very 
conscious of the sun’s heat, therefore 1t has not dimimished in 
apparent size Again, the outhne of a light becomes blurred before 
it decreases in size. but the moon’s outline 15 not blurred: therefore 
1t again has not diminished (Lucr v 579-584). This argument the 
compiler merely alludes to in 1. 5, but it 1s clearer in the scholiast’s 
reference to the eleventh book of the Περὶ φύσεως. see app. crit, 
‘if its size had been lost through the distance much more would its 
colour have been: for there 1s no distance better adapted for such loss 
than that of the sun’, 1.e no earthly fire is ever so far away and 
therefore so likely to lose both in size and splendour. 

1. (καὶ σελήνης). an almost certain addition of Usener’s* ‘ Epicurus ἡ 
would hardly’ have written ἡλίου τε Kai τῶν λοιπῶν ἄστρων cf. ὃ 90, 
} 6, above. 

2. κατὰ μὲν τὸ πρὸς ἡμᾶς .. κατὰ δὲ τὸ καθ᾽ αὑτό. At once an 
indication of the line of thought in Epicurus’ remarkable decision, and 
an interesting illustration of the whole idea of ἐπεμαρτύρησις (see notes 
on Ep. 1, §§ 50, 51, and K A. xxiv). We see the sun a certain size " that 
15 115 §1Ze πρὸς ἡμᾶς : 1.6 that is what the sun looks like at the distance 
we are from it, just as a distant tower looks round. Are we then to 
conclude at once that zs its size καθ᾽ αὑτόυ ΝΟ, it is a προσμένον : we 
must try for ἐπιμαρτύρησις. In the case of the tower we aan go nearer 


288 Il. ΠΡῸΣ NYT@OKAEA 


to it and see: we cannot do this with the sun, but we can use the 
analogy of terrestrial hghts (see introductory note to this section), and 
shall then have confirmatory evidence that «af αὑτό it is about the 
size we can see it. Bignone takes xara... τὸ πρὸς ἡμᾶς to mean ‘as 
far as concerns us’, i.e. as far as it is necessary for our happiness 
to know, but that does not make a natural contrast with ro... 
καθ᾽ αὑτό. 

μὲν τὸ. Schneider’s correction οὗ μέντοι. 

3. φαίνεται ; the reference to the eleventh book of the Περὶ φύσεως, 
which comes in at this point in the MSS., is a very obvious scholium. 
The illustration, which 1s important, 1s quoted in the introductory 
note. 

ἤτοι μεῖζον. . .: the idea of μικρῷ is certainly to be supplied with 
μεῖζον as well as ἔλαττον : cf. Lucr. v. 564, 565: 


nec nimio solis major rota nec minor ardor 
esse potest, nostrs quam sensibus esse videtur. 
And again 590, 591 

After τηλικοῦτον the MSS. have οὐχ ἅμα, which I take to be 
merely a note on μεῖζον... ἢ. . ἔλαττον ἢ τηλικοῦτον, i.e. ‘it can’t 
be all these three at the same time’. Lachmann, believing it to be a 
corruption of a true reading, proposed τυχόν, Usener with more 
probabihty τυγχάνει. But no verb is needed, and I believe the words 
are simply a ridiculous comment: so Kochalsky. 

οὕτω γὰρ καὶ τὰ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν πυρὰ... would be almost intelligible in 
itself, but 1s explained by the scholiast’s quotation from the Περὶ 
φύσεως and the parallel passage in Lucr. (see introductory note). 

6. καὶ πᾶν δὲ... As usual, what we must dois to look at the clear 
evidence of the senses and not confuse it with προσδοξαζόμενα : cf. 
Ep. i, § 50, &c. 

évornpa, ‘an objection’: apparently from its occurrence in Sextus 
Empiricus an Epicurean word for the more usual ἔνστασις. 

q. ἄἀναργήμασι, ‘the clear visions ’ uncontaminated with opinion: a 
technical Epicurean word: cf. § 93, 1. 9. 

8 ἐν τοῖς περὶ φύσεως βιβλίοις : i.e. presumably in Book XI, from 
which the passage quoted by the scholiast is taken. 

(2) § 82. 1-8. The rising and setting of the heavenly bodies Two 
possible explanations are given: (1) that of Heraclitus, that these 
bodies of hght are extinguished at their setting and kindled again each 
day at their rising; (2) that of Anaximenes, that they appeared from 
behind the earth and then were hidden again by the land. Against 
neither of these explanations do phenomena afford any objection, and 
they must therefore be regarded as equally true: the phenomenon is 
one of those which may πλεοναχῶς γενέσθαι. The alternatives are 
put with almost equal brevity by Lucr. v. 650-635, though in speaking 
vd the nature of dawn in the following paragraph he somewhat enlarges 
the ideas. 


COMMENTARY. § 92 280 


ἃ. ἄναψιν : cf. Aet. n. 20 τό Ἡράκλειτος ἄναμμα νοερὸν τὸ ἐκ 
θαλάττης εἶναι τὸν ἥλιον. RKenophanes appears to have held the same 
view (cf. Hippol. Ref. i.14). Herachtus’ own word is here intentionally 
recalled. 

Usener, thinking that ἄναψιν and σβέσιν ought to be closely linked, 
inserts re after ἄναψιν and omits κατά before σβέσιν : but they corre- 
spond exactly to ἀνατολὰς καὶ δύσεις above. The rising is caused by 
the ἄναψις and the setting by the σβέσις, and a too close connexion 
would upset the correspondence. 

8. δύνασθαι : an or. ΟὟ]. infinitive, or else prolate afler ἐνδέχεται 
understood : cf. γίνεσθαι, ὃ 106. 2. It 1s not necessary to alter to 
δυνατόν with Usener. 

περιστάσεως, ‘the composition of the surrounding matter’, a 
favourite word of the writers cf ὃ 102. 7,§ 104 9. Bignone trans- 
lates ‘conditions’, but the two passages cited seem to show that the 
word has a more concrete meaning. The idea is explained more 
clearly by Lucretius, v. 660-668. The ‘ seeds of fire’ gather together 
in the east towards dawn and make themselves into a compact body, 
which 1s the new sun. It 1s perhaps worth while noting that this 
theory of Heraclitus is quite incompatible with the idea of the gradual 
composition of the heavenly bodies in the growing κόσμος enunciated 
in ὃ go. 

4. καὶ καθ᾽ ἑκατέρους τοὺς τόπους, ‘ especially in regard to the two 
places on each occasion’, 1.e. the places of the daily composition and 
extinction of sun (or moon): there must in the east be an atmosphere 
conducive to its kindhng and in the west to its extinction. Meibom 
early emended to τρόπους, which makes the clause meaningless, and 
Usener, adopting his reading, excluded the words as a gloss. Bignone 
shows that the inclusion of the words is essential: one of the objec- 
tions made in antiquity to the theory of Herachtus was that though tt 
was easy to conceive of the extinction of the sun in the western sea, 
it was by no means easy to imagine its kindling in the east, and 
Lucretius (v 660 ff.) lays special stress on this, There must there- 
fore be the requisite atmospheric composition ‘in both places’, 

5. (καὶ) a necessary addition made by Usener to correspond with 
καὶ κατὰ ἄναψιν, 1. 2. As so often, it was lost before κατά by 
‘haplography ’, 

6. ἐκφάνειαν,. . . ἐπιπροσθέτησιν. We must remember that the 
early philosophers did not think of the earth as a sphere, and the sun’s 
nightly course did not present itself to them as a passing uuder 
the earth, so much as a passing round behind the lofty ground in 
the north, corresponding to a journey round the southern sky during 
the day-ume. The earth was tilted up to the north and the sun 
went behind it. So Anistotle (Meteor. B. 1. 354 a 28) referring to 
Anaximenes, πολλοὺς πεισθῆναι τῶν ἀρχαίων μετεωρολόγων τὸν ἤλιον 
μὴ φέρεσθαι ὑπὸ γῆν, ἀλλὰ περὶ τὴν γῆν καὶ τὸν τόπον τοῦτον, ἀφανί- 
ζεσθαι δὲ καὶ ποιεῖν νύκτα διὰ τὸ ὑψηλὴν εἶναι πρὸς ἄρκτον τὴν γῆν. 


3918 τ 


290 Il. ΠΡῸΣ TIYOOKAEA 


ἐκφάνεια and ἐπιπροσθέτησις are again probably technical terms 
borrowed from one of those who held this theory. Some editors have 
doubted the form érurpoobérnow and wished to ‘ restore’ ἐπιπρόσθησιν : 
but it is exactly the kind of form that one would expect to find in one 
of the older philosophers, from whom it 1s probably quoted. 

(2) §§ 92. 8-93 3. The mouons of the heavenly bodies are next 
dealt wrth and various possible causes suggested. There ts an unfor- 
tunate lacuna, which almost certainly contained other explanations 
than the two given we can restore them from the closely parallel 
passage in Lucr. v 509-533 

8. τάς... κινήσεις meluding both the darly revolution and the 
orbit of the heavenly bodies, their apparent path round the heavens, as 
indicated by the successive points of their daily rising. 

οὐκ ἀδύνατον. a rather more tentative statement than usual 

9. κατὰ Thy τοῦ ὅλου οὐρανοῦ δίνην : sc the whole heaven moves 1:0und 
τῇ ἢ whirl and takes the heavenly bodies with it This was the theory 
of Anaximenes, who thought (Aet. 1. 2. 4) that the motron of the heaven 
was ‘Irke a mill-stone’ and not ‘ hke a wheel’, τ 6. horizontal and not 
perpendicular : tins of course corresponds with ins notion of the darly 
revoluuon of the sun (see note on | 1, above}: cf Lucr v. s10—-516, 
where the possible mechanism of this revolution is more fully 
explained, 

ἢ τούτου μὲν. . , δίνην sc the heaven as a whole remains 
stationary, and the mdividual heavenly bodies perform their crrcuits 
(cf. Luer. v. §£7-533). This mdividual motion may again be due to 
various causes, of which the text, as we have it, refers to two. 

10 κατὰ Thy... ἀνάγκην. i.e a ‘natural Jaw’, inated at the begin- 
ning of the world, causes all the bodies to move in one direction This 
of couse, with its characteristic assertion of ἀνάγκη, was the theory 
of Democritus, which 1s cxplained at greater length by Lucr. v. 
621-636 

11, ἐπ᾽ ἀνατολῇ, ‘towards the east’ as Lucretius explains, the 
orbit of the heavenly bod.es 1s in reality in the reverse direction to 
what it appears {o us: for the nearer a body 1s to the earth the 
slower it moves, the moon slower than the sun, the sun than the 
planets. But when we obseive this motion against the background 
of the fixed stars, 11 seems to us by a familiar optical delusion that 
they are moving in the reverse directron, the moon quicker than 
the sun, the sun than the planets It 1s posstble that this notron was 
explained in the passage Jost im the jacuna. Bignone translates 
ἐπ᾽ ἀνατολῇ, ‘ for their origin’, but it is surely mmpossible that the word 
could be used for the onginal creation of sun and moon. 1n reference 
to them it could only mean their daily msing. 

§ 98. There is undoubtedly something, probably several lines, lost 
at this point. Lucretius in the parallel passage mentions two other 
possible causes of the individual revolution of the heavenly bodies, 
(1) 519-521, that they were impelled by an internal fire trying to 


COMMENTARY. §§ 93-94 agt 


escape: this appears to have been the theory of Anaximander, 
(2) 522-523, that they were driven on by an external current of air: 
this was the theory of Anaxagoras (Aet. 1. 23. 2). Then we pass on 
to the fourth explanation, which 1s here left us in a fragmentary 
condiaon. In Lucretius this appears tn the form that the bodies 
move on to places where they can find food, 1.e are naturally attracted 
to a fresh supply of fuel~ this appears to have been the theory of the 
Stoics. The letter has it in a shghtly different form, which seems 
more consistent with the theory of the constant rekindhng of the 
heavenly bodies: the apparent progress of the stars 1s really the con- 
stant spread (ἐπινέμησις) of fire moving on to fresh fuel (we may 
perhaps compare the advance of a spark along a train of gunpowder). 
In this form the theory may certainly be attributed to Heraclitus, who 
held the ἄναψις (§ 92, 2, note). 

1, * * τάτῃ θερμασίᾳ : the mutilated word must have been a superla- 
tive> possibly, as Usener suggests, σφοδροτάτῃ 

2 émvéynow,‘spread’, the verb, too, 1s so used Of fire,e g. πῦρ ἐπενέμετο 
τὸ ἄστυ, Hdt.5 101. Bignone would take the words after the lacuna in 
more direct correspondence with Lucretius’ statement. He would 
complete the missing word ἐπιτηδειοτάτῃ (εἰ m the MSS) and trans- 
lates, ‘(it 18 possible that the heavenly body moves through the sky in 
search of the heat) most appropriate to τὶ, and proceeds, as though 
feeding on the fire, succcssively from place to place’. But apart from 
the questionable meaning assigned to ἐπινέμησις, the rendering at the 
end 1s surely impossible with ἐόντος, which must go with τοῦ πυρύς. 

(7) 898 Il 3-8 deal with the question of the tropics of sun 
and moon’ Bestles appearing to perform a tevoluuon, they scem 
also to go up and down in the sky, standing Ingher in the heavens at 
one part of their orbit than another. The Inghest and lowest points 
were known as the rpovaié or turning-places, and the problem now 
discussed 1s really the whole nature of this ‘ecliptic’, which ranges 
between the tropics Again, various alternatives are presented, which 
correspond closely to the ideas of the causes of motion in the previous 
section, 

4. λόξωσιν οὐρανοῦ " this theory goes closely with the first theory 
in the previous section. If the motions of the heavenly bodies 
are caused by the revolution of the whole heaven, then their 
* obliquity ᾿ must be due to an ‘obliquity’ of the entire sky; 1.6. it 15 
set at an angle to the plane of the earth. This does not however 
appear, as one would expect (see note on ὃ 92 9), (0 have been the 
theory of Anaximenes, but of Empedociles: it 15 amphed in Luct. 
v. 691-693. 


propter signifer: posituram totius orbis, 
annua sol in quo concludit tempora serpens, 
obhquo terras et caelum lumine lustrans. 


τοῖς χρόνοις κατηναγκασμένου, ‘constrained by ’, or “τῇ respeci to the 
T 2 


292 1. ΠΡῸΣ MYTOOKAEA 


times’, probably refers to the obvious connexion between the ecliptic 
and the succession of the seasons. 

5. ἀέρος dvrégfwou, ‘the contrary thrusting of a current’: this theory 
goes with that of a stationary heaven and independent orbits: the 
revolution of sun and moon would be in the same plane as the earth, 
but that they are thrust out of their course towards the tropics by 
cross-currents of air. This was the theory of Anaxagoras: cf. Aet. n. 
23. 2 ἀνταπώσει τοῦ πρὸς ταῖς ἄρκτοις ἀέρος, and is fully explained by 
Luctr. v. 637-649. 

ἢ καὶ OAns . . . ἐκλειπούσης must be taken in connexion with the last 
theory of the movements: the train of fuel along which the fire moves 
lies along this oblique orbit. Ths then was the theory of the Sioics 
and almost certainly, though we have no authority for it, of Herachtus. 

6. ἐχομένως, ‘successively’, Usener’s correction of ἐχομένοις or 
ἐχομένης in the MSS. 

τῆς δ᾽ ἐκλειπούσης, ‘when the other’, sc the former fuel, ‘fails’. 
Ihave with hesitation adopted Usener’s correction of the MS τῆς δὲ 
karaXerovons There is no trace of an intransitive use of καταλείπειν, 
and itis not Itkely that καταλειπομένης (von der Muehll), which 1s the 
sense required (‘being left behind’), should have been altered into 
the active, as might be the case if there were a neighbouring active 
pariciple. 

qo ἢ καὶ ἐξ ἀρχῆς. . . κινεῖσθαι : corresponds to the theory that the 
heavenly bodies were orgtnally set in δῖνοι by ἀνάγκη (see note on 
I. 5 above). It 1s the theory of Democnitus, and ts 1n pait set out as 
such, though in a paragraph where he has not quite understood his 
own argument, by Lucr v. 621-636. 

ἄστροις : a good instance of its use for sun and moon, 

8. οἷόν τιν᾽ ἕλικα the combination of the daily revolution of sun 
and moon with the gradual mounting or descent to the tropics would 
of course produce a spiral movement οἷόν rw’, Usene, for οἷόν re 

8-13. The section ends with the usual appeal to the principles of 
argument, here witlt greater elaboration than usual. 

9. οὐθενί, Usener, for οὐθέν, a wecessary correction as there 15 no 
evidence for διαφωνεῖν with the gentlive. 

ἐναργημάτων: cf. ὃ gr. 7. 

το. μερῶν, ‘subjects’, ht. ‘departments of inguiry’; cf 8 91 6 εἰς 
τοῦτο TO μέρος. ; 

12. ἀνάγειν 15, I think, a slightly more probable correction of the 
ἀπάγειν of most MSS than b’s ἐπάγειν adopted by Usener. ἀνάγειν 
or oye is Eptcurus’ technical word in this sense: cf. K. A. χχιι, 
xxvi. Von der Muehil prefers the double compound ἐπανάγειν. 

τὰς ἀνδραποδώδεις... τεχνιτείας, ‘slavish’, because they are wedded 
to one explanation instead of having an open mind for many possi- 
bilities, like the true Epicureans. 

ἀστρολόγων: not ‘astrologers’ in our sense, but professional 
astronomers: a subdivision of the φυσικοί (§ go 3). 


COMMENTARY. §§ 93-94 293 


(g) The moon. (1) Its phases. ὃ 94 The letter now passes to the 
consideration of certain problems with regard to the moon, which are, 
as usual, traditional among the physical philosophers. It deals first 
with the phases, and again reports several traditional explanations 
without the expression of any preference. The sentence should be 
compared with Lucr, v. 705-750, which shows the connexion of the 
explanations given here with the theories concerning the moon’s light 
which are discussed in the following sentence 

1. Κενώσεις. . πληρώσεις : all the MSS. agree on the plural in 
both cases, and it seems simpler to alter δύναιτ᾽ dy (1. 2) to the plural with 
Meibom rather than ‘restore’ the singular here The plural would 
be quite natural: each separate phase of the moon 15 8 κένωσις oF 
a πλήρωσις, and the whole process of waxing and waning 1s nghtly 
described by the plural. 

2. στροφὴν τοῦ σώματος τούτου, ‘the turning round of the moon’s own 
body ’. If this idea 1s combined with the theory that the moon has its 
own light, then the moon, as Lucretius explains (v 720-730), 1s thought 
of as a ball light on one side and dark on the other, and its gradual 
turning round causes the appearance of the phases This was 
approximately the theory of Heraclitus, who (Aet 1 24 3) thought that 
both sun and moon were ‘ bowl-shaped’ (cxagoedets), and that the 
turning of the concave εἴα to us caused both the phases of the moon 
and also echpses. Lucretius (v. 727) attributes the theory to the 
Chaldeans, from whom possibly Heraclitus took it. On the other 
hand, 1f the action of ‘turning’ be combined with that of the moon’s 
reflected hght, we get approximately the mght explanation of the 
phases, as described by Lucr v. 705-714. 

3. σχηματισμοὺς ἀέρος, ‘the conformation of the atmosphere’. This 
theory, which 1s not mentioned by Lucretius, goes naturally with the 
notion of the rekindling of the heavenly bodies at times the ‘fuel- 
track’ of the moon runs through dense and moist tacts of atmos- 
phere, so that portions or the whole of the hght was extimguished. 
We may therefore compare the theory Lucreuus puts forward (v 696-- 
400) of the unequal length of nighis and days Tis notion seems 
to have been held by Xenophanes (Aet. τ. 29 5). 

κατὰ προσθετήσεις, ‘by the mterposition’, as Lucretius explains 
(v γ15- 710), of another opaque body which 1s itself invisible to us, so 
that the mooh’s own hight 1s partially or completely hidden. This 
was the theory of Anaximenes (Aet. 1 13 10) and Anaxagoras 
{Hippol 1.8 6). Though ἐπιπροσθέτησις 18 more usual in this sense,’ 
e.g § y2 6, 11 seems unnecessary to alter with Usener to κατ᾽ 
ἐπιπροσθετήσεις. 

5. τούτου τοῦ εἴδους, ‘ of this appearance’, almost ‘of these phases’. 

ἀποδόσεις, ‘accounts ’, ‘explanations’ 

ἡ ἄποδοκιμάζξῃ : an intentional use of a legal technical term. 

οὐ τεθεωρηκώς : Cobet’s restoration of οὔτε θεωρητικῶς 

(2) lis hght. ὃ 94. 9-§ 95.7. The next section deals with the 


294 Hl. ΠΡῸΣ IIY@OKAEA 


origin of the moon’s light and with the two explanations that it is her 
own, or is reflected from the sun. Lucretius does not deal separately 
with this problem, but refers to it, as we have seen, in the discussion 
of the phases of the moon, and again in his discussion of its size 
(ν. 575-576). 

9. ἐξ ἑαυτῆς : this view was held by Anaximander (Aet. 11. 25. 1) and 
Xenophanes (id. 1. 28. 1). 

10, ἀπὸ τοῦ ἡλίου: the belief of Thales, Empedocles, and 
Anaxagoras 

8 85. τ. καὶ γὰρ wap’ ἡμῖν: the analogy of things on earth 31s in 
favour of the double possibility. 

2. καὶ οὐθὲν ἐμποδοστατεῖ. . .* and nothing in the phenomena of 
the sky 1s against either explanation. 

3. ἐάν τις ...: another long exposition of the principles, but an 
unusually clear statement. The two mistakes we have to avoid are 
admitting explanations which are inconsistent with phenomena, and 
arbitrarily confining ourselves to a single explanation. 

6. ταῦτ᾽ ὀγκοῖ ματαίως: a good instance of the superiority of B, 
which alone preserves the text, which 1s dreadfully mangled in the 
other MSS. 

(3) Its face. ὃ 95. 7-§ 96. 4. The face in the moon 15 a subject 
not touched on by Lucreuuus, but dealt with by some of the early 
philosophers. ‘Two causes are suggested for its appearance. 

7. ἔμφασις, ‘impression’, the word ordinanly used to represent the 
image on the retina of the eye 

8. κατὰ παραλλαγὴν μερῶν, ‘by the succession of varying parts’, 
1.6. the contour of its surface changes in successive places and so 
causes the appearance Anaxagoras had so explained the face in the 
moon (Aet. 11 30. 2). 

9. κατ᾽ ἐπιπροσθέτησιν, ‘by the interposiuion of other bodies’ shut- 
ting out the moon’s light, and so causing the shadows which produced 
the appearance This may have been the theory of Anaximenes, who 
gave a similar account of the moon’s phases; see on ὃ 94 3 above, 

ποτ᾽ the MSS. have πάντα, which must be a mere mistake 

θεωροῖντο, ‘might be observed ’, i.e. in terrestrial phenomena, so as 
to suggest an explanation by analogy. 

§ 96. 2. τὴν τοιαύτην (sc ὁδὸν) ἰχνεύειν : it is unnecessary to emend 
with Usener to ἔχνευσιν. Bignone compares ὃ 114. °3 παρὰ τὸ τὴν 
ἐναντίαν κινεῖσθαι. 

3. τις ἦ μαχόμενος : the MSS. have τισὶ μαχομένοις (or βαλλομένοις): 
again this seems a necessary correction 

(Δ) Eclipses. ὃ 96. 5-10. The letter proceeds to deal very briefly 
with the problem of the eclipses of sun and moon, and suggests two 
possible causes corresponding to the general theories of sun and moon 
already enunciated; either the temporary extinction of the luminanes 
or their obscuration by the interposition of some other body. The 
latter explanation is then subdivided according to the nature of the 


COMMENTARY. §§ 94-96 298 


interposed body. The text is rather uncertain and the whole passage 
made obscure by its brevity, but much light 1s thrown upon it by the 
longer discussion in Lucr. v. 751-770. 

6. κατὰ σβέσιν: i.e just as we have seen the cause of the daily 
setting and rising may be the exlinction and rekindhing of sun and 
moon, their echpses may be due to the same cause, when the ‘ fuel- 
track’ passes through damp regions. So Lucr.v 758-761 (cf 768-770). 


solque suos enam dimittere languidus ignis 
tempore cur certo nequeat recreareque lumen, 
cum loca praeterit flammis infesta per auras, 
quae faciunt ignis imlerstingul atque perire? 


This was probably the theory of Xenophanes (cf. Aet. 11 24. 4) 

ἡ. κατ᾽ ἐπιπροσθέτησιν, ‘by the interposition of another body ’, 
e.g. as, In point of fact, the eclipse of the sun 15 due to the interposi- 
hon of the moon between earth and sun and thal of the moon to the 
inlerposinon of the earth between sun and moon’ The wiiter 1s not 
satished with these possibiliues, but must add others. 

ἢ γῆς this of course accounts for the echpse of the moon, as 
Lucreuus clearly explains v. 762-764 


et cur terra queal lunam spohare vicissim 
lumine et Oppressum solem super ipsa tenere, 
menstrua dum rigidas com: perlabitur umbras 


This explanation was given by Anaxagoras, Aet. αι. 29. 6, 7 τὰς δ᾽ 
ἐκλείψεις [τὴν σελήνην ποιεῖσθαι) εἰς TO σκίασμα τῆς γῆς ἐμπίπτουσαν, 
μεταξὺ μὲν ἀμφοτέρων τῶν ἀστέρων γενομένης, μᾶλλον δὲ τῆς σελήνης 
ἀντιφραττομένης. 

ἢ ἀοράτου τινὸς ἢ ἑτέρου τοιούτυ The MSS αἵ this point have 
ἢ οὐρανοῦ ἥ τινος ἑτέρον τοιούτου. οὐρανοῦ can hardly be kept, though 
yon der Muehll retains it Woltyer (de Lucr. Philos , p. 135) proposed 
to read ἢ σελήνης 7 τιιος ἑτέρου τοιούτου" ἢ γῆς ἢ σελήνης would 
then give the nght explanations of the eclipses of moon and sun 
respectively, and ἤ τινος ἑτέρου τοιούτου would allude to the theory of 
the interposition of some other opaque body mentioned by Lucr. v. 
756-757, 765-767. Usener’s objection (Preface, p xvin) that this 
will not do Because ‘the wnter 1s anxious to eaplain the eclipse of 
both sun and moon by the same cause’, does not hold: for it applies 
equally well to ἢ γῆς, which can only explain an echpse of the moon. 
The real objection to Woltjer’s suggestion is surely palaeographical, 
that it does not at all account for the MS οὐρανοῦ, Usener him- 
self, thinking of the theory of the interposition of the opaque body, 
and comparing the passage in Aet. 1. 13 10, where it 1s attributed to 
Anaximenes (περιέχειν δέ [se. τὰ ἄστρα] twa καὶ γεώδη σώματα συμπερι- 
φερόμενα τούτοις ἀόραταὴ together with Lucr v. 753-767, made the 
brilliant restoration ἀοράτου for οὐρανοῦ, which may be considered 


296 Il. ΠΡῸΣ TIY@OKAEA 


certan. He then proposes to omit 4, and suggests that it may 
possibly conceal ἡμῖν. I prefer to transpose 7 and τινός and take 
ἢ érépov τοιούτου to refer, not to the possibility of the sun-eclipse 
by the interposition of the moon (which is now not mentioned, 4 γῆς 
being taken as typical of this Ime of explanation), but rather to the 
mterposition of ‘any other such body ’—one of those vague phrases 
by which the writer wishes to leave the way open to other possible 
explanations: cf. § 95. 9 καὶ ὅσοι ποτ᾽ ἂν τρόποι κτλ. 1 do not how- 
ever feel sure that we should not combine both Woltjer’s and Usener’s 
suggestions, and restore the passage ἢ γῆς (ἢ σελήνης) ἢ ἀοράτου τινὸς 
ἣ ἑτέρου τοιούτου, when we should have a fuller account and a closer 
correspondence with Lucretuus. Homoeoteleuton would account for 
the omission of ἢ σελήνης 

8. καὶ ὧδε. .: the writer adds two cautions with regard to such 
explanations 

τοὺς οἰκείους .. . συνθεωρητέον. (1) we must be careful that the 
explanations of eclipses are properly combmed with the other theories 
adopted about the heavenly bodies. e.g. as Lucretms suggests v. 768, 
the idea that eclipse 1s due to extinction can only be applied to the 
moon, if it be held that she shines with her own hight, or again, moon- 
echpse can only be explained by interposition of the earth, if we 
suppose her light to be reflected from the sun. 

9. τὰς ἅμα cuyxupyces. ..° (2) we must remember that several 
of these causes may be at work at once: eg it might be that the 
moon is extinguished at the same moment as an opaque body comes 
in front of it, or that the sun is shut off by both the moon and some 
other body at once. It is an additional argument for the πλεοναχὸς 
τρόπος. συγκυρήσεις, which is undoubtedly nght, 1s preserved in BQCo 
and the second hand in H and P: the other MSS. have the corruption 
συγκρίσεις. 

10 γίνεσθαι : at this point the MSS. have a reference to the eleventh 
book of the Περὶ φύσεως, which 15 important as showing that Epicurus 
had there the full theory of echpses ‘ by interposiion’: see app. crit. 
The word σκιάσματος connects the theory directly with Anaxagoras: 
see note on |. 7 above The compiler of the letter probably had this 
passage of the Περὲ φύσεως before him. 

(ἢ Periods. § 97. A brief sentence on the ‘periods’ of the 
heavenly bodies, with another elaborate warning against the falseness 
of the theological view and the mistake of the dogmatic assertion of 
one theory against all others. 

I. τάξις περιόδου, ‘the regularity of the period’, i.e. the mechanical 
regularity with which the orbits (περίοδοι) of the heavenly bodies are 
performed, the moon in a month, the sun in a year, &c. 

2. ἔνια καὶ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν. we can infer the kind of analogies of which 
the wnter was thinking from the similar passage in which Lucretius 
(v. 7137-750) adduces the succession of the seasons asa parallel to the 
regularity of the successive phases of the moon. 


COMMENTARY. βὲ 96-98 297 


3. ἡ θεία φύσις... : such things must not be attributed to the gods, 
for such work would be inconsistent with their existence of perfect 
tranquillity. The argument is famihar. cf. Ep. i, § 77; ui, §§ 123, 
124. 

4. ἀλειτούργητος, ‘not oppressed with burdens’. cf. Ep. 1, § 76. το 
μήτε Accroupyotrros τινός 

μακαριότητι " οἵ, Ep. τ, § 123. 5. 

5 αἰτιολογία, ‘the discussion of causes’. Stob. Ζελ i. 724 αἴτιο- 
λογίαι . . . ἐν φυσιολογίᾳ and Sext Emp. i. 181 πᾶσαν δογματικὴν 
αἰτιολογίαν. 

6. οὐ δυνατοῦ τρόπου ἐφαψαμένοις, ‘not clinging to the possible 
method’, i.e the method of accepting only such explanations as are 
consistent with possibility as revealed by phenomena. 

4. τὸ καθ᾽ ἕνα τρόπον... οἴεσθαι it seems quite possible to retain 
the accusative τό, 1n apposition to τὸ μάταιον, instead of emending with 
Usener to τῷ. 

9. τὸ ἀδιανόητον, ‘that which cannot be thought’: that which 18 
inconsistent with the προλήψεις which exist in the mind 

IO σημεῖα" as ‘hints’ or ‘indications’ of the facts of celestial 
phenomena, cf, ὃ 87. 6 

11. συνθεωρεῖν, ‘to consider them with’ celestial occurrences, 
16 to compare and so infer cf τοὺς οἰκείους ἀλλήλοις τρόπους συν- 
θεωρητέον, § 96.8 The strange reading of the MSS. σὺν θεῶ (sic) 
χαίρειν looks almost hike a ‘pious’ emendation. 

(J) Length of nighis and days. § 98. 1-8. Another bnef para- 
graph on the alternations in the length of days and mghts at different 
tumes of the year. Jt 1s obscure and undoubtedly corrupt, but we 
may, I think, recover the sense and in part the text from the parallel 
section in Lucr. v. 680-704. I do not, however, at all agree with 
Usener as to the relation of the two passages or the state of the text. 

I, παραλλάττοντα cf. κατὰ παραλλαγὴν μερῶν, § 95. 8. 

καὶ παρὰ τὸ ταχείας .. θεωρεῖται: these clauses must all be 
considered together. The MS text runs καὶ παρὰ τὸ ταχείας ἡλίον 
κινήσεις γίνεσθαι καὶ πάλιν βραδείας ὑπὲρ γῆς παρὰ τὸ μήκη τόπων 
παραλλάττοντα καὶ τύπους τινὰς περαιοῦντα τάχιον ὡς καὶ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν ἢ 
ραδύτερόν τινα θεωρεῖται, an obvious muddle which the earlier editors 
practically gave up, though Meibom by inserting 7 before παρὰ τὸ 
μήκη τόπων tned to distinguish a separate explanation from that χη the 
beginning of the clause. this 15 merely unintelligent patchwork. 

Usener, after emending the participles παραλλάττοντα and περαιοῦντα 
to the infimtives παραλλάττειν and περαιοῦν, and making the obvious 
transference of ἢ βραδύτερον to its place between τάχιον and ds καὶ 
παρ᾽ ἡμῖν, then cuts out the whole clause from παρὰ τὸ μήκη τόπων... .. 
ἢ βραδύτερον as an explanatory gloss on the previous explanation and 
marks a lacuna. He thus leaves the passage with one explanation, 
the difference of pace in the sun’s movements, which does not occur 
in Lucretius, and supposes all the three reasons which Lucretius 


298 If. ΠΡῸΣ NYOOKAEA 


mentions to have been dealt with in clauses now lost. But seeing 
the close correspondence of the letter and Lucretius all through 
this astronomical section, this 1s not a probable nor, 1 think, a 
necessary supposition, and, further, the clause which Usener excludes 
is by no means a ‘formula paullo accuratior’ for what he has already 
said. 

If we analyse the passage in Lucretus we see that the three 
explanations he gives fal] naturally under two heads, corresponding to 
the two main theores about the sun. (1) If we suppose that the 
same sun performs a daily orbit round the earth, then the vanation is 
due to the fact that he spends more time above the earth in summer 
than in winter. This may be caused (2) by an unequal division of the 
arcs of the orbit owing to the relation of ecliptic, equator, and horizon 
(682-695), or (4) by the presence of a crasstor aer at some parts of his 
journey, which causes a delay in his msing (696-700) (2) If we 
suppose a new sun 1s kindled every day, then the vanation is due to 
the slowness or quickness of the gathenng of the flames which create 
the sun (701-704) 

It is probable that the writer of the letter had the same explanations 
in the same order, and with but slight alterauon of the text one can 
obtain this I should keep παραλλάττοντα, suppose that a verb of motion, 
say διιέναι, was lost afler it, after καί insert (rapa τόν, adopt Usener’s 
περαιοῦν for περαιοῦντα (the change may either be due to the neigh- 
bouring παραλλάττοντα or to dittography of the first syllable of τάχιον), 
and accept the transference of ἢ βραδύτερον after rdyov: it 18 also 
possible that there 1s a considerable lacuna after ἢ βραδύτερον. 

The clause καὶ παρὰ τὸ ταχείας... ὑπὲρ γῆς then expresses the 
genera] view (1) that the sun im his datly orbit spends less time 
ταχείας) above the earth at certain periods of the year than at others. 

his explanation is then subdivided into two possible causes. 
(2) corresponding to Lucr. v. 682—695 παρὰ τὸ μήκη τόπων παραλλάτ- 
τοντα (διιέναι), ‘because he traverses regions differing in length (above 
earth)’, or (δ) corresponding to Lucr. v. 696-700 καὶ (παρὰ τὸν τόπους 
τινὰς περαιοῦν τάχιον ἢ βραδύτερον, ‘because he gets through certain 
regions‘ (1.e, those which have a thmner atmosphere) ‘more quickly 
than others’. Then in all probability there was another clause 
beginning with καὶ παρά corresponding to καὶ παρὰ τὸ ταχείας... 
setting out (2) the explanation on the theory of the ἄναψις. In this 
way with small alteration we can get a complete correspondence to 
Lucretius. μήκη νυκτῶν καὶ ἡμερῶν παραλλάττοντα 1s left without any 
definite construction, but the looseness 15 not greater than m many 
pace of the letter: ‘the variation in length of nights and days (is) 

ue to...’ 

Bignone, who agrees with me as to the general run of the passage, 
but wishes to mend the construction and refrain from any MS. altera- 
tion, except the transference of 4 βραδύτερον (and possibly the sub- 
stitution of περιόδους for xurjoes—surely gratuitous), would suppose 


COMMENTARY. §§ 98-99 299 


a more considerable loss and restore as follows καὶ παρὰ τὸ ταχείας 
ἡλίου κινήσεις (ἢ περιόδους) γίνεσθαι καὶ πάλιν Bpadeias ὑπὲρ γῆς, παρὰ 
τὸ μήκη τόπων παραλλάττοντα (περαιοῦν, ἐνδέχεται ὑπάρχειν, καὶ παρὰ τὸ 
τάχιον ἢ βραδύτερον κινεῖσθαι, παρεκτάσεις ἀέρος) καὶ τόπους τινὰς 
περαιοῦντα τάχιον ἢ βραδύτερον. This appears to me a rather clumsy 
and unnecessarily elaborate change. 

6. of δὲ τὸ ἕν λαμβάνοντες ; the usual caution against the ‘single’ 
method. 

7. et: Usener’s alteration to 7 1s unnecessary: the persons who 
dogmatically assert the single explanation, have surely failed to ask 
if it 1s possible for man to attain such accuracy in observation 

(4) Weather-signs. § 98. 9-§ 99. 2. Another bnef sentence on 
signs of the weather as given by the heavenly bodies. The text 1s 
again corrupt, but in its most difficult place has been set nght by 
a brillant conjecture 

9. ἐπισημασίαι, ‘weather-signs’ The wnier is thinking here solely 
of such signs as are given by the heavenly bodies, e.g. the nstng of 
Sirius, the red sunset, the blushing of the moon (Virg. G.1 431), & 

κατὰ συγκυρήσεις καιρῶν " it may be that such signs are due mainly 
to comcidence of occasion, e g. the presence of Sirius and hot weather. 
For συγκυρήσεις cf. ὃ 96. 9 above. 

10 καθάπερ ἐν τοῖς ... ζῴοις 1 ¢ 1n the case of weather-signs given 
by animals, e.g. the low-flying swallow, the croaking crow, &c. With 
these the writer deals in § 115, and explains there that they are due to 
coincidence. 

παρ᾽ ἑτεροιώσεις ἀέρος καὶ μεταβολάς : a brillant restoration of 
Usener’s for the MS, text παρ᾽ ἑτέροις ὡσεὶ ἀέρος καὶ μεταβολῆς (μετα- 
βολάς 1s due to Kuhn). In some cases the signs are really due to 
the same changcs in the atmosphere, which produce the change of 
weather: e.g. the flushing of the moon. 

§ 99. τ. ἐπὶ δὲ ποίοις. * it 15 not possible for us to distinguish 
which of these two possible causes is at work on any given occasion. 
The writer seems to have been almost excessively cautious here, but 
consistent with his own principles There 1s some authority in the 
MSS. for the reading ἤδη δὲ ποίοις adopted by Kochalsky. 


III. Mxrroro.ocy: Croups, Rain, Tuunper, Licutnixe. 
§§ 99-104 


The discussion of signs of the weather leads naturally to the third 
main section of the letter, which deals with what we know more 
strictly as meteorology: it corresponds to the earher portion of 
Lucr. vi. 96-607. The same principles are of course observed as in 
the section on Astronomy. 

(a) Clouds. ὃ 99. 3-8 The wniter deals first with clouds and 
explains three methods of their formation, which correspond with those 
set out by Lucr. vi 451-482 the fourth cause suggested by Lucretius, 


300 ll. ΠΡῸΣ TIT@OKAEA 


the pouring 1n of moist elements from outside the κόσμος, is not 
noticed in the letter. 

4. πιλήσεις ἀέρος, ‘the packing of the atmosphere’: the ἀήρ is 
regarded always as being moist in character, and its condensation 
would form the masses of moist matter which we call clouds. 

4. (κατὰ) πνευμάτων συνώσεις : the two last words are excluded by 
Usener as a gloss, συνώσεις being Meibom’s correction of συνώσεως. 
But they are certainly not an interpretation of πιλήσεις ἀέρος, but are 
required to explain the origin of the phenomenon: cf. Lucr vi. 462- 
466, who describes the operation as taking place on a mountain-top: 


propterea quia, cum consistunt nubila primum, 
ante videre oculi quam possint, tenvia, venti 
portantes cogunt ad summa cacumina montis. 
hic demum fit uti turba maiore coorta 

et condensa queant apparere. 


The words should then certainly be retained. Meibom connected 
them with 4#—but they do not express an alternative cause, Kuhn with 
xai—but they do not give a parallel cause. rather the remoter cause 
of the πιλήσεις dépos; the air 1s condensed owing to the compression 
of the winds. I think, therefore, that & 1s a preposition which has 
dropped out, and have inserted κατά. Bignone, who takes the same 
view, inserls διὰ: Usener in his preface suggests πνευμάτων συνώσει, 
which is simpler, bul a little abrupt ‘The theory was that of 
Anaximenes. cf Act, in 4 I νέφη μὲν γίνεσθαι παχυνθέντος ἐπὶ πλεῖον 
τοῦ ἀέρος. 

παρὰ περιπλοκὰς. . . τοῦτο τελέσαι. atoms likely to form moisture 
come together and become interlaced, making the nucleus of a cloud 
which gradually grows. The process is described by Lucr. 451-458. 
The explanation, as one might expect from its atomic character, was 
that of Democritus: cf. Aet. iv. r. 4. Guussani translates ἀλληλούχων, 
‘of every kind’, but this 1s clearly wrong. 

5. κατὰ ῥευμάτων... καὶ ὑδάτων - parucles of moisiure came off fiom 
sea, rivers, and even the earth itself, and streamed together into the air 
to form clouds: cf. Lucr. vi. 470-482, and especially 476-477 . 


praeterea flavus ex omnibus et simul ipsa 
surgere de terra nebulas aestumque videmus. 


This was the theory of Xenophanes: cf. Aet in. 4. 4, and the frag- 
ment of Xenophanes himself which is there preserved : 


μέγας πόντος yevérwp νεφέων ἀνέμων τε 
καὶ ποταμῶν. 
6. καὶ κατ᾽ ἄλλους δὲ... - the usual supposition that there may be 
other equally good explanations. 


COMMENTARY. 88 99-100 301 


(δὴ) Rain. ὃ 99. 8-§ 100. 4. A short explanation is given of the 
way in which rain may be produced, corresponding to the ongin of 
clouds above, and roughly with the account given by Lucr. vi. 

-526. 
τι ἤδη : i.e. when the clouds are thus formed. 

ἡ μὲν θλιβομένων, 7 δὲ μεταβαλλόντων : the rdeas are not at once 
clear, but are explained by Lucretius (1) The clouds are piled up on 
one another: those underneath are ‘squeezed’ on their upper side 
by the clouds above them, and so the rain 15 pressed out cf. Lucr, vi. 
510-512: 

psa 
copia nimborum turba maiore coacta 
urget et 6 supero premit ac ἴδοις effluere imbris, 


This idea is found in Anaximenes: cf. Aet 1. 4. 1 μᾶλλον δ᾽ ἐπισυνα- 
χθέντος [τοῦ ἀέρος] ἐκθλίβεσθαι τοὺς ὄμβρους and corresponds to the first 
notion of the formation of clouds given above. (2) The clouds are 
‘altered’ when they are struck by the sun’s rays and so changed from 
solid to hquid, falling in the form of rain cf Lucr vi 513-516 


praeterea cum rarescunt quoque nubila ventis 
aut dissolvuntur, solis super icta calore, 
mittunt umorem pluvium stllantque, quasr 161} 
cera super cahdo tabescens multa liquescat. 


§ 100. 1. πνευμάτων καταφορᾷ : the MSS. have πνεύματα κατ᾽ ἀπο- 
φοράν, the alteration 1s Usener’s. The genitive πνευμάτων is required 
by the participle κινουμένων, and καταφορᾷ expresses the swooping 
down of the wind on the clouds better than κατ᾽ ἀποῴφοράν The first 
cause of the rain 15 internal—in the clouds themselves; the second 1s 
external—the advent of the wind which disturbs them: this corre- 
sponds exactly to Lucr. vi. 510 ‘nam vis venti contrudit’ 

Bignone, who apparently overlooked these words in Lucretius, 
complains that Usener’s text does not give satisfactory sense, and 
reads ῥευμάτων κατ᾽ ἀποφοράν, in 1eference to the gathering of moist 
particles into the clouds described later on by Lucretius in vi, 520 ff.: 


. multa cientur semina aquarum 
atque alns allae nubes nimbique rigantes 
- os 6 + . omm . . . de parte feruntur, 


This change seems to me gratuitous, and ἀπὸ ἐπιτηδείων τόπων is much 
more forcible τῷ reference to the wind: τὸ would not matter from what 
places the moist particles came. 

2, ἀπὸ ἐπιτηδείων τόπων. the wind must be blowing from the right 
quarter to affect the conformation of the clouds in the nght way. 

καὶ δι᾽ ἀέρος : Usener omits xa/, unnecessarily. The wind must not 


302 Tl, ΠΡῸΣ TIY@OKAEA 


only blow from the right quarter, but pass through the musty atmo- 
sphere, and so gather in its course more of the material of clouds. 

8. βιαιοτέρας. . . ἐπιπέμψεις, Usener apparently (from his 
analysis) takes this clause solely with the second explanation ἔτι re, 
regarding 11 as the true atomic and probably Democritean explanation 
as opposed to Anaximenes. But this 15 surely not nght. Both the 
internal pressure of clouds and the external force of wind are causes 
of rain which would be recognized on any theory, atomic or other- 
wise, nor 18 there any good reason for the comparative βιαιοτέρας 
Lucretius, too, v'. 517-518, after giving the two causes above as exactly 
parallel to one another, proceeds to conside: the cause of a vemens 
zmber, and though his explanation differs from that given here, it 
shows, I think, the purpose of the clause 1 understand the writer to 
mean: ‘there are two causes of rain, and with either cause the 
violence of the shower 1s increased, if the atomic conformation of the 
cloud 1s suitable’. 

ἀθροισμάτων : the regular techmical word for the combination of 
atoms in a thing: cf K. A ix, Lucretius’ glomeramina  Bignone, 
reading ῥευμάτων in| 1, takes it of the accumulanon of moist emana- 
tions, but it 15 very common in Epicurus in the atomic sense. 

4. ἐπιτηδείων it is interesting to note this reference to the main 
theory. to produce a given effect, a thing must be composed of the 
night atoms in the nght formation 

{c) Thunder. § 100 5-11. From clouds and rain the writer 
naturally proceeds to thunder, Ightning, and thunderbolts, and 
suggests an unusually large number of causes for these phenomena. 
Lucretius similarly treats these subjects at gieat length (vt. 96-422), 
and as usual the letter corresponds closely with his explanations. 

5. πνεύματος . dveiAnow: the wind shut up in the hollows of the 
clouds and by its whurt always thickening their sides, reverberates 
loudly. The idea is clearly explained by Lucr. vi. 121-131. 

ἡ. ἀγγείοις, ‘vessels’. the ordinary Greek jar with a narrow mouth 
would, as Bignone points out, make a noise when one blew into it. 
Lucretius’ illustration from a bladder 1s really more appropriate " 


nec mirum, cum plena animae vesicula parva 
saepe ila dat parvum sonitum displosa repente. 


πυρὸς πεπνευματωμένου βόμβον: an explanation not mentioned by 
Lucretius. The idea is no doubt of the flame excited by wind, which 
seems to get inside it and drive it about with a great roar, as ina 
forge. Ido not think Usener is mght in translating (in his analysis) 
tgnis im spirifum soluft. αἴ 1s not the natural meaning, nor required by 
the context Bignone agrees with my view. 

8. ῥήξευς .. . διαστάσεις : the clouds themselves are actually torn 
asunder, and make a noise, like the rending of awnings in a theatre or 
the tearing of paper, as Lucretius aptly says, vi. 108-115. 


COMMENTARY. §§ 100-ror 303 


διαστάσεις " Usener unnecessarily corrects to διασπάσεις 

Tapatpipers . . κρυσταλλοειδῆ : ἃ more difficult idea. The clouds, 
congealed to a kind of rigidity, scrape along one another and burst 
with a report cf. Lucr, vi. 116-120: 


fit quoque enim interdum ut non tam concurrere nubes 
frontibus adversis possint quam de latere ire 

diverso motu radentes corpora tractim, 

aridus unde auris terget sonus ille diuque 

ducitur, exierunt donec regiombus artis 


9. κατάξεις, ‘breaking ’, ‘bursting’ doubtfully I follow Bignone in 
adopting this reading from Froben’s editio princeps The majority of 
the MSS. have τάξεις, which 1s impossible. VF has διαστάσεις, whence 
Usener conjectured τάσεις, ‘tension’, the idea bemmg that the clouds 
being stretched emit a sound like the string of a lyre but this is very 
far-fetched. 

κρυσταλλοειδῆ = Surely not ‘like glass’, as Usener renders in his 
analysis, but ‘like ice’, it 1s a less violent form of the process which 
produces hail: see § 106 

καὶ τὸ ὅλον. .° the usual appeal to the ‘plural’ method. τὸ ὅλον 
here apparently the whole subject of meteorology: τοῦτο τὸ μέρος, the 
special question of thunder 

11 ἐκκαλεῖται cf ὃ 86. το 

τὰ φαινόμενα both the phenomena of thunder itself and phenomena 
on earth, which supply analogies 

(4) Lightung. §101 1-§ 102.6 The causes of lightning are set 
out in a rather confusing profusion. The explanations may be 
analy zed thus 

(1) fire-atoms contained τη the clouds are driven out of them— 

a) by collision or friction with other clouds (1-3) ; 
Mi) ap and 4: ἢ 
(c) by compression (6, 7). 
(2) fire atoms are driven out, which came originally 
(4) from the heavenly bodies (8-10), 
(6) from a filtration of lght-particles through the atmo- 
sphere (10-12) 
(3) the cauge 1s wind— 
(2) itself ignited in the cloud (13, 14), 
(8) bursting the clouds and driving out fire-atoms (101. 1-3). 
The last cause (34) is hardly distinguishable from (14), but it 1s now 
regarded from the point of view of the wind as cause. Nearly all the 
explanations can be paralleled in Lucr vi 160-218, and many can be 
discovered in the earher philosophers. 

2. παράτριψιν καὶ σύγκρουσιν.. παράτριψις, the side-fricuon of clouds 
tubbing against each other (cf 100 8); σύγκρουσις, the collision of 
clouds charging against one anotuer. The two operations are of 


304 Π, ΠΡῸΣ TIT@OKAEA 


course distinct, but are classed together: it is unnecessary to alter 
καὶ to ἥ, as Usener suggests in his notes. This cause Lucretius 
also places first (vi. 160-163) It was the theory of Democritus, and 
Aetius in his account (1. 3.11) has just the same combination of 
σύγκρουσις and παράτριψις : ἀστραπὴν δὲ σύγκρουσιν νεφῶν, ὑφ᾽ ἧς τὰ 
γεννητικὰ τοῦ πυρὸς διὰ τῶν πολυκένων ἀραιωμάτων ταῖς παρατρίψεσιν εἰς 
τὸ αὐτὸ συναλιξόμενα διηθεῖται 

ὁ πυρὸς ἀποτελεστικὸς σχηματισμός: a splendidly atomic expression : 
the night conformation of the nght kind of atoms to produce fire. 

4. ἐκριπισμὸν ... παρασκευάζει - the second means of ejection; a 
violent casting out by winds, This 15 treated by Lucr. vi. 185-203, and 
may be traced in Anaximander and later in Metrodorus of Lampsacus 
(Aet. ni. 3. 3) 

τῶν τοιούτων σωμάτων ἃ... again characteristic. the nght sort of 
atoms for the purpose. 

6. κατ᾽ ἐκπιασμόν. the third possibility, the atoms are squeezed out 
by the presence of other clouds or of wind, a cause simula: to the two 
preceding, but less violent. Lucretius does not deal with ot separately. 
It was the theory of Anaxagoras. 

7. κατ᾽ ἐμπερίληψιν. .. διὰ τῶν νεφῶν the writer now passes to the 
second class of causes in which the fire 1s not supposed to be onginally 
contained 1n the clouds, but to enter them from without, and first from 
the heavenly bodies. This curious 1dea is explained by Lucr. vi 204- 
213: it was apparently the theory of Empedocles. κατεσπαρμένου 
seems a very necessary correction of the MS. κατεσπειραμένου, Which 
Usener strangely keeps 

10. κατὰ διήθησιν... τοῦ λεπτομερεστάτον φωτός. the light-particles 
are now regarded as collected in the clouds fiom the air in which they 
previously floated. This is not mentioned by Lucretius, but seems to 
have been a notion of Anaxagoras, who regarded the αἰθήρ as fire and 
said that it was κατενεχθὲν ἄνωθεν κάτω, and that the hghining was 
διάλαμψεν. .. τούτου τοῦ πυρός (Arist. Mefeor. 369b 15): cf. also Seneca, 
Nat Quaest, 1. 12. 3, who uses the word d@is/llare, which 1s clearly 
a translation of διηθεῖν. 

(διὰ). a necessary addition of Usener’s. 

11. λεπτομερεστάτου : particles of heat or hght are always in the 
atomic theory extremely hght and subtle, so that they can both rise 
and penetrate cf ὃ 90. 9 λεπτομερῶν τινων φύσεων. 

After φωτός the MSS have ἢ ἀπὸ τοῦ πυρὸς νέφη συνεϊλέχθαι καὶ τὰς 
βροντὰς ἀποτελεῖσθαι καὶ κατὰ τὴν τούτον κίνησιν. The words from ἢ 
ἀπὸ... ἀποτελεῖσθαι are excluded as a gloss by Usener, who then omits 
κατὰ and takes καὶ τὴν τούτου κίνησιν parallel to κατὰ διήθησιν. This 
is arbitrary, and Bignone has shown that the words can be pieserved in 
the text with the slight changes of 4 to ἡ and συνειλέχθαι to συνεφλέχθαι 
(Usener), and the omission of καὶ before κατὰ τὴν τούτον κίνησι.. The 
clause will then constitute a parenthesis connecting the phenomenon of 
lightning with that of thunder, which has already been discussed: it is 


COMMENTARY. §§ 1or-1oa 308 


this penetration of the light particles from the ether which causes the 
kindling of the clouds and so the occurrence of thunder through the 
movement of the enclosed fire. He discovers the same connexion in 
Lucr vi. 150 ἢ, where he says: 


andior porro si nubes accipit ignem, 
uritur ingenti somtu succensa repente. 


The infinitives συνεφλέχθαι and ἀποτελεῖσθαι will be dependent on 
a suppressed ἐνδέχεται, as in § 92. 3 γενέσθαι δύνασθαι. 

In a later note Bignone 1s inclined to keep both καί and κατά and 
to suppose a lacuna: he would then write καὶ κατὰ τζὴν cif καὶ 
κατὰ τ)ὴν τούτον κίνησιν. ois Occurs in Arist. Aeseor. κα. 9. 3694 in 
the sense of ‘a hissing noise’, such as would be produced by the fire- 
particles in contact with the moisture of the clouds and might cause 
thunder. He then quotes as parallel Lucr. vi. 145 ff. where two causes 
are adduced: (1) the noise of the fire in contact with the wet clouds ; 
(2) the onward rush of the increasing fire. An exact parallel would 
then be produced, but I think this 1s going too far in the way of 
imaginative restoration. 

13. κατὰ τὴν τοῦ πνεύματος ἐκπύρωσιν this is the third class of 
causes, namely wind. Here the wind inside the clouds catches fire 
owing to the severity of 1ts motion. Lucretius explains this cause in 
νι 175-182. 

§ 102. 1 κατὰ ῥήξεις. . . ἀποτελουσῶν : wind is here the active 
cause which drives out the fire-atoms. This explanation 1s found in 
Lucr, vi. 214-218, and corresponds nearly to the theory of Democritus, 
given in § ΤΟΣ. 4, but 1s here represented from the point of view of 
wind as the main cause. 

2. ἔκπτωσίν re for ἔκπτωσιν τῶν. the particle is essential, 

3. φάντασμα the ‘appearance’ which we perceive, not said of 
course with any sense of its unreality. 

5. ἀεί - for the MS. καὶ. 

τὸ τούτοις ὅμοιον - i.e. that which in earthly phenomena resembles 
what we see 1n the sky. 

6 συνθεωρεῖν. cf. § 96.9, § g7. 11 

(ec) Why lightning precedes thunder. § 102. 6-§ 103. 2. The writer 
now deals with the question why the lightning precedes the thunder in 
our experience: he offers two solutions, one with the general idea that 
the lightning actually takes place first, the other that the two are 
simultaneous, but the lightning travels more quickly to us than the 
sound. The latter reason alone 15 asserted by Lucr. vi. 164-172, who 
for once seems to abandon his Epicurean suspense of judgement. 

ἡ. περιστάσει : lit. ‘gathering of matter tc form the clouds’: so 
practically ‘atomic conformation’: cf. § 92. 3, § 111. 8. Bignone 
again takes it less concretely, ‘1n the case of such phenomena in the 
clouds ’. 

2978 U 


306 Il, ΠΡΟΣ TIT@OKAEA 


καὶ διὰ τὸ ἅμα, . .: this explanation goes with those of lightning 
and thunder above which attributed them to wind: the wind enters the 
cloud and at once expels the fire-particles, and then 18 itself caught in 
the cloud and rushing about causes the sound of thunder, so that the 
lightning does in fact occur first. A description of the idea will be 
found in a different context in Lucr. vi. 194-203. 

8. ἀποτελεστικὸν σχηματισμόν. cf. ὃ ror, ]. 3 above. 

ὕστερον δὲ, ., ἀποτελεῖν τοῦτον ; cf. ὃ 100. 5 above. 

10. κατ᾽ ἔκπτωσιν, ‘Owing to the falling out’ both of the hght and 
sound from the cloud at once. The MSS. are here much corrupted, 
B’s xaréurrwow being the nearest approach to sense. Usener keeps 
κατ᾽ ἔμπτωσιν, but it is not a question of the light and sound entering 
the cloud (which the sound does not do on any theory), but of their 
being driven out of it simultaneously. Usener shows this clearly in 
his analysis, where he renders ‘ posse etiam simul! utrumque nubibus 
emitti’: ἔμπτωσιν cannot possibly mean this, and it seems to me 
necessary to correct to ἔκπτωσιν. Bignone apparently retains ἔμπτωσιν 
in the sense of ‘ occurrence’. 

τῷ Tdxet... τὴν βροντήν : involving of course the general idea that 
light travels quicker than sound. We must remember that on the 
Epicurean theory both sight and sound are caused by actual particles 
of matter, which move from the objects in al] directions, and when 
they impinge on our sense-organs, cause sensation: cf. Ep. 1 
§§ 49-53. 

§ 108. 1. καθάπερ én’ ἐνίων : Lucr. vi. 167~170 illustrates from the 
case of a woodman felling a tree: we see the blow of the axe before 
we hear it. 

πληγάς τινας ποιουμένων : a quite correct atomic expression, refer- 
ring of course to the blows on the pupil of the eye and the drum of 
the ear, made by the impinging particles of the εἴδωλον and the φωνή. 

(75) Thunderbolts. 8 108. 3-§ 104, 4. The ongin of thunderbolts 1s 
explained on the lines of the previous sections. Either they are por- 
tions of wind, fanned into flame by movement inside the clouds, or 
portions of the fire contained in the cloud, driven by the wind: in 
either case the outburst 1s due to the condensation of the cloud, which 
impedes further motion inside itself. The description 1s more detailed 
than usual, and from the fact that Lucretius devotes a long section 
(vi. 219-422) to the ongin of the thundeibolt and its behaviour, we 
may gather that 1t was an important point in Epicurean meteorology. 

3. κατὰ πλείονας πνευμάτων συλλογάς, ‘many gatherngs of winds’, 
Le. the conjunction of several of those whirls of wind pent in the 
clouds, which are described mn ὃ 100. § above. The emphatic word 
i8 πνευμάτων as opposed to πυρός, 1. 7 below: this 1s the distinction 
between the two theories, which in effect come to much the same. 
Lucretius (vi. 246-284) has a long description in which the ideas of 
wind and fire are not kept distinct, though it on the whole inclines to 
the present notion of ignited wind. 


COMMENTARY. § 102-104 307 


4 ἐκπύρωσιν καὶ κατάρρηξιν μέρους : the whole is ignited, and then, 
as it comes into collision with denser and denser masses of cloud, 
a part breaks off and falls as a thunderbolt, There 1s no doubt that 
the sentence is continuous, and that καὶ κατάρρηξιν, &c., forms part of 
the first explanation: cf. Lucr. vi. 281~284, where he exactly describes 
this portion of the process. Usener in his text followed the authority 
of the better MSS. and printed ἐκπύρωσιν καὶ κατὰ ῥῆξιν μέρους, 
starting an independent explanation: but, as he sees in his preface 
(p xx), that leaves the first explanation incomplete (and μέρους in the 
second would be strangely vague) Bignone agrees in reading καὶ 
κατάρρηξιν. 

6 διὰ τὸ τοὺς ἑξῆς τόπους. the violent rush of wind condenses 
the cloud more and more, and so it offers an ever increasing resistauce 
to the wind itself as 1t advances, until 1t 1s compact enough to cause 
a portion of the wind to break off and fall out of the cloud. 

7. καὶ κατ᾽ αὐτὴν δὲ In the second explanation it 1s the fire- 
particles which produce the thunderbolt, bering driven violently by the 
wind, and then owmg to the same opposition of the increasing density 
of the cloud, breaking through it and fallng The MSS. have κατὰ 
ταύτην, on which Usener’s κατ᾽ αὐτήν 18 certainly an improvement, 
though even that 1s not very easily intelligible: 1t probably refers back 
to the theory of thunder in § 100. 5 ff 

8 καθὰ καὶ βροντὴν. certainly a reference to the theory of 
§ 100 5. One would have expected a reference to one of the theories 
of lightning here rather than thunder 

9. πνευματωθέντος. cf. πεπνευματωμένον, § 100. ἡ. 

To διὰ τὸ μὴ ϑύνασθαι ὑποχωρεῖν just in the same way as the 
igmited wind above, 1 4 

11. TO πίλησιν γίνεσθαι After these words the MSS, have τὸ μὲν 
πολὺ πρὸς ὄρος τι ὕψηλον, ἐν ᾧ μάλιστα κεραυνοὶ πίπτουσιν The words 
interrupt the sense badly and μέν has nothing to correspond with it, so 
I have followed Usener in rejecting them asa note But the high 
mountain 1s a promiment feature in the Epicurean theory of clouds, as 
we may see from Lucr vi 459 ff., and the note is at any rate on quite 
correct Epicurean lines. 

§ 104 1 καὶ κατ᾽ ἄλλους δὲ τρόπους. .᾿ Lucretius suggests several 
In vi 295 ff., 300 fF, 309 ff 

3. ὃ μῦθος © of course the Idea that the thunderbolt is the direct 
instrument of divine vengeance, which Lucretius combats at length 
Vl. 370-422 

4. τῶν ἀφανῶν. it is of course the causes of celestial phenomena 
which are ἀφανῇ and not the phenomena themselves We are to get 
hints (σημειοῦσθαι) from causes we know about causes beyond 
our ken. 


308 It. ΠΡῸΣ MTO@OKAEA 


IV. ATMOSPHERIC AND TERRESTRIAL PHENOMENA. 


(a) Cyclones. § 104. 5-§ 105. 4. The writer deals first with cyclones 
and suggests three explanations: in the first cloud is the main con- 
stituent, which is forced down by wind: 1n the other two wind, which 
either forms itself into a spiral, or 1s impeded by the mass of cloud 
and so driven downwards. Lucr. vi. 423-450 deals with the same 
topic and, though he only suggests the first explanation, sets it out with 
much picturesque detail. The section owes much to the restorations of 
Usener, who has, however, gone a little too far τῇ ‘correcting’ 1t. 

5. κατὰ κάθεσιν νέφους, &c. The cloud is forced down by wind, 
which also causes its rotation, and its advance sideways 1s caused by 
an external wind: cf. Lucr. vi. 431-442. 

6. στυλοειδῶς, ‘hike a pillar’: a brilliant restoration of Usener’s for 
the MS. ἀλλοειδῶς : Lucr vi. 433 ‘tamquam demissa columna’ makes 
it almost certain 

7. πολλοῦ, ‘ by the violence of the wind’, which in its whirling efforts 
to escape drives on the cloud. Usener reads κύκλῳ, comparing 1. 9 
κατὰ περίστασιν δὲ πνεύματος εἰς κύκλον, but the sense 18 already 
sufficiently given by στυλοειδῶς, and a change here is unnecessary. 

8. εἰς τὸ πλάγιον. another emendation of Usener’s for εἰς τὸ 
πλήσιον. again, }, 11 els τὰ πλάγια διαρρνῆναι gives it strong support 

9. κατὰ περίστασιν. . . In this explanation wind 1s the main con- 
stituent, which forms itself into a rotating spiral. For περίστασις cf 
§ 92. 3, § 102. 7. 

ἀέρος τινὸς ἐπισυνωθουμένου ἄνωθεν: 
‘vento in gyrum acto et desu 
μένου as a middle in an acti 
simultaneously from above ’, 
improbable, (4) 


Usener, who analyses this clause 
per pulso’, apparently takes ἐπισυνωθου- 
ve sense, ‘atmosphere thrusting 1t down 

But (a) such a middle use 1s very 
e ἀήρ could not have this thrusting power. The 
participle is surely passive’ wind in a spiral formation could not in 
itself account for the phenomenon of the spout. it needs also some 

body’: this 1s supphed in a portion of misty atmosphere (ἀέρος τινός) 
which is thrust down from above into the wind-spiral. 

ΗΝ ῥύσεως πολλῆς. .: the third explanation, which also takes 
hes eae chief constituent, follows the lines of the explanations of 
᾿ Ais sph given above. The wind in the cloud, being impeded 
pe condensed mass of cloud in its endeavours to move sideways, 15 

tion. find an exit in a downward direction: cf. ὃ 103. 3-7. 
ean a he ne ἕως pév...: the same distinction of the whirlwinds 
oe - vue Waterspouls at sea produced by the cyclones is implied 

y Lucretius, who, after his description of the phenomenon at sea, 
appends a picture of what occurs on land (vi. 443-447). 

2. ὡς ἂν » ++ ylyntou: Usener having emended ὡς ἄν to ὡς ἀναγκαίως, 
pel τιν to δίνησιν, and γίνηται to γίνεται, then excludes the clause as a 
gloss on δῖνοι. This is exceedingly arbitrary, and Bignone points out 


COMMENTARY. §§ 104-105 309 


that the words will make good sense as they stand if ὡς ἄν be taken in 
the sense of ‘in whatever way’, ‘in all the various ways in which the 
creation of such whirlwinds may occur owing to the movement of the 
wind’. He would however himself prefer to suppose a brief lacuna, 
γίνζονται, ἰδίως δὲ καὶ ὀνομάζονται, ds dy... This would, no doubt, 
give further point to the clause, but once again it seems to be unduly 
ymaginative restoration, and I should prefer to keep the words as they 
stand as a reference to the various kinds of whirlwinds which may 
occur. 

(6) Earthquakes. 8105 5-§106 2. The writer suggests two main 
causes for earthquakes. (1) The dislocation and shaking of the earth 
by wind, which either (2) penetrates from outside, or (4) 1s produced 
by the falling 1n of large masses of ground into subterranean caverns. 
Or (2) this falling may itself circulate a shock underground, which is 
ultimately arrested and returned by compact tracts of earth We must 
remember that the earth 1s conceived of as flat and of no great depth. 
The explanations are for the most part hke those suggested by 
Lucr. vi. 535-607, and may be traced to their authors among the 
early philosophers, from whom too comes the tradition of reckoning 
certain subterranean phenomena among τὰ μετέωρα. 

5 κατὰ πνεύματος... The causing of the earthquake by subter- 
ranean winds 1s described by Lucr. vi. 577 ff. 

6. παράθεσιν. presumably ‘dislocation ’, ht ‘the putting aside’ of 
the earth in small masses by the force of the wind, which ultimately 
by cumulative effect causes a great motion. 

7 δτὴν.. παρασκεύαζει Usener for ὅταν .. . παρασκενάζη (sic). 

τὴν κράδανσιν, ‘the swaying of the earth’. so τὸ περιέχον κραδαίνον- 
ros, Δεῖ. μι 15.4, In his account of Anaxagoras’ theory of earthquakes. 
The reading of the majonty of the MSS points to «padacpov, which 
Casaubon adopied, but the second hand m B supports Hermann’s 
restoration xpddavow 

καὶ τὸ πνεῦμα toiro.. the writer deals with the question of the 
ongin of this wind. It may come from outside. This was apparently 
the theory of Anaxagoras. cf. Aet. loc. cit., and Arist. Afefeor. ii 
7 3652 so Lucr, vi 578: 


ventus ubi atque animae subito vis maxima quaedam 
; extrinsecus . . . coorta. 


8. (4). a necessary addition of Meibom. he must proceed now to 
the alternative cause of the wind. 

ἐκ τοῦ πίπτειν. . .: the second cause: the carth is cavernous 
beneath, and from time to time masses of earth fall in which stir the 
air and so create a wind. This idea is explained in Lucr. vi. 535-556 
and was the notion of Anaximenes: Anst. Afefeor. u. 7. 365 b Bpexo- 
μένην τὴν γὴν καὶ ξηραινομένην ῥήγνυσθαι καὶ ὑπὸ τούτων τῶν ἀπορρηγνυ- 
μένων κολωνῶν ἐμπιπτόντων σείεσθαι. So too Seneca, Wat. Quaesi. vi 
20, in explaining Epicurus’ theories of earthquake says: ‘ fortasse 


310 ἢ. ΠΡῸΣ TITOOKAEA 


enim aere extrinsecus alo intrante agitatur, fortasse aliqua parte 
subito cadente percutitur et inde motum capit’. 

There can be no doubt as to the meaning, but the text is uncertain. 
The MSS. have ἐκ τοῦ πίπτειν εἰς ἐδάφη els ἀντροειδεῖς τόπους. Usener 
obelizes the first εἰς and suggests in his notes that 1t may represent some- 
thing hke εἴκοντα or ἐκλελυμένα, but Hermann’s simple emendation εἴσω, 
mentioned by Usener in the preface, seems to set the passage right. 

9. ἐκπνευματοῦντα 18 again a correction of Usener's for ἐκ πνευμάτων. 
A participle 1s badly wanted, and this gives yust the sense required : 
Mie may compare πεπνευματωμένον, § 100. ἢ, and πνευματωθέντος, 

103. 9. 

10. ἐπειλημμένον of Q 15 probably nght : πεπιλημένον of the majority 
of the MSS. is certainly wrong: there is no question here of the con- 
densation of air. 

(καὶ) κατ᾽ αὐτὴν δὰ...“ the second main cause: the communica- 
tion of a shock owing to the fall of ἐδάφη There seems to be nothing 
quite like this notion elsewhere. Lucr. vi. 557-576 has the idea of the 
fall, but regards it as due to wind and causing wind, as above, 1 J, and 
Democritus too (Seneca, Wat. Quaest vi 20) connects it with the 
motion of a subterranean stream. The MSS. have κατὰ ταύτην : the 
sense demands Usener’s restoration: cf. § 103 7 

διάδοσιν, ‘the distribution’ of the shock. 

12, ἀνταπόδοσιν, ‘the return’ of the shock: the movement reaches 
a firm, rocky piece of earth and 1s repelled: so, with his general 
notion of wind, Lucr. vi. 568 ff. 

ἀπαντήσῃ. sc. ἡ κίνησις. 

8 106. 2. γίνεσθαι. Usener, who puts a full stop αἱ ἀποτελεῖσθαι, 
suggests in his notes that δυνατόν is missing it 1s probably another 
instance in which ἐνδέχεται or the ike must be supphed~ cf. § 92. 3, 
§ 107. 4. 

(c) (ὁ Volcanoes. 8 106. 3-7 There follows a short passage dealing 
with the genesis of wind, which 1s palpably fragmentary It does not 
seem to be part of a general theory of wind, though Bignone appears 
to take it as such, but rather of its origin im connexion with some 
other phenomenon. Usener is inchned to attach it to the section 
dealing with cyclones (§ 104 above), but it does not seem to fit well. 
Comparing it with Lucretius’ descnption (vl. 680-702 and especially 
694-700), I am inchned to believe that 1t formed part of a section on 
the cause of volcanoes. Lucretius explains that there are subter- 
ranean tunnels from the sea underneath Aetna, and the water which 
thus enters causes the wind which drives out the flames, &c. The 
passage in Lucretius has also been unfortunately mutilated, but we 
may notice the lines: 


et penetrare mari penitus res cogit aperto 
atque efflare foras ideoque extollere flammam 
saxaque subiectare et harenae tollere nimbos, 


COMMENTARY. 8 ros—106 311 


which correspond well enough to the second half of the first sentence 
of this section. If this theory be nmght, a considerable passage must 
have fallen out 

3. τὰ δὲ πνεύματα: Usener suggests that we should read ra δὲ 
πνεύματα (ratra), and whether the reference be to the cyclones or to 
volcanoes, or any other phenomena, it 1s a very probable addition: 
something is wanted to distinguish ra πνεύματα here from τὰ Aouad 
πνεύματα below. 

ἀλλοφυλίας tivds* probably the alien matter of wind as opposed to 
the earth of the volcanoes. I do not understand how Usener takes it 
on his theory of the context. 

4. καθ᾽ ὕδατος ἀφθόνου συλλογήν will, on my view, be a second 
cause, namely, that descnbed by Lucretrus—the entrance of the sea- 
water, which forces the alr in the caverns up as wind. 

5. τὰ δὲ λοιπὰ πνεύματα, ‘other winds’ concerned in the eruption 
apart from the special ones with which he has been dealing: these are 
produced when a few wind-particles or currents fall into the hollows 
beneath the mountain, and setting the interior air in motion cause 
a spreading of wind. Bignone would read τὸ δὲ λοιπὸν. 

6. ὀλίγων : sc. πνευμάτων, as Opposed to the πολλὰ κοιλώματα into 
which they enter. The word does not seem to mc, as Usener thinks, 
to require emendation Bignone would translate ‘few bodches of 
matter’, holding that the writer is arguing against Democnius, who 
said that when many bodies were in an empty space, wind followed : 
this seems very far-fetched. 

διαδόσεως, ‘spreading’ as the currents set in motion the air which 
they meet and that in its turn stirs more distant air: cf. κατ᾽ αὐτὴν δὲ 
τὴν διάδοσιν τῆς κινήσεως, ὃ Τοῦ. 10. 

(α)ὺ Hal §106. 6-§107 4 The wmter now returns from terres- 
trial phenomena to more strictly meteorological occurrences, and deals 
with the formation and shape of hail The text 1s uncertain and the 
meaning obscure’ unfortunately Lucretius passes by the subject of 
this and the next few sections with the general statement that it will be 
easy to account for the formation of such things when we have once 
grasped the nature and powers of the atoms (vi 527-534), nor can we 
derive much assistance from the accounts of the theones of early 
philosophers. The general idea, however, seems clear. Hail ts 
formed either(1) by the powerful congelation of particles of wind, or 
(a) by the milder congelation of particles of water: in erther case 
together with the process of congelation there is a (? simultaneous) 
process of division which causes the formation of small masses of ice 
instead of the freezing of the whole cloud. Wuth regard to details 
both of text and interpretation I am inclined to differ considerably 
from Usener. 

8. κατὰ πῆξιν ἰσχυροτέραν - because it requires a stronger congela- 
tion to sohdify the subtler and more elusive particles of wind than the 
already more compact particles of water. 


312 Il, ΠΡῸΣ MTO@OKAEA 


9. πνευματωδῶν : the emphatic word ὦ i lanati 
Opposed to the Diaronihe of the second. ae a ταῦ ae 

περίστασις, ‘conformation’, the comi i 
quarters to form a whole: cf. pone eee βιὴ 
§ ake 9 above: for the wee also ὃ 92. 3, § 102. 7. sis 

καὶ καταμέρισιν : so the MSS., except t ἃ μέ i 
two words, Simultaneous with the ny aos ΕΓ γγάκ cate aca of 
division, which causes the formation of separate nodules of hail instead 
of one solid mass. Usener reads κᾷτα μέρισιν, ‘and anes 

piacere ae : Η a subsequent 
division’. but (a) 1 is extremely improbable that any one held th 
notion that the whole congealed ‘in a mass, ‘and then’ was ainda 
surely τὰ φαινόμενα ἀντιμαρτυρεῖ, (6) the lengthier explanation of 
the process in the second theory shows that this was δι the c 
pee meth follows Usener. sae 

καὶ (kara) πῆξιν μετριωτέραν . . .: the second theory: it 1s water 
bere which congeal, and for this purpose a less sie freezing ic 
equired. (xard) 18 a necessary mnserlion made by Meibom 

10. (kat) ὁμοῦ ῥῆξιν, ‘and at the same time a breaking ’: i.e. just 
as in the case of the πνευματωδῇ particles, there must be a concurrent 
process of division : the idea 1s then doubly explained: this causes 
a simultaneous ‘thrusting together’ (σύνωσις) of the particles, and a 
splitting up (διάρρηξιν) into separate nodules; the former process 
makes the individual parts of the hailstones cling together (κατὰ μέρη), 
the latter makes them cling together as separate wholes (xara ἀθροότητα). 
I believe then that with the single insertion of καί the MS, text gives 
a perfectly intelligible and consistent account of this double process 
and that no further emendation is required. Usener, however, adopts 
the correction ὁμούρησιν (cf. Ep. ad Ad? § 64. 9) for ὁμοῦ ῥῆξιν, and 
to account for it inserts before it ςπνευματωδῶν δέ τινων But (a) the 
alteration is very considerable; (4) the ‘neighbourhood of certain 
windy particles’ 1s not required to account for the double process, 
(c) it destroys the tnple parallelism of the whole clause (wjéw .. . ῥῆξιν, 
σύνωσιν.. .. διάρρηξιν, κατὰ μέρη. .. κατὰ aOpodryra); (4) it introduces 
a confusion between the two explanations: all that 1s required mm the 
second is ὑδατοειδῇ particles (this 15 made clear again by ὃ 107. 3 εἴτε 
ὑδατοειδῶν εἴτε πνευματωδῶν). The correction 1s very ingenious, but 
to my mind quite wrong, Buignone’s translation again follows Usener’s 
text without comment. . 

αι. σύνωσιν : the process of union of the parts m a whole as opposed 
to διάρρηξιν the breaking up into separate nodules: the particles con- 
geal, but in single nuclei, 

ποιουμένην agrees grammatically with ῥῆξιν, but in sense, of course, 
also with πῆξιν. 

12. κατὰ μέρη, as far as regards the parts of the nodules as opposed 
to κατὰ ἀθροότητα, as far as regards the individual nodules as separate 
wholes. With the general idea of the second theory we may compare the 
notions of Anaximenes, χάλαζαν δὲ (ἐκθλέβεσθαι), ἐπειδὰν τὸ καταφερό- 


COMMENTARY. § 106~107 313 
M4 ~ see 

εκ eocaite & et aoe εἱς aae iy ἰφα τὰ ὅταν ἀπὸ τῶν 

ψυχρούμενα στρογγυλοῦται (Aet. mm 4. 2) ἐν ἘΠΕ ΛΕΙΣΣΕ ἘΣ 

ὃ 107. r. ἡ δὲ περιφέρεια... : the writer proceeds to consider the 
cause of the round shape of the hailstones and su 

ggests (1) that the 
corners are rounded off as they fall; (2) that as all the composin 
particles come together in exactly even quantities and at even oie 
from all sides, the round shape is naturally formed: this 1s true 
whether the particles are of wind or water. 

2. τῶν ἄκρων ἀποτηκομένων " this 15 stated as Epicurus’ 

Aet ML 4 5 στρογγυλαίνεσθαι δὲ τὴν χάλαζαν ey 
μακρᾶ oe ilar nd 

καὶ ἐν τῇ συστάσει. : i 
Seneca, Net pidge a 1S most ingenious idea 1s again imphed in 

πάντοθεν... ῶ ᾿ 
Girefelnese of inet haan Ube aoc oe ci a ᾿ fh Hayles 
philosopher's theory. ἸΣΕΟΡΗΓΟΙΒ pine 

ὡς λέγεται ᾿" but unfortunately we cannot attribute’it to its author, 
Re: ὑδατοειδῶν: Usener for some reason adopts the reading of F, 
ὑδατοποιῶν, against that of all the other MSS., which preserves the 
parallelism and 1s strongly supported by ὑδατοειδῶν in ὃ τοῦ το. 

(c) Snow § 107. 5-§ 108. 4 A section naturally follows on snow 
The text 1s again corrupt, but the general sense is clear, and a series 
of brilhant emendations have greatly improved the MS. reading. 
There are three theories (1) that waler 1s driven out of the clouds, 
which subsequently congeals in cold regions below; (2) that the 
pressure of clouds on one another congeals the water into snow 
inside, so that it falls out im that form, (3) that the friction of con- 
gealed clouds causes bits of snow to break off along the edges The 
last 1s perhaps the most typically Epicurean explanation. Lucretius 
again passes over the question without comment (v1. 529) 

5 ὕϑατος λεπτοῦ... : the first theory . fine parucles of water exude 
from clouds of the right atomic formation provided with pores to fit 
them, and entering cold regions below become congealed into snow 
flakes. This was the theory of Anaximenes and Anaxagoras, 

6. διὰ πόρων a striking correction of Kiihn’s for διαφορων (variously 
accented) of the MSS. 

θλίψεις, Usener. θλίψεως MSS.- the writer uses διά with acc. rather 
than gen. in this sense, e.g. διά τινα ioxupav .. . ψυχρασίαν just below, 
and the accumulation of genitives would be almost intolerable. 

4. νεφῶν ἀεὶ ὑπὸ πνευμάτων σφοῦράς a Semes of corrections for the 
MSS. νεφῶν καὶ ὑπομνήματος σπορᾶς, which 1s clearly nonsense. 
Usener excludes καὶ, but I have accepted Bignone’s correction ἀεὶ 
(cf. § τοΖ. 5) 

8. ἐν τῇ φορᾷ: 1.6. 1m its descent. 

9. κατωτέρω, Cobet, for κατώτερον 

περίστασιν. see §§ 92. 3, 102. 7, 104. 9, 106. 9. 


ν 
καὶ τὸν ὑετὸν ἀπὸ τῆς 


314 If. ΠΡῸΣ TIYOOKAEA 

καὶ κατὰ πῆξιν 8'...: the second explanation: the congelation of 
the snowflakes may take place inside clouds of sufficiently fine 
texture, and their exudation caused by the pressure of clouds in 
juxtaposition. 

10. ὁμαλῇ ἀραιότητα : the clouds must be fine in texture to produce 
such fine particles as those which compose snow: they must be of the 
game texture all over (ὁμαλῇ) to cause the evenness of the formation 
of the snowflakes: cf of the formation of hailstones, ὃ 107. 2, πάν- 
robe... κατὰ μέρη ὁμαλῶς περιισταμένων. 

ἔχουσιν, Meibom, for ἔχουσαν or ἔχουσα. 

τοιαύτη, Froben, for τοιαύτην 

12. Before ὑδατοειδῶν Usener inserts (τῶν) unnecessarily, ὑδατοειδῶν 
καὶ συμπαρακειμένων ate conditions which must be fulfilled by the 
clouds. Bignone translates ‘ when the watery elements are pressed by 
those near them’: I do not see how this can be got out of the Greek 

σύνωσιν in the technical sense: the driving together of particles to 
form the flake: see ὃ 106. 11. 

13. ὃ μάλιστα γίνεται ἐν τῷ ἀέρι : i.e. this process of σύνωσις, the 
driving together of particles by an external agency to form things 18 
especially frequent in the atmosphere, where there 15 greater freedom 
of movement. We have seen it in the case of hail in ὃ τοῦ. 11. The 
clause is cunous, but not, I think, unnatural There seems no 
necessity for Usener’s ἐν τῷ ἔαρι, though Arist. Mefeor, 1. 12. 347 Ὁ 
says al δὲ χάλαζαι γίνονται ἔαρος μὲν καὶ ὀπωρίνου μάλιστα. 

8 108. τ. καὶ κατὰ τρῖψιν δὲ νεφῶν. a third possibility : the clouds 
themselves may be congealed, and by their friction cause the flakes of 
snow to spring off by a kind of trituration: a specially Epicurean 
idea. 

a. ἀπόπαλσιν. a technical word: the particles which form the con- 
gealed clouds are always in a state of vibratory movement, and the 
friction enables them to ‘leap away’ from the cloud. 

ἂν λαμβάνοι τὸ, Schneider, for ἀναλαμβάνοιτο or ἀναλαμβάνοι τὸ. 

4. ἄθροισμα : again technical, the right conformation of atoms to 
make snowflakes. cf. 100. 3 

(/) Dew and Frost. §108.5-§109. 8. Dew is next dealt with 
in a section which presents no great difficulty. There are two 
theories of 118 formation: (1) that particles which form it unite in the 
atmosphere and fall; (2) that particles rise from damp places, umte 
and form moist drops, which fall again as dew. ‘To this account 15 
appended a brief statement that frost 1s formed in the same ways, 
when the most particles are congealed by cold air. Lucretius does 
not even mention dew in his hst of phenomena passed over: 
vi. 527-534. 

5. ἐκ τοῦ ἀέρος is emphatic: in the first theory the origin of the 
moisture is in the air: moist particles gather together there till they 
form a drop big enough to fall as dew. 

ἡ. καὶ κατὰ φορὰν δὲ. ..: the second theory differs in that the 


COMMENTARY. §§ 107-109 315 


origin of the moisture 1s the earth: moist particles are exhaled from 
damp places which then gather together and fall once more as dew- 
drops. Bignone would read κατ᾽ ἀναφοράν, unnecessarily . cf. φοράν 
for the fallin} 7. 

ἀπὸ νοτερῶν τόπων: sc. marshes, ἢ ὕδατα κεκτημένων, sc places with 
ponds or streams. 

8. οἵοις - Usener’s correction for τοῖς, better than Kiihn’s οἷς, which 
18 too abrupt. 

9. εἰς τὸ αὐτὸ with σύνοδον only: cf, σύνοδον πρὸς ἄλληλα, lg above. 

10. ὕγρασίας - Bignone would insert παχυτέρας : if anything 1s to 
be added I would rather insert τοιαύτης. 

καθάπερ ὁμοίως. . .. the appeal to famihar phenomena is not so 
obvious as usual: perhaps the writer is thinking of such things as the 
formation of steam into water on an intervening solid 

II. τοιαῦτά τινα there 1s obviously a lacuna after these words 
which must have contained (4) the conclusion of the sentence, (4) the 
beginning of a sentence about hoar-frost, as Gassendi long ago inferred 
from the context. I should differ slightly from Usener’s tentative filing 
up, (2) because I think συντελούμενα 18 unnecessary and not quite 
m accordance with the writer’s usual phraseology (cf. § 95. 9, &c ), 
(ὁ) because οὐ διαφερόντως συντελεῖται τῶν δρόσων Seems an unnatural 
expression I suspect a participle, μεταβαλλομένων OF ἀλλοιουμένων 
1s lost. 

8 109. 2 τοιούτων τινῶν, Usener, for the τούτων of the MSS - the 
correction 1s not absolutely necessary, but makes the construction less 
abrupt, and is hinted at by B’s τούτων τινά. 

(g) Ice. 8109. 4-8 <A short section on the formation of ice 
follows Two theores are advanced both hold that ice 1s produced 
by the ehmination of particles of round formation and the gathering 
together of those of angular shape, but they differ in that the first, 
which is probably that of Democritus, descnbes the process as taking 
place entirely in the water, the second holds that it is an external 
formation which then comes and causes congelation in the water. 
The ideas seem rather grotesque to us, but we may remember (1) that 
to Epicurus the alteration of the σχηματισμός of component particles 
1s always the cause of change, (2) that round smooth particles are 
always characteristic of water (cf Lucr 1. 451-452), and that conse- 
quently their emination would be the natural prelhmunary to the change 
of water into a solid; (3) that the observation of the formation of ice- 
crystals might well lead to some such idea. Lucretius (vi. 530) again 
passes over the problem with a mention. 

4 ἔκθλιψιν, ‘the squeezing out’, a technical word of the atomists 
for the process by which a particle (or an atom) between two others 


. 


gets dnven out usually in an upward direction (cf probably Ep i, 


§ 53. 6). 


5. σχηματισμοῦ : the formation of atoms into a nucleus of matter: 
Lucretius’ glomeramen: cf. §§ 101, 102. 


316 11. ΠΡῸΣ MIY@OKAEA 


σύγωσιν, as in ὃ 107. 12. 

σκαληνῶν καὶ ὀξυγωνίων : it is a little difficult to realize the difference, 
but probably by σκαληνῶν he means particles of triangular shape, by 
ὀξυγωνίων other angular formations. 

6. τῶν... ὑπαρχόντων : this 1s emphatic as it is the point in which 
the first theory differs from the second. 

καὶ κατὰ ἔξωθεν : again the emphatic point: the nuclei are formed 
outside, and attaching themselves to the water cause the change in 
shape and texture. We ought perhaps, with Schneider, to read 
κατὰ (τὴν). 

4. πρόσκρισιν : the use of this word leads one naturally to suspect 
that thrs was the theory of Anaxagoras, though I can find no trace of 
it elsewhere: cf. § go. 8. 

8. mood, ‘a certain number’: the use 1s odd, but seems vouched 
for by the MSS. 

(4) Zhe rainbow. ὃ 109. 9~§ 110. 6. The writer proceeds to deal 
with the rainbow. Two theories again are advanced: (1) that st 1s due 
to the shining of the sun’s rays on a watery atmosphere; (2) that it 1s 
caused by a mixture of light and air which produces these colours, 
which are then reflected by the surrounding aur. The former theory 
alone is mentioned by Lucr. vi. 524-526, and seems to have been the 
notion of Anaximenes (Aet, πὶ. 5. 10). 

9. ἀπὸ τοῦ ἡλίου " the MSS, have ὑπό, which can hardly be rght. 
Usener, following F, omits the preposition: I think it 1s more likely 
that it is a mistake for ἀπό. 

Io. κατὰ πρόσκρισιν. the MSS. have κατ᾽ ἀέρος φύσιν, a palpable 
error. Usener reads κατὰ κρᾶσιν, which 1s excellent in sense, but 
hardly accounts for the MS text. I suggest κατὰ πρόσκρισιν (κατ᾽ 
ἀέρος = κατὰ mpda.); cf. ὃ 109, 7 above. If the suggestion be right, 
one would expect this to be the theory of Anaxagoras, though Aetius 
(ii. δ. 11) states that he supported the reflection theory: 1t may be 
that the writer adopted Anaxagoras’ technical term without intending 
to imply his authorship of the theory Buignone, feeling the same 
objection to Usener’s emendation, reads xara σύμφυσιν. 

Ir, ἰδιώματα, ‘the special characteristics’: cf. πρόσκρισιν ἰδίαν 
above. 

εἴτε. . . μονοειδῶς : 1.6. the peculiar combination of light and aur 
may produce all the colours at once, or separate combinations may 
cause the separate colours. 

13. τοιαύτην, Usener, for ταύτην “ cf. § 109. 2. 

14. κατὰ πρόσλαμψιν πρὸς τὰ μέρη i.e. the shining of the same 
light on different parts of the surrounding atmosphere may cause the 
production of different colours: a suggestion to explain povoedds 
above. 

§ 110. 1-6. As a secondary point the writer discusses the shape of 
the rainbow. Here we have two qutte different theorres corresponding, 
though not at first obviously, to the two theories of the formation of 


COMMENTARY. §§ 109-110 317 


the rainbow above: (1) if the rainbow 1s merely the reflection of the 
sun’s light, then it is round because all points of the reflection are 
equidistant from our sight; (2) if it is caused by the m:xture of 
elements of light from the sun and air in the atmosphere, then its 
roundness is due to the fact that one or other of these two component 
elements is actually arranged in round form and impresses its shape 
on the combination. 

ἃ. διὰ τὸ... θεωρεῖσθαι : the conformation of our κόσμος being 
spherical, the yonction of points equidistant from the earth will assume 
a round appearance. 

3. ἢ aivwow ...: this explanation clearly goes with the second of 
the two theories as to the general nature of the rainbow. 

4. τῶν ἐν τῷ ἀέρι... ἀποφερομένων : corresponding exactly, though 
with a more careful statement, to τοῦ τε φωτὸς καὶ τοῦ ἀέρος, 
§ 109. 10. 

ἀτόμων " all the MSS. have τομῶν, a palpable mistake, which, as 
Usener has seen, was corrected by the isertion of ἀτομῶν after the 
participle ἀποφερομένων. 

ἀπὸ τοῦ αὐτοῦ dépos: after these words the MSS. have προσφερο- 
μένου πρὸς τὴν σελήνην Usener insists, followmg C. F Hermann, 
that the words from ἀέρος to σελήνην are only a meaningless repetition 
of a phrase from the following section Usener also excludes αὐτοῦ, 
which I am inclined to keep as emphasizing the contrast between the 
light atoms derived from the sun and the air atoms already in the 
atmosphere: all that need be excluded 18 προσφερομένου πρὸς τὴν 
σελήνην. 

5. περιφέρειαν . ταύτην. This combination (sc. of hght and air 
atoms) stretches downwards, a kind of round shape 1e spreads out 
in the round shape which it assumes from one of itselements But the 
expression 1s odd and the text rather uncertain, all the MSS. having 
καθεῖσθαι instead of καθίεσθαι, which 15 Meibom’s correction. 

(1) Zhe moon’s halo. §110. 7-111 2. Three easily distinguishable 
theories are propounded (1) that the halo 1s formed by air advancing 
from outside towards the moon; (2) that it 1s formed by effluences 
from the moon itself, which are checked equally all round by the 
ar ; (3) that it is formed by the surrounding air, which is piled up in 
a thick circle either by an external current, or by heat which blocks 
up the channels for its movement The text 1s rather corrupt, though 
it has been greatly improved by Me:bom and Usener. Lucretius does 
not deal with this problem, nor does it seem possible to obtain any 
hght from the accounts of the earlier philosophers, from whom no 
doubt these theories are derived. 

4 wat the MSS. have καὶ κατὰ, their most frequent mistake, due to 
dittography. 

9. ἀναστέλλοντος, ‘ blocking’, ‘ banking up”. Meibom’s correction 
for ἀναστέλλοντα, ἃ Mere mistake due to the neighbourhood of ῥεύματα 
and ἀποφερόμενα. 


318 II. ΠΡῸΣ TYOOKAEA 


10. περιστῆσαι εἰς : Usener’s most ingenious correction of περὶ τῆς 
als, based on Meibom’s previous suggestion πέρ 

καὶ ph τὸ παράπαν διακρῖναι, ‘without any distinction all along’, 
1.6. the process of the banking up of the eee circle takes place 
equally at all parts, an elaboration of ὁμαλῶς in } 

11. ἀναστέλλοντος : : SC. τοῦ ἀέρος, as before " he. expression is loose, 
‘the air checks the air round the moon’. Possibly it was the con- 
sciousness of this carelessness which led the writer to add the clause 
δε έγεται . . . ἀπεργάσασθαι, which explains the real causes of the 
chec 

12. περιφερές, like παχυμερές, is predicative. 

παχυμερές, ‘thick in parts’, 1.e. with 1ts parts closely compressed, 
580 dense. 

§ 111 1. ὃ γίνεται... - ἀπεργάσασθαι. I take this sentence to refer 
only to the last explanation : the ‘ banking’ of the air may be due 
either to an external effluence or to the effect of heat. Bignone would 
refer it to the whole paragraph, taking #rou. . . ῥεύματος as the cause 
of the advance of air from outside (first explanation) and ἢ... ἀπερ- 
as σασθαι as the cause of the ‘banking’ of the air (third explanation). 

he singular 6 seems to me agamnst this. 

κατὰ μέρη τινά, sc. in different parts of the sky during the moon’s 
course one or other of these causes 1s at work. 

2. ἢ τῆς θερμασίας... ἀπεργάσασθαι is not very explicit. Bignone 
takes this to mean that heat seizes on the pores through which the air 
would naturally move and blocks them up, so as to produce the 
phenomenon of the halo. I feel sure that this 1s the meaning, but do 
not see how it can be extracted from the MS text, with which it must 
be that the πύροι are ἐπιτήδειοι εἷς τὸ τοῦτο ἀπεργάσασθαι I therefore 
propose the small change to ἐπιτηδείως 


Vs Furtuer CrerestiaL PHENOMENA. 


The wnter now, with a certain irregularity of procedure, returns to 
celestial phenomena, and deals with certain problems which he had 
hitherto left untouched. It would not be nght to transfer this and the 
following sections to their logical position at the beginning of § 99, 
because the whole letter 1s so obviously a patchwork compilation 
without systematic treatment. Usener suggests that this paragraph 
on comets ought to come after the two sections on the planets and 
fixed stars and immediately before that on falling stars. Again we 
may agree that this would be more logical, but there seems liitle 
reason for supposing that the writer was careful enough to put his 
subjects in the rational order. 

(2) Comets. § 111. 4-11. For the occurrence of comets the writer 
suggests two possible causes, the latter being subdivided. (1) It may 
be that they are casual collocations of fire in the sky due to a special 
atomic conformation ; (2) it may be that they are real permanent stars, 


COMMENTARY. 88 110-112 319 


and that either (a) some special movement of the sky reveals them to 
us when they were previously hidden, or (δ) they move independently 
so that they come into our vision. I cannot at all agree with 
Usener that (2 4) 1s a mere repetition of (1) and should therefore 
be excluded: see notes. Bignone agrees with me both in keeping 
the text and in the explanation of it. 

5. περιστάσεως, ‘a gathering of matter all round’ to form some 
new object one of the writer’s favourite technical terms- cf. §§ 92, 
102, 104, ἂς 

6. ἢ ἰδίαν. . . ὑπὲρ ἡμᾶς the second cause: the whole heaven 
moves so as to bring the comets into view. compare the account 
given of the motion of sun and moon, ὃ 92 9. 

7. τὰ τοιαῦτα ἄστρα 1s emphatic’ the comets are actual ἄστρα, 
permanent heavenly bodies, which through the movement of the whole 
sky now become visible. 

ἢ αὐτὰ. ἐκφανῆ γενέσθαι. the third cause: the comets may be 
permanent celestzal] bodies, which though the whole heaven remains 
stationary, come into view from time to time by their own movement. 
The construction of the clause, as Bignone points out, is agatn infint- 
tive depending on a suppressed δυνάτον or ἐνδέχεται. cf ὃ 92. 3, 
§ 101. 11, ὃ 106, 2. Usener excludes the whole clause on the ground 
that τ 1s a mere repetiuon of (1), but it differs from tt in that (1) 
regards the comets as occasional temporary aggregations of fire, and 
(2a and 4) as permanent bodies It 15 essential to the passage to retain 
the clause, which 1s then parallel to the second possibility with regard 
to sun and moon given ἸΏ ὃ 92. 9. 

8 διά τινα περίστασιν 1.6 some conformation of the atmosphere 
which presses on these normally stationary bodies and stirs them into 
action Bignone again translates ‘for some reason’ see § 102 7. 

9 τήν τε ἀφάνισιν. αἰτίας. There can surely be no reason why 
Usener should exclude this clause. the explanation of the disappear- 
ance of the comets 1s not only natural but almost necessary. 

(δὴ) Fixed stars §112 1-8 The wrter now proceeds to consider 
the problems of the various kinds of motions of the stais, and deals 
first with the fixed stars | His explanations correspond exactly to the 
theories of the motions of the stars given in § 92, with which passage 
this .s closely connected. (1) Ifthe whole heaven rnoves round and 
the stars witH’ it, then the fixed stars are at the po:nts which do not 
revolve (1.e, the poles), (2) if the heaven is stationary and the stars 
move independently then, (4) if the stars are driven by their own 
whirl (δίνη), the fixed stars are prevented from moving by a circular 
current all round them which keeps them im their place, (6) if the 
stars advance to the regions where they can successively find fuel for 
their flame, then the fixed stars are kept in one place as it 1s the only 
source of their proper fuel. We may therefore fairly attribute the first 
theory to Anaximenes, the second to Democritus, and the third to 
Hersachtus. The reference is to the polar stars, i.e. as Bignone 


320 If. ΠΡῸΣ TIY@OKAEA 


explains, those whose distance from the pole is less than the height 
of oy pole above the horizon, so that they are visible all the year 
roun 

δ 112 τ. τινὰ ἄστρα στρέφεται αὐτοῦ ὃ συμβαίνει : the MSS. have τινὰ 
ἀναστρέφεται αὐτοῦ ὁ συμβαίνει. Usener’s restoration ἄστρα for ἀνα- 1s 
certain, and he nghtly sees that the expresston 15 a remmuscence of 
the Homeric dpxrov.. 4 τ᾽ αὐτοῦ στρέφεται (7). 18. 487). That being 
80, it seems more hkely that the wnter should have made the quotation 
exact and followed it with ὃ συμβαίνει, as the MSS. have it, than that 
he should have brought the phrase into line with his usual form of 
expression by writing, as Usener emends, στρέφεσθαι αὐτοῦ συμβαίνει. 

στρέφεται αὐτοῦ. not merely versatur 1b:dem, but literally ‘ revolve 
in their place’. 

od μόνον. . . στρέφεται. the first cause: these stars are in a 
stationary part of the heaven. 

2. τὸ λοιπόν : sc. ‘the rest of the heaven’: there is no reason to 
adopt Schneider’s τὰ λοιπά, ‘the remaining stars’ 

3. τινές we may then take to be Anaximenes and his followers. 
Usener thinks the reference is not to the polar stars, but to the theory of 
the Pythagoreans that the ‘middle and end’ of the world were fixed. 
But the parallel of § 92 seems to demand the polar theory. 

ἀλλὰ καὶ... καὶ τὰ ἄλλα. the second theory: the other stars per- 
form an orbit, but these are kept im their place by a revolving mng of 
air around them. 

4. περιεστάναι: with the full technical force of περίστασις the 
encircling whirl is formed all round the star 

δ. ἢ καὶ διὰ... .: the third theory, which is really so different in 
general] idea from the other two, 1s carefully marked off from them 

6. κείμενα : emphatic, ‘ fixed’ 

καὶ κατ᾽ ἄλλους. . : the usual caution: the parallel of earthly 
phenomena may suggest several other ways in which the occurrence 
may take place. 

(c) Planets and regular stars. § 112. 9-§ 113. 12. From the fixed 
stars the wnter passes to the moving stars, and fist suggests explana- 
tions for the difference between the (apparently) erratic course of the 
planets and the regular orbits of the other stars. The two explana- 
tions given again correspond, but not so completely, to the theories of 
8 93. The notion of the movement of the whole sky new drops out, 
and the two theores of the independent motion of the individual stars 
are considered (1) 1f they move according to orbits determined by 
necessity from the beginning, then some of these were regular circles 
and some are interrupted by aberrations , (2) if the stars move towards 
the regions which supply their fuel, then some pass always through 
regions equally open and prolific in fuel, others through irregular 
tracts with an unequal supply, so that their movements are erratic. 
For the latter notion we may compare, in a slightly different context, 
Luer. v. 696-7oo. The wording of the passage 1s 2 httle obscure and 


COMMENTARY. 8 112-113 Zar 


the text in places uncertain, though I incline, as usual, to think 
Usener’s corrections rash. 

9. εἰ οὕτω... συμβαΐνει: a parenthesis’ ‘if indeed it is the case 
that their movements are erratic’, suggesting the possibility that im 
such distant phenomena even our observations may be doubtful. 

ἢ 118. 1. τινὰ δὲ ph ζοῦτων κινεῖσθαι. The MSS. have τινὰ δὲ μὴ 
κινεῖσθαι, which cannot be right, as the question of the fixed stars has 
already been disposed of in the previous paragraph, and the contrast 
now 1s between the aberrations of the planets and the regularity of the 
stars. Usener boldly emends, on the analogy of the terminology else- 
where in ths paragraph, to τινὰ δ᾽ ὁμαλῶς κινεῖσθαι. But this seems 
too violent, and 1 am inchned to think that δὲ μή 1s night and some 
word has dropped out: possibly ἀνωμαλῶς, but more probably simply 
οὕτω, referrmg back to οὕτω... συμβαίνει. Bignone would exclude 
κινεῖσθαι as a gloss—not a very probable one. 

2. παρὰ τὸ κύκλῳ. ..: the first explananon: in this idea of the 
whirl and ἀνάγκη we seem again to recognize the theory of 
Democnitus, 

3 Spoddy... 6 dpahds... 7. ἀνωμαλεῖς There is considerable 
doubt as to the form of the adjectives. Elsewhere the forms ὁμαλός 
and ἀνώμαλος alone are known the MSS. here are doubtful, they are 
unanimous for ὁμαλήν in 1 3, divided between Guards and ὁμαλεῖς in 
1, 6, and distinctly in favour of ἀνωμαλεῖς in! 7. Usener prefers the 
grd declension forms throughout I incline to think that MS evidence 
combined with the invariable practice elsewhere 1s against It Possibly 
the right solution is, as the MSS suggest, that the writer used ὅμαλός 
but ἀνωμαλύής, a shghtly more probable form than ὁμαλής. 

4 κατὰ τὴν (sc. δίνην) ἅμα τισὶν ἀνωμαλίαις χρωμένην is the MS. text 
and seems to me quite reasonable . the course of the planets is an orbit, 
but at the same time (ἅμα) it has some irregularities. Usener emends 
quite unnecessarily to κατά τινα Sivyow, Bignone less violently but, 
I think, gratuitously to κατά ru’ ἄλλῃν. 

ἐνδέχεται δὲ... : the second theory, that the fuel track of the planets 
is regular, seems to bear the mark of Heraclitus. 

5. παρεκτάσεις, ‘tracts’ of air surely not ‘currents’, as Bignone 
renders 

6. ἐπὶ τὸ αὐτὸ συνωθούσας κατὰ τὸ ἑξῆς, ‘urging them on (by the 
attraction of appropnate fuel) continuously in the same direction ’, 
1.6. n the direction of a regular orbit. 

4. mapadAayds, ‘alternations’, so ‘aberrations’: for the word 
cf § gs. 8. 

8. τὸ δὲ μίαν αἰτίαν... : the usual attack on the ‘theological’ view, 
which adopts one certain theory: cf § 87. 

10. ἀστρολογίαν : here clearly ‘theological astronomy’, the view 
which wishes to see in the movements of the stars an indication of the 
divine will. cf. ἀστρολόγων τεχνιτείας, ὃ 93. 12 

Ir. αἰτίας τινῶν is the MS text, and again there seems no reason 

2978 x a 


322 II, ΠΡῸΣ TIY@OKAEA 


to follow Usener in altering to αἰτίας dorpwv—if indeed that is a possi- 
ble expression. Bignone’s πάντων 1s more probable, but possibly the 
wniter’s expression here was more mild. 

ὅταν... ἀπολύωσι ' again a familiar point, The primary object of 
Epicurean astronomy 1s to show that the divine nature πράγματα οὐκ 
ἔχει, K. A, i, 

(2) Difference of speed in the stars’ orbits, §114. 1-7. The writer 
next deals with the apparent variety of pace in the orbits of the stars. 
His explanations hee cannot be attached closely to preceding theones, 
nor are they exactly parallel to Lucretius’ treatment of the same 
subject (v. 614-649), but they are within the same range of general 
ideas, Enther (1) all stars are going on the same orbit, but some 
faster than others, or (2) some are really moving in the opposite 
direction, but are caught back by the whirl of the others and so seem 
to follow them more slowly, or (3) all move in the same direction, but 
some being at a greater distance from the centre have a larger distance 
to travel The only difficulty of the passage lies in the text and 
mterpretation of the second explanation. 

3. περιιόντα of course nom. plur, roy αὐτὸν κύκλον being an 
internal acc. περιιόντα 15 the correction in Froben’s text for the 
MS περιόντα 

καὶ παρὰ τὸ. ὑπὸ τῆς αὐτῆς δίνης. with this, the MS. tcxt, the 
idea seems to be that the ‘slower’ stars are actually moving in an 
orbit in the opposite direction to that of the ‘faster’ stars, but they 
are, 85 11 were, caught up by the whirl of the others and dragged back, 
so that they seem to move in the same direction as the others, but less 
fast The idea is not quite clearly thought out, but sufficiently clear 
to be maintained in the text. Usener alters τῆς αὐτῆς to τοιαύτης, and 
in his analysis renders causam posse esse vertiginem ila ex orbila 
defrahentem, the idea being apparently that of a whnl ‘ of the requisite 
nature’ (τοιαύτης) dragging the stars out of their course. But (4) this 
entirely neglects τὴν ἐναντίαν κινεῖσθαι, (0) ἀντισπώμενα could only mean 
‘dragged tn the opposite direction’ and not ‘dragged out of the 
course’; (c)the facts of the case are against such an idea, which 15 
more appropriate to a planet. Bignone apparently accepts τοιαύτης, 
but agrees with me in the general :dea of the passage. 

4 τῆς αὐτῆς δίνης then 15 the whirl which moves the other stars 
as opposed to τὴν ἐναντίαν : cf. τὸν αὐτὸν κύκλον above. To me the 
expression seems quite clear and natural. 

καὶ παρὰ τὸ περιφέρεσθαι. .: this idea approaches nearly to the 
theory of Democritus as explained by Lucr. v. 621-636, but is without 
the elaborate notion of optical delusion which was a cardinal point in 
Democnitus’ explanation. We may compare the expressive phrase in 
the Epicurean Diogenes of Oenoanda, 355. vill. 1. 11 οἱ μὲν ὑψηλὴν 
ζώνην φέρονται, of δ᾽ αὖ ταπεινήν. 

6. τὸ δὲ ἁπλῶς... the same caution as above, ὃ 1132. 8. To insist 
on the single explanation is to lay claim to miraculous knowledge 


COMMENTARY. δ 113-114 323 


(τερατεύεσθαι). Compare again Diog Oen./7 viil. 3 7 μάντεως yap 
ἃλλόν ἐστιν τὸ τοιοῦτον ἢ ἀνδρὸς σοφοῦ 

(e) Falling stars §114. 8-§ 115 8. The letter proceeds to deal 
with falling or shooting stars, a sequence which would be quite natural 
if we were to follow Usener’s suggestion and transfer the section on 
comets to a place immediately before it Three explanations are 
offered, as to the first of which there 1s great divergence of opimon 
As I understand the passage they are. (1) the falling stars may 
actually be fragments of stars, rubbed off 1n collision of star with star 
and driven down towards earth by an outburst of wind; (2) they may 
be formed by a gathering of fire-producing atoms, caused to fall in 
the direction of the impulse started by their meeting , (3) they may be 
formed by a gathering of wind in dense clouds, which 15 ignited when 
1t cannot find an outlet, and then buists out and falls in the duection 
of its original mpulse. Usener inteiprets the first theory quite differ- 
ently and alters the text, but in any case the paragraph must be care- 
fully compared with that deahng with comets (§ 111) and those which 
treat of hghtnmg (88 1ro1-102) and thunderbolts (§ 103) 

8 παρὰ μέρος, ‘in part’, almost ‘i individual cases’, as Bignone 
translates it. It may possibly be used in a more strictly local sense, 
‘in places’ cf κατὰ μέρη, ὃ 111 1. 

κατὰ παράτριψιν Usenei’s correction for καὶ παρὰ τρίψι.. The 
repetition of παρὰ is not, I think, rmpossible, and the uncompounded 
τρίψις might be used here (see, however, § rox. 2), but καὶ is unin- 
telhgible afte: καὶ παρὰ μέρος, and the confusion of καί and kare 15 the 
commonest mistake in the MSS. 

8-11. κατὰ παράτριψιν. , ἐλέγομεν I take this whole clause to- 
gether as constituting the first cause and, with some hesitation, 1¢etain 
the MS. ἑαυτῶν. The idea is that stars 1ub together and fragments 
break off, which fall through the atmosphere. compare, as the wnter 
tells us, the description of the first cause of the creation of hghtning 
(§ ror 2 ἢ). The explanation will then be parallel to the second and 
third explanations of comets, namely, that shooting stars are in point 
of fact stars, or m this case, fragments of stars, whereas the other two 
explanations regard them as occasional formations. 

If this view be correct, (1) παράτριψιν ἑαυτῶν 1s a loose expression, 
for it 1s of course the collision of stars which causes the fragments to 
be rubbed off, and not the collision of the ‘ falling stars’ themselves. 
Bignone, agreeing with me in the general view of the phrase, would 
read ἄστρων for ἑαυτῶν, which would certainly make the expression 
much clearer, but this I do not consider necessary, aS ἄστρων can so 
easily be derived as the equivalent of ἑαυτῶν from of λεγόμενοι ἀστέρες 
éxmurrey in 1, 8, (2) καὶ παρὰ ἔκπτωσιν will denote a further step m 
the same cause’ the fragments of stars are first rubbed off and then 
caused to fall by the action of wind. Buignone takes the words as 
mtroducing the second cause: but (a) the introductory phrase for 
anew Cause in this section 1s καὶ κατὰ, not καὶ παρὰ, and (δ) in the 

Χ 2 Ὁ 


324 ff. ΠΡῸΣ ΠΥΘΟΚΛΕᾺΑ 


parallel account of lightning in § ro1 the ‘falling out’ of the frag- 
ments rubbed off 1s denoted by ἐξολεισθαίνων ; (3) the parallel to the 
explanation of the lightning flashes will not be exact, for they are 
created by the friction of clouds: but I take it that the reference 18 
intended to suggest the kind of παράτριψις and ἔκπτωσις which the 
writer has in mind and not to insist on an exact parallelism of occur- 
rence. Usener however, desiring an exact parallel, reads νεφῶν for 
ξαντῶν and πυρὸς ἔκπτωσιν for παρὰ ἔκπτωσιν. But the changes seem 
to me (as to Bignone) unjustifiably violent; they are not really 
requred by the reference to the section on lightning, and they 
destroy the parallel to the section on comets which we should certainly 
expect to find. Bignone notices further that they would make the 
first cause very little different from the third I prefer, therefore, 
to retain the MS text and explain it as above, though admitting that 
11 1s a rather careless piece of writing 

9. καὶ παρὰ ἔκπτωσιν, ‘and then by the falling out of the frag- 
ments’. Bignone, as already noted, takes this of an alternative cause. 

10, ἡ ἐκπνευμάτωσις, ‘the blowing of them out by wind’. Bignone 
renders ‘the combination of fire and air, of which we have spoken in 
treating of lightning’. But (1) τὲ is surely impossible that ἐκπνεὺυ- 
μάτωσις could imply as much as this; (2) καθάπερ Ought to refer to the 
whole clause and not to one word only. ἢ 

§ 115. 1, καὶ κατὰ σύνοδον δὲ, .. γένηται. The second cause, the 
casual gatheiing of fire-particles, which then fall in the direction 
originally given them by their meeting Compare the first explanation 
of comets in ὃ 111 4. 

2. συμφυλίας, ‘a kinship’, 1e. a gathering of kindred matter, the 
περίστασις Of § rrr. 8“ an unusual but quite natural term for the 
writer, which seems to be corroborated by the MS. variations. 

καὶ κίνησιν; the MSS have καὶ κατὰ κίνησιν, which might per- 
haps be kept to express a subordinate cause hke καὶ παρὰ ἔκπτωσιν 
in ὃ 114.9: but the wmiter’s usual practice 1s only to insert the 
preposition again when he is mtroducing a new cause, and the confu- 
sion and dittography of καί and κατά 1s so common that we should 
probably follow Usener in excluding κατὰ here. 

of Gy ...: ‘wherever’ 1s a little awkward in expression, and we 
should perhaps adopt the suggestion made by Usener in his notes 
ot &y ..., ‘in whatever direction ’. 5 

8. καὶ κατὰ πνεύματος. .. : the third suggestion 1s that the falling 
stars are really ignited wind: cf, the sections on lightning and the 
thunderbolt. 

5. τούτου, Usener: the τούτων of the MSS. is a mere mistake: 
von der Muehll prefers the plural all through, πνευμάτων... τούτων... 
φερομένων. 

κατείλησιν, ‘the whirl’ of a pent up body: cf. δ 101. 14, &c. 

ἐπέκρηξιν seems to be what is mtended by the MS. vanants (three 
MSS. have it), thongh the force of éw- 18 not easy to see, and Usener 


COMMENTARY. = §§ 114-116 325 


gests that we ought to read the simple ἔκρηξιν. Von der Muehll’s 
ἔκρηξιν (éx) 18 attractive. 

6. τῶν περιεχόντων, ‘from the surrounding matter’, i.e. the πυκνώ- 
para ὃὄμιχλοειδῆῇ  Bignone translates ‘the bursting asunder of the 
parts on the outside’, but this seems to miss the force of ἐπέκρηξιν. 

7. φερομένου, Usener nghtly, with πνεύματος, 1. 4: φερομένης (MSS ) 
15 again a mistake due to the neighbourhood of φορᾶς. 

8. ἀμύθητοι, MSS.. the word, when 1t occurs (e.g. Dem. 520 20), 
usually means ‘unspeakably large, or many’, a sense which 1s 
obviously out of place here, though Cronert would retain it in that 
sense. I do not think, seeing the writer's many references to μῦθος, 
that 1t 1s impossible that he should use the word meaning ‘ uncon- 
taminated by myth’: cf. especially the conclusion of the parallel 
section on thunderbolts (§ 104 2) μόνον ὁ μῦθος ἀπέστω. Usener, 
presumably regarding this as impossible, reads ἀνύσιμοι, ‘effective’, 
another very violent and, I think, unnecessary change Bngnone retains 
ἀμύθητοι, noting that Lortzing proposed ἄμυθοι, whch 1s the more 
usual word in this sense 

(S) Weather-signs from animals §116 9-§116 3. A concluding 
ironical paragraph follows on the supposed signs of the weather given 
by the appearance of certain animals—e.g the swallow as the herald 
of spring Such ‘signs’ are, the writer says, merely due to coinci- 
dence: the animals cannot exert any influence on the course of the 
seasons, and no animal of any sort, let alone a divine being, could be 
so enamoured of trifles as to play the game of watching for the animals 
and thus bringing the prediction to pass. The irony of the passage 
is m rather marked distinction to the general matter-of-fact style of 
the letter, and reminds us of passages 1n Lucretius. In his amused 
scorn the writer seems to have forgotten the explanation that 1t 1s the 
approach of a new season which causes the animals to appear. 

9 ἐπισημασίαι, ‘signs of the weather’ cf ὃ 98, where in dealing 
with the signs given by the stars, the wnter says that some of them 
are due to chance coincidence, καθάπερ ἐν τοῖς éudaveot παρ᾽ ἡμῖν 
ζῴοις. 
κατὰ συγκύρημα τοῦ καιροῦ, cf. ὃ 98 9 κατὰ συγκυρήσεις καιρῶν. 

8 1168. 2 κἂν (ei). the addition of Usener seems necessary, as 18 
Cobet’s ἄν just before 

μικρὸν χαριέστερον εἴη, obviously an allusion to a proverb, ‘the 
smaller the trifle, the greater the joy’. 

3. ἐμπέσοι : another certain correction for the MS. ἐκπέσῃ. 

Conclusion. § 116. 4-12. The letter ends with a conclusion based 
more or less closely on the corresponding conclusion of the first 
letter. These main principles, and especially the doctrine of the 
origin of things and the infinity of the atoms and space, must be 
thoroughly grasped, together with the fundamental reason for their 
knowledge, the true pleasure of life: from them an understanding of 
the details will naturally follow. 


326 If, ΠΡῸΣ NY@OKAEA 


δ' τοῦ μύθου ἐκβήσῃ, the avowed object all through this second 
letter, and one of the chief sources of ἀταραξία. 

6. τῶν ἀρχῶν, ‘the origins’ of things,1 6. the atoms and space. 

7 dmepias: i.e. the infinity of the two ἀρχαί and of the κόσμοι. 

8. κριτηρίων here must be the criteria of truth on the mtellectual 
side, 1.6. αἴσθησις and πρόληψις. 

παθῶν. the criteria of rightness on the moral side: they are usually 
included with the other two under the general head of κριτήρια 
(e.g. D. 1. x. 31), but the separation here 1s quite natural, and there 
1s no reason, with Kochalsky, to suspect the text. 

οὗ ἕνεκεν 1e the ἀταραξία, freedom for the disturbance of theo- 
logical beliefs, which 1s the greater part of the true philosopher's 
ἡδονή, 

9. τῶν κατὰ μέρος the detailed phenomena of nature and their 
explanation 

TO καταγαπήσαντες : not merely understood but accepted them as 
a creed Bignone renders ‘studied with the utmost care’, which 1s 
hardly strong enough 

ταὶ ¢: Kuhn’s necessary correction for ἢ 

(av) an inevitable addition of Usener’s, 

12. περιεποιήσαντο, ‘made it thei own’ they have not otherwise 
attained ἀταραξία. 


LETTER TO MENOECEUS 


Tue third letter, wntten to Epicurus’ disciple Menoeceus, 1s a brief 
exposition of the plulosopher’s moral theory It starts with a reitera- 
tion of the two fundamental conditions of the moral hfe, the nght 
understanding of the nature of the gods and the freedom from the fear 
of death, after which the rest of the letter 1s devoted to a clear and 
logical statement of Epicurus’ view that pleasure is the end of hfe and 
of the sense in which this is to be understood 

The letter 15 not intended, hke that to Herodotus, for the use of 
advanced students, but 1s a simple and straightforward exposition for 
the general reader It 15 in fact an ‘exoteric’ work, as Aristotle might 
have called it, and as such, contains far more references than the 
other letters to rival theones and popular views The common ideas 
as to the nature and activities of the gods aic passed in review (§ 123) 
and their weakness 1s exposed, popular notions as to the terrible 
nature of death are condemned (§§ 125, 126), and vulgar conceptions 
of the character of true pleasure are refuted (§ 131) References are 
made, mplicitly or expheatly, to leas of Plato (δ 132), of the Cyrenaics 
(§ 127), of the Stoics (§ 130), of Theogms (δ 126), and possibly of 
Epicharmus (δ 125) and Mimnermus (§ 126) It 1s cleat that however 
devoted a disciple Menoeceus may have becn, the letter was intended to 
reach a wider public who might still be unde: the influence of an 
erroneous philosophy or of the unsupported maxims and opinions of 
popular thought 

For this reason the letter 1s written ina very different style from that 
of the letter to Herodotus. The expression 15 almost invariably smooth 
and arttsttc, free from the crabbed obscunties of the first letter and the 
hasty carelessness of the second I1 1s in the Atuc mood, in a mellow 
and straightforward Greek, with far fewer :diosyncracics of vocabulary 
and idiom, and Jess technical diction than either of the other two letters 
or the Kvput Δόξαι Epicurus employs such dehberate artifices as 
antithesis and assonance, one can almost trace an intentional rhythm, 
and certainly (though Usener has probably pressed the point too far) 
there is in general a deliberate avoidance of hiatus. As a consequence 
no doubt of its greater ease and fluency, the text of the letter has been 
far better preserved in the MSS. of Diogenes and, except in the Jast 
three sections, presents few serious difficulties 

The genuineness of the third letter has not been disputed, and in it 
we see Epicurus at his best. He ts still the dogmatic teacher, certain 


338 lll. ΠΡῸΣ MENOIKEA 


of the truth of his own position and contemptuous of all who differ 
from him, he preserves his characteristic gravity and seriousness, and 
has, for instance, no trace of the playfulness and irony of Plato or of 
the humour of Anstotle, but the reader cannot fail to find a certain 
attractiveness in this cold, severe style, which seems to bring before us 
a vivid picture of the aged philosopher discoursing to his young fnends 
in the Garden 


IntRoDucTION (§ 122). 


The introductory paragraph presents no serious difficulties. Philo- 
sophy 1s for all ahke: no one 1s too young or too old for it, and to 
refuse to study it 1s at any age to throw away one’s chance of happ1- 
ness. This 1s an emphatic declaration of Epicurus’ essentially 
democratic view: he had no desire to form a new esoteric sect, but 
wished to place his philosophy at the service of any who would 
hear it. 

§ 122. 3. mdpwpos, ‘ past the age’ the word is not quoted elsewhere 
in this sense, but the neighbouring ἄωρος makes 118 meaning clear. 

4. ἢ μήπω is the reading of the MSS. (εἰ B), and there seems no 
reason for excluding ἢ which anticipates ἢ before παρεληλυθέναι : 
indeed it makes it easier to take τὴν ὥραν with ὑπάρχειν. 

ὑπάρχειν ἢ the MSS. have ὑπάρχειν ὥραν ἢ, which must be 
emended either by the insertion of the article before dpay, as Cobet 
proposed, or by omittung ὥραν as a gloss. The latter seems the 
better course, as the repetition of τὴν ὥραν would be both unnecessary 
and harsh, and Epicurus in this letter shows much greater attention to 
such points of style 

5. πρὸς εὐδαιμονίαν is Of course emphatic: a man might just as well 
say that he 1s 100 young as too old to be happy. 

μήπω is a necessary correction for the MSS. μὴ F makes a similar 
mistake immediately afterwards in reading μὴ for μηκέτι. 

ἡ. νεάξῃ τοῖς ἀγαθοῖς, ‘may be young in blessings’, a rather unusual 
expression: νεάζειν τῷ τρόπῳ 1s quoted from a fragment of Menander, 
but is not quite so harsh 

διὰ τὴν χάριν τῶν γεγονότων, ‘by the grateful recollection of the past’, 
1.6. of the philosophic truths which he learnt in earlie: hfe. The phrase 
has almost a New Testament mng: there are other indications of an 
approximation of Epicurus’ language to the Hellenistic, ¢.g, the use of 
σάρξ, K. A.tv. There is no need to follow Ritter m altering to χαρὰν. 
For this idea of the value of recollection Bignone refers to K. Δ. 1x 
and Sené. Vas, xv. 

9. διὰ τὴν ἀφοβίαν τῶν μελλόντων because he will know the truth 
about the government of the world and the dissolution of the soul at 
death. 

μελετᾶν : probably ‘meditate on’, not ‘practise’: so at the end 
of the letter, § 135. δ Note its combination with πρᾶττε in ὃ 123. 1. 


COMMENTARY. §§ 122-123 329 


Tue First Principtes oF tHE Goop Lirz (§§ 123-127). 


8 123. In a bref sentence Epicurus recommends his disciple to keep 
in mind the first principles, which are the guarantee of a happy and 
good life. 

1 παρήγγελλον: the imperfect seems to refer to verbal instructions 
given while Epicurus and Menoeceus were together. Oral teaching 
was always the basis of Epicurus’ instruction. cf. £p. ad Hdt., 
§ 83. 12 note 

2. στοιχεῖα, ‘first principles’. cf. κατεστοιχειωμένον, Lp. ad Hdt., 
§ 35.9 There he was deahng with physical and metaphysical prin- 
ciples; here he is speaking of the moral principles, the στοιχεῖα τοῦ 
καλῶς ζῆν 

διαλαμβάνων. more than ‘receiving ” or ‘accepting’: ‘ distinguish- 
ing’ these moral principles from other στοιχεῖα as the ground of the 
good hfe 80 frequently n Zp ad Hate g.§ 58 6 

The two great principles, which Epicurus now enunciates, that the 
gods need not be feared, and that death is nothing to us, were part of 
the Epicurean τετραφάρμακος, and form the subject of K A.1 and nu. 


1. The nature of the gods (§§ 123-124) 


The Epicurean theology 1s here viewed in its moral aspect, as it 
affects human beings. That the gods exist 1s certain, for the know- 
ledge of them 15 due to immediate (mental) perceptions, which are 
common to 8}} men They are also, as 1s commonly supposed, blessed 
and immortal, but popular rehgion errs in attributing to them the 
government of the world, and feehngs of anger and love towards men, 
which are inconsistent with their blessedness. They live apart from 
the world and are not concerned with its changes and chances. Yet 
by the visitation of their images man can be brought to have a share 
in their ἀταραξία, so that a place 1s still left for religion. The removal 
of fear and the communication of tranquillity thus both contribute to 
the good life 

3. ζῷον ; God 1s a living being, though the pecuhar formation of his 
person distinguishes him from all other creatures. 

ἄφθαρτον καὶ μακάριον, ‘imperishable and blessed m happiness’: 
cf. K. A. 1 τὸ μακάριον καὶ ἄφθαρτον. 

4. ἡ κοινὴ ... νόησις, ‘ the universal] conception’ the idea which 18 
in the mind of every man. This idea was created, as we Jearn from 
Lucr. v. 1161 ff., by the constant influx into the mind of subtle umages 
(εἴδωλα) passing from the persons of the divine bemgs and thus 
creating in the mmd a ‘concept’ {πρόληψις): the process 1s exactly 
described by the verb treypapy. 

μηθὲν. . . προσάπτε, i.e. we must not attnbute to the gods any 
care or anxiety, such as would be implied in the government ol the 
world, or any feehngs of anger or favour towards men, which would 


33° iY. ΠΡῸΣ MENOIKEA 


disturb or diminish their complete happiness: this is where popular 
religion makes its mistake Note how the non-interference of the 
gods in the world 1s presented as a deduction not from the workings 
of phenomena, but from the nature of the gods themselves cf. ΚΖ. 
ad Hdt., § 77 

7. θεοὶ μὲν γὰρ εἰσίν an emphatic declaration of Epicurus’ position ° 
he was not an atheist As he explains in the next sentence, the con- 
ception of the gods 1s universal in the minds of men and cannot 
therefore be denied 

8. ἐναργὴς  . γνῶσις. the knowledge of the gods 1s a matter of 1m- 
mediate perception, not im this case by the senses, but directly by the 
mind. It was the result of an ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας (see Appendix, 
PP. 259 ff) ἐναργής 15 a technical term used of the immediate percep- 
tion of a near object. 

9 (ot) πολλοί. Gassendi’s insertion of the article 1s essential for the 
meaning and 1s amply justified by τῶν πολλῶν below, ll] 10 and εἰ 

οὐ yap φυλάττουσιν αὐτοὺς οἵους νομίζουσιν, ‘for they do not preserve 
them as they think them to be’,1e they do not consistently keep up 
the idea of their blessedness and tranquillity, but attribute disturbing 
passions, &c,tothem But νομίζουσιν in this sense is certainly very 
awkward coming immediately after its use m reference to the erroneous 
opinions of men, and there 1s a strong temptation to adopt Usener’s 
conjecture νοοῦσιν, which would refer back to ἡ κοινὴ τοῦ θεοῦ νόησις τῇ 
1.4. ‘they do not represent them consistently as they originally conceive 
them’ (so too Bignone). There 15, however, no warrant for the con- 
jecture, and it 1s perhaps safer to retain νομίζουσιν 


10. ἀσεβὴς δὲ... προσάπτων for the general thought cf. Lucr. v. 
1198 ff and vi, 68 ff. 
8124 1 οὐ γὰρ ἀποφάσεις a very technical clause the 


popular representations of the gods (as taking a part in the affairs of 
the world) aie not ‘concepts’ formed in the mind by the constant 
repetition of the ἐναργής vision of the image, but ‘ suppositions’ or 
additions of the mind (προσδοξαζόμενα), inferences, as Lucretius tells 
us in v 1183 ff., from their observation of the regular sequence of 
phenomena on the earth and in the sky For πρόληψις see note on 
νόησις, ὃ 123. 4 above ὑπόληψις is defined in Vita Hpreurt, § 34, 
as the equivalent of δόξα, an inference from phenomena, which may 
or may not be truc 

2 ἔνθεν ai μέγισται βλάβαι... 5 ὡς ἀλλότριον νομίζοντες a difficult 
and obscure piece of writing. I take ἔνθεν to refer to the ἀποφάσεις, 
and to be used in the shghtly forced sense ‘ according to which’: the 
subject of οἰκειούμενοι in the next sentence then 1s ‘men’, or rather 
ot πολλοί. The majonty of men judge others according to their own 
accepted standard of ethics. they are in the habit of welcoming those 
they see to be like themselves and rejecting those whom they find 
alien. They therefore falsely attach to the gods a similar habit, and 
suppose that they do harm to the wicked and benefits to the good. 


COMMENTARY. §§ 123-124 331 


In spite of the slight difficulty attaching to the meaning of ἔνθεν, this 
seems to me the natural interpretation. 

Bignone takes ἔνθεν to mean ‘from the gods’ and believes the 
subject of οἰκειούμενοι to be of ἀγαθοί. He translates ‘ Yet from the 
gods the /olzsh and wicked obtain the greatest evils and the good and 
wrse the greatest benefits, for they, accustomed to their own virtues, 
embrace and make dear to themselves those who are like them, and 
consider alien what is discordant with them’ He thus believes the 
ἔνθεν clause not to be a statement of false popular belief, but of the 
actual facts. the good do derive benefil from the visitation of 
the images of the gods, because they can appropriate what is like 
themselves This 1s good Epicureanism, but I doubt if it can be 
derived from the Greek (1) ἔνθεν and ἐκ θεῶν will be an awkward 
tautology, which Bignone glosses over in his translation; (2) his 
argument largely depends on the words * foolish’ and ‘wise ' which he 
introduces withoul any warrant into the translation , (3) this Epicurean 
subtlety 15 alien to the rest of the section ,(4) his objection that popular 
opinion does not represent the gods as domg kindness to the good 
and injury to the evil 1s not sound in a certam stage of religious 
opinion (e g the Psalms) this opmion 15 very commonly found, (4) 15 
there any evidence in Epicureanism for the idea that the images of the 
gods do harm to the evil ? 

3 βλάβαι τε the MSS. have βλάβαι αἴτιαι, for which Usener’s 
correction βλάβαι re 15 not altogether satisfactory Is it possible that 
Epicurus wrote βλάβαι τοῖς αἰτίοις on which κακοῖς was a gloss? Von 
der Muehll would write ai μέγισται βλαβῶν αἴτιαι τοῖς ἀνθρώποις. 
καὶ ὠφελειῶν. 

3 (τοῖς ἀγαθοῖς) seems a necessary addition the antithesis can 
hardly have been left understood. 

5 ὡς ἀλλότριον νομίζοντες Uscner parallels the construction from 
Plat. Legg. 1x. 879 νομέζων ὡς πατέρα ἢ μητέρα, but adds ‘ exspectes 
verbum spernend:’. A more direct opposition to ἀποδέχονται would 
indeed be natural, but is not essential. 


2 Death (8§ 124-127). 


The second great principle, that death 1s nothing to us, is also 
viewed in its moral aspect. As the true understanding of the nature 
of the gods relieves us from fearin this life, so the knowledge that 
consciousness ceases at death relieves us from fear with regard to 
a subsequent life. Moreover, since death will not be terrible when it 
comes, there 1s no reason why its anticipation should disturb us. The 
whole thought 1s worked out clearly, and as in the previous section the 
Epicurean view 1s set in contrast with popular notions 

7. μηδὲν πρὸς ἡμᾶς εἶναι τὸν θάνατον the simple and emphatic 
expression which recurs frequently in Epicurean documents « cf. ὃ 125, 
K Δι᾿, and Lucr im. 830. 


332 HI, ΠΡῸΣ MENOIKEA 


8. πᾶν ἀγαθὸν. . . ἐν αἰσθήσει : as in the physical world, so tooin the 
mora] world, αἴσθησις is the final criterion, but here it takes the form of 
πάθος, the internal feeling of pleasure or pain, which 1s the measure of 
good and bad. πάθος then, like αἴσθησις, has its place among the 
κριτήρια. 

10, τὸ τῆς ζωῆς θνητόν, ‘the mortality of life’, sc. the fe which 18 
bounded by a mortal period. 

11. ἄπειρον. the MSS. have ἄπορον, but the correction of Aldobran- 
dinus and Menagius is inevitable: the false notion about death, 
which 1s popularly current, adds ‘an infinite period’ of conscious 
existence after death Bignone accepting ἄπειρον here, but wishing to 
account for the MS. text and noticing Epicurus’ conscious habit 
of parallelism in this letter, would insert ἄπορον after ἀλλὰ τὸν. 

Ὁ 125. 1. οὐθὲν γάρ ἐστιν ἐν τῷ ζῆν δεινὸν. a rather startling deduction 
at first sight, but we must remember that to Epicurus the fear of death 
was not only the greatest of all fears in life, but was also the cause of 
other evils (cf. Lucr im. 59 ff ). 

2. γνησίως, ‘ genuinely’, ‘ whole-heartedly’, a rather odd use which 
recurs in ὃ 130 7. 

3. ὥστε μάταιος ὁ λέγων. Bignone thinks the reference may be to 
Epicharmus (7. 11 Diels), but 1t seems more likely to be an attempt to 
gei over what 1s in reality the popular feeling about death, not that it 
will be painful when it comes, but that the present thought of 1t 18 
painful. Epicurus argues that the two are identical. we do not dread 
the coming of what will not be unpleasant when it comes We might 
reply that death 1s painful in thought because it will mean the cessation 
of many present pleasures ; to which Epicurus would answer that‘ we’ 
shall not be there to feel the loss (cf. Lucr. m1. 900). 

5. παρὸν. the reading of some MSS. παρὼν 1s due to the neighbour- 
hood of παρών in |. 4. 

6. ἐπειδήπερ: a fuller explanation of the way in which ‘death is 
nothing to us’. so long as we live, death 1s not there, and when death 
comes, ‘we’ shall be no more, for consciousness will be gone. 

10. οὐκέτ᾽ εἰσίν : the hiatus (οὐκέτι εἰσίν MSS.) should be avoided as 
In μηκέτ᾽ εἶναι, ὃ 122. 6. 

11. ἀλλ᾽ οἱ πολλοὶ... .§ 127. 4. οὐκ ἐπιδεχομένοις. Having stated his 
own position Epicurus turns to the popular views of death. In the first 
place men are inconsistent. they sometimes dread death as the worst 
of evils, at other times they long for it as a respite from suffering. The 
wise man neither wishes to escape from hfe nor fears death: he does 
not ask for the longest but for the most pleasant life. 

12. ἐν tg ζῆν... .: a line has clearly been lost here, and Usener’s 
suggestion (in which however I prefer Casaubon’s ποθοῦσιν to his own 
αἱροῦνται) successfully gives the sense. The loss may have been due to 
the repetilion τῷ ζῆν... τὸ ζῆν (note that B originally had τὸ for τῷ). 

§ 126. 2. προσίσταται, ‘comes across ns path’, ‘offends’ him. For 
the general sense of this sentence cf. Καὶ A. xx, xl. 


COMMENTARY. §§ 124-127 333 


4. ἥδιστον is the reading of the MSS. and there seems no sufficient 
cause to follow Usener in his change to ἥδιον: Epicurus writes τὸ 
wActoy because τὸ πλεῖστον would be a palpable exaggeration, but 


τὸ ἥδιστον 18 Not. 


οὕτω Kal... καρπίζεται, cf. Κ. A xix. 


6. The second error; to advise the young to live well and the old to 
die well is foolish. the art of both 1s the same, and hfe may be just as 
pleasant for the old, while it lasts. 

ὁ δὲ παραγγέλλων : Epicurus may, as Bignone suggests, have Mim- 
nermus in mind 

7. καταστρέφειν, ‘to end his life’: soK A xX 11 κατέστρεφεν. 

τὸ τῆς ζωῆς ἀσπαστόν, ‘the desirability of life’, the pleasure which 
it really has for all. 

g. The third error, which 1s much worse, that τὸ is best not to be 
born, or if born to die as soon as possible. Ifa man really beheves 
this, why does he not end his life? otherwise, he 1s talking idly to 
a world that will not beheve him χείρων has better authority than 
χεῖρον, which Usener adopts, and shouid be kept the direct masculine 
is natural after εὐήθης. 

ro ὁ λέγων" sc. Theognis 

§ 127. 1. ἀπέρχεται ἐκ rod ζῆν. the MS text is a quite natural 
construction, and there 1s no need to drop ἐκ with Usener it adds 
emphasis and force. 

4. ἐν τοῖς οὐκ ἐπιδεχομένοις 1 6. among the majority of men, to 
whom such a paradox seems absurd 

5. μνημονευτέον δὲ... οὐκ ἐσόμενον. The section ends with a short 
aphorism as to the right view of the future: we must not either reckon 
it a8 certainly ours, or certainly not ours, The true Epicurean has tt 
in his hands to obtain the true pleasures of life, and can be almost 
independent of what fortune brings him or when tt will terminate his 
life. Bignone notes well that Epicurus 15 arguing against the Cyrenaics, 
whose motto was μόνον ἡμέτερον τὸ παρόν. 


Tux Morar Tueory. 


Having considered the two conditions of a good life, a mght know- 
ledge of the nature of the gods and a true understanding of death, 
Epicurus devotes the rest of the letter to the exposition of his moral 
theory. He states that the end of action 1s pleasure, and then develops 
the implications of this view The argument may conveniently be 
divided into subsections as the various points arise. 


τ, Pleasure as the motive and end of action (§§ 124-129) 


In considering the purpose of life and the standard of good action 
Epicurus does not pursue the hne of thought which he has already 
suggested in§.124. 8 (ἐπεὶ πᾶν ἀγαθὸν καὶ κακὸν ἐν αἰσθήσει) of deducing 
pleasure as the,end from its fundamental nature as the only feeling τῷ 
the field of morals. This 1s a popular treanse, and he prefers therefore 


334 11. ΠΡῸΣ MENOIKEA 


to reach his conclusion on more traditional and less strictly Epicurean 
lines. The motive of all action 1s desire- the classification of desires 
leaves as the ‘ necessary’ residue, the health of the body and the repose 
of the mind: this means the absence of pain, bodily and spiritual, 
and the absence of pain 1s pleasure. Pleasure then is at once 
the mainspring and the purpose of life. We must note however how 
from the outset pleasure to Epicurus is not the positive enjoyment, 
which it was, for mstance, to the Cyrenaics, but the negative release 
from pain, which some philosophers regarded not as pleasure, but as 
a neutral or indifferent state. This distinction is of vital importance 
for the whole ethical theory: the nght life for Epicurus depends 
essentially on a due comprehension of mits. 

§127 8. τῶν ἐπιθυμιῶν. . . φυσικαὶ μόνον. the main division of 
pleasures here follows traditional hnes (cf Plat Rep. τ. 357 and 
Ar £th 1118 b), and the general idea is clearly brought out with 
examples by the schohast on Al δὴ loc cit ἡ μὲν οὖν τῆς τροφῆς 
ἐπιθυμία καὶ τῆς ἐσθῆτος ἀναγκαία 7) δὲ τῶν ἀφροδισίων φυσικὴ μὲν οὐκ 
ἀναγκαία δέ" ἡ δὲ τῶν τοιῶνδε σιτίων ἢ τοιᾶσδε ἐσθῆτος ἢ τοιῶνδε ἀφροδι- 
σίων οὔτε φυσικὴ οὔτε ἀναγκαία. 

g. κεναΐ, ‘vain’, ‘idle’, οὐκ ἀναγκαῖαι 

10. τῶν δ᾽ ἀναγκαίων... πρὸς αὐτὸ τὸ ζῆν in the subdivision of the 
necessary desires Epicurus follows his own line of thought and leads up 
directly to his main point Some desires are necessary for the 
preservation of hfe, eg. those of food and shelter, some to the 
repose of the body (freedom from pain), some to happiness of mind 
(freedom from fear) From these he passes at once to health of the 
body and peace of mind—the two foundations of the true Epicurean 
conceptions of pleasure 

rr, ἀοχλησίαν" a typical Epicurean formation. cf K. A x1 εἰ μηθὲν 
ἡμᾶς ai τῶν μετεώρων ὑποψέαι ἠνώχλουν, and vil πολλαπλασώους ἐπιφέρει 
τὰς ὀχλήσεις 

$128. 1 ἀπλανὴς θεωρία, ‘the unerring contemplation’ to form 
a might choice and avoidance, we must always have our eye on the 
true end. 

3. (τῆς ψυχῆς) a necessary addition made by the second hand in B. 

4. τούτου yap xdpw...- forthe idea of true pleasure or the absence 
of pain cf. K. Δ. xxvi, xxx, and especially in. 

4. τοῦ ζῴου Epicurus characteristically imphes that animals as well 
as men feel the desire for pleasure. 

8. καὶ τὸ τοῦ σώματος ἀγαθὸν : Usener following BF omits the 
article, which 1s however surely required. the good of the body is not 
identical with the good of the soul. 

συμπληρώσεται ; the testimony of the MSS is uncertain, but seems to 
point to συμπληρώσεται, which must be taken as a fut. middle with 
τὸ ξῷον as the subject. The parallel of K. A. xxvi. 2 (ἐὰν μὴ συμπληρω- 
pore) however suggests that the συμπληρωθήσεται of F may be right. 
For the idea cf. Lucr. ii. 16 ff. 


COMMENTARY βὲ 127-129 335 


nonne videre 
ni aliud sib: naturam latrare nist utqm 
corpore seiunctus dolor absit, mente fruatur 
iucundo sensu cura semota metuque ? 

10. (ὅταν δὲ μὴ AAyGpev) was the original insertion of Gassendi, and 
there seems no need to ‘improve ’ it with Usener by the substitution 
of μηδέν for μή. the addition is of course demanded by the sense. 
The limit of pleasure is in Epicurus’ idea the remoyal of pain, and 
beyond that point pleasure can only be vaned 866. especially 
K. A, xvin 

τι. τὴν ἡδονὴν ἀρχὴν καὶ τέλος pleasure is the beginmng because 
it 1s the motive which leads to action, 11 15 the end because 1s atlaln- 
ment 15 the completion of action 

§129 2. συγγενικὸν the desire to reach pleasure 15 innate in us 
a strengthening from the Epcurean point of view of its adoption 
as the end. «f D 7, x, § 137, which Bignone incorporates with 
the 2.7, 

4 ὡς κανόνι, . κρίνοντες we are thus biought back to the most 
simple and fundamental Epicurean point of view the feeling of 
pleasure, the immediate sensation, is in the moral] sphere the standaid 
of good and bad, just as in the physical sphere, sense-peiception 
is the standard of tiue and false πάθος takes its place with αἴσθησις 
among the κριτήρια see on § 124 8. 


2 Pleasuris and pains choice and avoidance (δὲ 129, 130) 


Having established pleasure as the end of action, it 18 necessary next 
to Inquire what precisely this means in effect It will mean, Epicurus 
argues, that though all pleasure 1s in itself good, because it 15 natural to 
us, yet there are some pleasures which we shall have to avoid because 
of their concomitant pain, and similarly some pains which we shall 
choose, because of the pleasure arising out of release from them. It 1s 
ultimately a matter of calculation, we must balance pleasures and 
pains against one another, and then choose the course which in the end 
brings the maximum of pleasure and the least pain. ‘T'wo points are 
of interest in this section (1) that we have arrived at something very 
hke the Uuhtarian calculus of pleasure , (2) that although Epicurus 
here amply refutes the calumnies attaching to the popular idea ol 
Epicureanism and implicitly rejects all the pleasures of excess, yet he 
does not at all abandon the main position that in itself pleasure 1s 
always good indeed, it 1s just for that reason that we must avoid 
pleasures which entail pain 

δ: σύμφυτον, ‘natural to us’, hke συγγενικόν above and οἰκείαν 
below. 

6. οὐ πᾶσαν ἡδονὴν αἱρούμεθα for this and the following clause 
compare the stnking fragment (62) preserved by Anistocles apud 
Euseb, Praep. Evang. xiv. 21 (442) ἄμεινόν ἐστιν ὑπομεῖναι τούσδε 
τινὰς τοὺς πόνους, ὅπως ἡσθῶμεν ἡδονὰς μείζους συμφέρει τῶνδέ τινων 


336 If. ΠΡῸΣ MENOIKEA 


ἀπέχεσθαι τῶν ἡδονῶν, ἵνα μὴ ἀλγῶμεν ἀλγηδόνας χαλεπωτέρας, where 
the idea of the calculus is clearly brought out. 

ἡ. τὸ δυσχερές, ‘discomfort ’, another typical Epicurean word cf. the 
fragment (37) in Ioannes Stob. 2770». xvu. 34 (Usener 181) προσπτύω 
ταῖς ἐκ πολυτελείας ἡδοναῖς οὐ δι᾽ αὐτάς, ἀλλὰ διὰ τὰ ἐξακολουθοῦντα 
αὐταῖς δυσχερῆ. 

10. διὰ τὸ φύσιν ἔχειν οἰκείαν, ‘because it has a nature akin to ours’, 
i.e. because it 18 that towards which we naturally move: an elaboration 
of the idea expressed in συγγενικόν and σύμφυτον above. Cf. K. A. 
vit. 4 οὗ ἕνεκα ἐξ ἀρχῆς κατὰ τὸ τῆς φύσεως οἰκεῖον ὠρέχθησαν. Bignone 
translates ‘because of their own proper nature’, but this cannot 
be mght. 

τι. After μέντοι Usener inserts y’ to avoid the hiatus. But μέντοι γε 
would be an unusual combination, and though this letter is undoubtedly 
written with care, we are hardly justified in correcting the MSS. on 
purely euphonic grounds, unless as in § 122. 6 and § 125. ro the 
correction involves no change. 

§ 180. τ. τῇ μέντοι συμμετρήσει : quite literally ‘the measuring of 
one against the other ’"—just the word for a calculus of pleasures. 

2. βλέψει : the simple substantive reads oddly, and Usener may be 
right In suggesting ἐπιβλέψει. 

3. τοὔμπαλιν or τὸ ἔμπαλιν is the reading of all MSS. except B, and 
we are hardly justified in beleving with Usener that B’s eccentric 
ὅτ᾽ ἂν πάλιν indicates an original τἄμπαλιν. 


3. Independence of desires (§§ 130, 131). 


Eptcurus proceeds to a practical application of his principle of 
choosing only the pleasures that involve no pain. αὐτάρκεια, ‘self- 
sufficiency’, 1s a virtue praised by all (remember that it was the moral 
aim of the Stoics), and in its application with regard to pleasures 
it means ‘independence of desires’ (Bignone). It leads us to be 
content with simple pleasures which involve no reaction. Indeed, 
since pleasure is but the removal of pain, simple food and drink can 
give us as complete pleasure as the most elaborate banquet. Finally, 
as Epicurus adds, almost cynically, if we accustom ourselves to simple 
fare, we are put into a better frame to enjoy luxury, if ever we meet it 
The thought all through ts typically Epicurean and may be paralleled 
from many other Epicurean sources. « 

5. οὐχ ἵνα πάντως τοῖς ὀλίγοις χρώμεθα : it was not necessarily the 
Epicurean’s :deal to have but a {π|||6 to enjoy all his life, but rather that 
he should be content with what he has. 50 in ἃ letter to a fnend 
(/r. 39, Usener 182) we find him asking for a gift of cheese, so that 
he may make merry. 

7. χρώμεθα is given by all the MSS., and though it may possibly be 
a dittography of χρώμεθα. in 1. 6, and ἀρκώμεθα, suggested by Cobet 
and adopted by Usener, gives more the sense which we should expect, 
we are hardly justified in introducing it into the text. 


COMMENTARY. § 129-131 337 


4. γνησίως: see ὃ 125 2 note. 

8. ἥδιστα, ἥκιστα: Bignone notes that this assonance 15 employed 
by Epicurus again ina quotation given by Plutarch, de Trangu:/iiate 
Anim: τό ὃ τῆς αὔριον ἥκιστα δεόμενος ἥδιστα πρόσεισι πρὸς THY αὔριον 
(/r. 78, Usener 490), and had already been used in Xen. Afem.1.6 5. 
It 1s another sign of conscious style in this letter. 

9. τὸ μὲν φυσικὸν πᾶν εὐπόριστον : all that is required for the satisfac- 
tion of the natural desires 1s easy to obtain’ cf. K. A xv and xxi, and 
Lucr v. 1119 ‘neque enim est unquam penuria parvi’ 

τὸ δὲ xevdy* what is required to satisfy the κεναὶ ἐπιθυμίαι, ὃ 127. 9 

10 οἵ Te λιτοὶ χυλοὺ. . an amplification of the satisfactory results of 
αὐτάρκεια. plain tastes can fully satisfy the pangs of hunger, and 
when once the ‘ pain due to want’ has been removed, pleasure cannot be 
increased but only varied: cf. Καὶ A. xvi. Usener alters re to yap in 
order to get a better logical sequence, but the transition 1s again from 
class to species, as in καὶ τὴν αὐτάρκειαν δὲ in |. 5. 

ἴσην. ἡδονήν; after the πέρας has been 1eached and the pain 
removed, pleasure cannot be quantitatively increased, but only quali- 
tatively changed: therefore the pleasure to be obtained from plain and 
luxurious food 1s equal m amount (ἴσην). Usener most unjusifiably 
changes ἡδονήν to ἀηδίαν, believing presumably that the reference 1s to 
the cloying of the appetite after satiety But not only 15 this incon- 
sistent with Epicurean doctrine, but, as Bignone has shown, the MS. 
text 15s made certain by Cicero’s translation of the passage, de γι. u. 
28 go ‘negat enim tenuissimo sictu - minorem voluptatem percip1 
quam repus exquisitissimis ad epulandum ’” 

11. τὸ ἀλγοῦν κατ᾽ ἔνδειαν, ‘that which 1s painful by way of defect’, 
1. 6. the pain arising from an unsatisfied want, as in the case of hunger. 
Another characteristic phrase repeated in K. A xxi 

8 181 1 καὶ pala καὶ ὕδωρ... - a still further limitation of the 
general principles to a particular instance 

τὴν ἀκροτάτην. ἡδονήν. ic. the pleasure of ἀπονέα, fieedom from 
the pain of hunger 

2. τὸ συνεθίζειν οὖν. : ἃ summing up, referring the conclusions 
just reached to the general principles of the earlier part of the para- 
graph’ simple living is the best for the health of the body and the 
purposes of life. 

4 συμπληρωτικὸν * one more characteristic word: cf εὐσυμπλήρωτον, 
§ 133.4 

aS τοῖς πολυτελέσιν . * anew and almost ironical consideration 
plain hving*puts us into better condition (both physically and mentally) 
for the enjoyment of luxury, 1f we do at Jong intervals come across it. 

6. προσερχομένους. though it has inferior MS. authority 1s better 
than προσερχομένοις With rots πολυτελέσιν. 

καὶ πρὸς τὴν τύχην... a more serious reason. if we are accustomed 
to simple living, the attacks of fortune cannot hurt us, for we are used 
to being content with a little. “᾿" 

2078 ¥ 


338 Ill. ΠΡῸΣ MENOIKEA 


4. The character of true pleasure (§§ 131, 132). 


Having now explained clearly what in effect is meant by making plea- 
sure the end of life, Epicurus is able to refute false conceptions. He 1s 
not encouraging gluttony or sensuality, which bring with them greater 
pains, but the higher pleasure of a simple life, which satisfies the needs 
of the body and keeps the mind free from trouble and therefore able 
to devote itself to the study of philosophy. It 1s interesting to see that 
even apparently among contemporaries there were calumnies abroad 
concerning the nature of ‘Epicureanism ’. 

9. καὶ τὰς ἐν ἀπολαύσει κειμένας. The MSS. have καὶ ras τῶν : τῶν 
is mghtly excluded by Usener and must have come from τὰς τῶν 
ἀσώτων just before. 

ὥς τινες... νομίζουσιν: notice the three classes of persons who 
make misrepresentations (1) those who do not know the true doctrine ; 
(2) those who know it, but do not agree with 1t, philosophical 
opponents ; (3) those who cannot comprehend 1t—another piece of 
careful writing. Buignone points out that under (2) Eptcurus 1s think- 
yng primarily of the Cyrenaics who regarded ἀπονία as a purely neutral 
state (‘the condition of the dead’) and only the starting-point of true 
pleasure. The doctrine of the ‘ mut of pleasure’ 1s the really essential] 
feature of Epicurus’ own theory. 

§ 182. 1. ἀπολαύσεις : there seems no reason for Usener’s change 
to the singular ἀπόλαυσις it means individual acts of ἀπόλαυσις. 

4. νήφων λογισμὸς, ‘sober reasoning’, a rather strong metaphorical 
use cf Arist., AZefaph. 984017 οἷον νήφων παρ᾽ εἰκῇ λέγοντας. Notice 
that Epicurus is here surreptitiously introducing a new point The 
charactenstic pleasure of the mind, freed from fear, is philosophical study. 

5. Tas δόξας, ‘opinions’, are in particular of course mistaken 
opimons about the gods and about death. Epicurus 1s here working 
back to the two fundamental principles laid down at the outset of 
the letter. 

ἐξ Gv: preserved only by Bits omission in the other MSS. has Jed 
to the filling out of the construction by ἀφ᾽ οὗ or ἀφ᾽ ὧν in the earlier 
printed texts. 


5. Prudence (§§ 132-135). 


After establishing the general character of his ideal, Epicurus 
proceeds to consider the method of attaming it. It is clear that the 
nght course of action will not be discovered by instinct, as it might be 
supposing all pleasures were not merely ἀγαθά but αἱρετά. It is neces- 
sary in order to live the truly pleasant life to have ‘a mght judgement 
1n all things ’, based upon a calculation of the less and more of pleasure 
and patn. This mght judgement Epicurus characterizes by the old 
word φρόνησις, always with philosophers the practical as opposed to 
the speculatuve wisdom . it 1s at once the ἀρχή, the beginmnng of any 
step in the right direction, and the μέγιστον ἀγαθόν, the best thing 


COMMENTARY. ἐδ 131-133 339 


aman can attain. It is indeed more valuable than purely speculative 
wisdom, σοφία, which cannot issue in any action, but can only lay 
the foundation of action in a true knowledge of circumstances. And 
what will be the instruction given by φρόνησις ἢ It will be the recom- 
mendation of the accepted virtues, for τὸ will show that the pleasant 
life 1s really that in which honour and justice are practised. ‘Thus by 
a strict train of reasoning Epicurus, starting from his first principle of 
the pursuit of pleasure as the ideal, reaches the acceptance of the 
recognized standards of morality the answer to his detractors is now 
complete. He concludes with a panegyric of the prudent man, the 
details of which must be considered as we come to them 

9. ϑιδάσκουσα is Usener’s necessary correction of the MS, reading 
διδάσκουσαι which must merely be due to the neighbourhood of the 
plural ἀρεταί. 

τὸ καὶ Sixalws* notice how Epicurus includes the central word of 
Platonic ethics and ordinary morality—not without intention 

(οὐδὲ .. καὶ δικαίως): Stephanus made this essential addition cf. 
K, A.v The omisuion must be due to homoeoteleuton. 

$183, 1. ἐπεὶ τίνα νομίζεις. .° a panegylic of the dpdvipos, in 
which he incidentally returns on much that he has said before it 1s 
the φρόνιμος Who knows the condiuons of life, namely the true under- 
standing of the nature of the gods and of death (§§ 123-127), who 
realizes the government of the world and the responsibility of free- 
willed man, who sees in chance not a determinant of achon but an 
opportunity, and prefers to suffer with wisdom, rather than to prosper 
through folly. The section, largely through the corruption of the 
MSS., 1s undoubtedly the most difficult in this letter. 

2 ὅσια, ‘holy’ or ‘reverent’ opimions, such as a truly rehgious 
man may hold—a singularly bold word seeing his direct opposition to 
ordinary religious beliefs. But, as has been seen already (§§ 123, 124), 
religion had a very real place in Epicurus’ system 

3. τὸ τῆς φύσεως. τέλος " sc. pleasure: cf § 129, where pleasure 1s 
described as συγγενικόν and συμῴυτον and 1s said φύσιν ἔχειν οἰκείαν. 

4 τὸ μὲν τῶν ἀγαθῶν πέρας se. ἀπονία, the freedom from pain, 
which can easily be secured by simple means: cf. ὃ 130 

εὐσυμπλήρωτον cf ὃ 131 3 ὑγιείας. . . συμπληρωτικόν, and for 
εὐπόριστον, ὃ 130. 9 τὸ μὲν φυσικὸν πᾶν εὐπόριστόν ἐστι 

5 τὸ δὲ τῶν κακῶν, ‘the limit of evils’ in a shghily different sense, 
‘the possible extent’ of ews. For this idea that all pain 1s either 
slight or of short duration compare Κα. Δ tv The sentence so far has 
resumed the ideas of the Epicurean terpapddppaxos cf. Καὶ A i-iv 
notes 

6. τὴν δὲ ὑπό τινων δεσπότιν εἰσαγομένην πάντων’ sc εἱμαρμένην, 
‘ destiny’, or ‘ necessity ’ as viewed in the moral sphere. The earher 
thinkers, and especially Democritus, having insisted in their pliysical 
theories on an all-controlling ἀνάγκη, were compelled to admit deter- 
minism in human actions. From this necessity Epicurus only escaped 

Υ 2 


340 IJ. ΠΡῸΣ MENOIKEA 


(as we know from Lucr. ii. 216 ff.) by the device of the παρέγκλισις, 
the original spontaneous swerve of the atoms in their downward fall, 
which in the conscious aggregate of the ψυχή was the cause of free will. 

4. ἐγγελῶντοᾳ : with some hesitation I propose this correction for 
the varieties of reading found in the MSS, ἀγγέλωντος, ἀγγελῶντος, 
ἀγγέλλοντος. Usener had already suggested this sense in his reading 
διαγελῶντος, but the correction is more violent. It 1s true thal ἐγγελῶν 
1s elsewhere only found with the dat, but καταγελᾶν similarly takes 
acc. in Eur. Bacchk. 286. Bignone prefers to ‘keep the MS. text’ 
ἀγγέλλοντος, and to follow on in the lacuna with εἱμαρμένην κενὸν 
ὄνομα εἶναι But (a) ἀγέλλοντος 18 not the universal reading in the 
MSS., and the variation strongly points to a compound of γελᾶν, 
(ὁ) the verb ἀγγέλλειν in the context seems to me very unnatural. 
Kiihn’s ἀνελόντος 1s too far from the MS. text, and does not give the 
right sense: the ‘ prudent’ Epicurean does not entirely annihilate 
destiny, as 1s seen by what follows 

After éyyeAGvros there must be a lacuna of some considerable 
extent All are agreed on εἱμαρμένην " Epicurus could not have left 
τὴν ..- δεσπότιν alone without explanation, and that εἱμαρμένην must 
be the word is shown by τῇ τῶν φυσικῶν εἱμαρμένῃ, § 134.2 It 15 
also clear that towards the end of the lacuna there must have been 
the words ἃ μὲν κατ᾽ ἀνάγκην, corresponding to ἃ δὲ ἀπὸ τύχης. So 
far there is agreement, but as to what the lacuna exactly contained and 
its relation to the rest of the sentence opinions differ. 

(1) Usener, who believes that the whole section down to § r35. 4 
ὀρθωθῆναι διὰ ταύτην 15 ONE Monstrous sentence, would write the lacuna 
(εἱμαρμένην καὶ μᾶλλον ἃ μὲν κατ᾽ ἀνάγκην γίγνεσθαι λέγοντος). But 
(α) in ἃ letter so carefully written as this, so clumsy a sentence 15 
highly improbable, and moreover the supposition involves the alteration 
οἴὑπολαμβάνων, §134 5, and νομίζων, $135. 2, to ὑπολαμβάνοντος and 
νομίζοντος, it 15 far more probable that the sentence riva νομίζεις εἶναι 
κρείττονα ended in the lacuna; (6) as Bignone shows, the resulting 
argument is most illogical Epicuius could not have written that the 
φρόνιμος Says that ‘ some things happen by necessity, others by chance, 
&c.,. . . decause necessity cannot be called to account, &c.’? On the 
other hand the clause διὰ τὸ τὴν μὲν ἀνάγκην κτλ. would give a good 
reason for the belief that most ihings are within our control 

(2) Bignone limself would therefore place a mark of “interrogation 
after κενὸν ὄνομα εἶναι, which he supplies after εἱμαρμένην, and would 
then proceed σόφος yap ὃ τὴν μὲν τῶν γινομένων κυριωτάτην αἰτίαν παρ᾽ 
ἡμᾶς τιθέμενος, ὧν ἃ μὲν κατ᾽ ἀνάγκην γίνονται (presumably a slip for 
γίνεται), ἃ δὲ κτλ. ἄς. ‘For the wise man is he who places in our 
hands the chief control for the things that happen, of which some 
occur by necessity, others by chance, &c.’ This is much more hkely 
to have been the sense of the passage, and 

(3) I should only differ from it in putting the mark of interrogation 
immediately after εἱμαρμένην (reading ἐγγελῶντος) and supposing that 


COMMENTARY. § 133-134 341 


the rest was a little simpler, e g. otros yap τὴν τῶν γινομένων κυριωτάτην 
αἰτίαν παρ᾽ ἡμᾶς τίθεται, ὧν ἃ μὲν κατ᾽ ἀνάγκην γίνεται ἃ δὲ κτλ. 

In any case note that the emphasis falls on τὴν. . δεσπότιν... 
πάντων Epicurus does not deny that ἀνάγκη causes many things, but 
not all, and the greater part of our lives 1s under our own control 

8. ἃ δὲ ἀπὸ τύχης : Epicurus’ conception of ‘chance’ seems to be of 
a force co-ordinate with necessity Natural law causes the mevitable 
sequence of events, but it 1s chance that rules the production of 
particular causes. e g. ἀνάγκη causes the motions and meetings of 
atoms, but chance causes thcm to fall mto the positions which create 
our world. Such a notion 1s of course unscientific, but 1s very promi- 
nent 1n the Epicurcan philosophy, e.g. Lucr. νὰ. 30 ‘ quod fieret natural 
.  seucasu seu vi’ Guyau (La Aforale PE pr. ure) has seen in this 
idea the working of the παρέγκλισες 1n inanimate nature, just as in the 
soul it produces free will, but there 1s no evidence for this, and most 
probably Epicurus had not fully thought out the relation of his notion 
of chance to the rest of the system. 

παρ᾽ ἡμᾶς, ‘in our control’ 

9 ἀνυπεύθυνον εἶναι, ‘cannot be culled to account’; i.e. if ἀνάγκη 
were universal, as the determimsts hold, neither could there be 
responsibility in the moral sphere, nor the occasional ‘lapse’ im the 
phy sical sphere, which we call chance. It means more than ‘destioys 
responsibility (Wallace) for it 15 opposed not only to the ἀδέσποτον of 
our actions, but also to the ἄστατον character of τύχῃ 

10. ἀδέσποτον, ‘not subject to the tyranny’ of determinism we are 
morally our own masters 

8 184. τ. ἐπεὶ κρεῖττον ἦν the most emphatic and famous 
deciamation of Epicurus’ greater hatred of physical determinism than 
even of popular religion 

τῷ περὶ θεῶν μύθῳ. 1.e the popular story of the gods’ interference 
in the affairs of men, and of their assignment of rewards and punish- 
ments 

3. παραιτήσεως by worship of the gods we may, according to 
popular rehgion, hope to escape from the destiny which ts our due. 

ὑπογράφει, ‘lightly sketches’, ‘hints at’. 

4. τὴν δὲ τύχην... finally the prudent man understands the nature 
of chance it 1s not a divine force, nor a direct cause of good or evil, 
but it does @fford occasions for good and evil. There 1s considerable 
doubt as to the punctuation and text of this section. 

(1) Usener conunues the construction of the main sentence, placing 
a comma after the parenthesis and reading ὑπολαμβάνοντος § . . . νομί- 
fovros ὃ 135 2. But apart from the tmprobability of the immense un- 
broken question, there 1s no authonty for the gemitives and the MSS. 
have ὑπολαμβάνων (ὑπολάμβανον H). . . νομέζων (νομίζειν F) 

(2) The variants just quoted might suggest ὑπολαμβάνοντ᾽ .. νομίζειν 
constructed after διὰ τό τη § 133. 9. but, as Usener points out, the sense 
makes this impossible. = 


342 lil. ΠΡῸΣ MENOIKEA 


(3) With Bignone’s view of the lacuna τῇ ὃ 133. 7, 1t is possible to 
retain the two nominative participles ὑπολαμβάνων, νομίζων, placing 
a comma after the parenthesis and refernng them mght back to the 
subject of the main sentence which begins in the parenthesis. 

(4) But this too makes a very clumsy piece of writing, and I prefer, 
while retaining ὑπολαμβάνων, to read νομίζει (to which F’s νομίζειν 
seems to point) τῇ ὃ 135.2. A fresh sentence will then start at τὴν δὲ 
τύχην of which νομέζει 1s the main verb. 

6. ore ἀβέβαιον αἰτίαν (MSS ), ‘ nor an uncertain cause’, but (a) this 
15 exactly what Epicurus did think chance to be (cf. τὴν δὲ τύχην ἄστατον, 
§ 133 9), and (4) as Bignone points out, the statement would not 
be at all borne out by the explanatory parenthesis Bignone com- 
panng Democritus’ aphorism τύχη μεγαλόδωρος, ἀλλ᾽ ἀβέβαιος would 
read οὔτε ἀβέβαιον αἰτίαν (μεγαλόδωρον), Or to put it more in Epicurus’ 
phraseology οὔτε ἀβέβαιον αἰτίαν (μεγίστων ἀγαθῶν ἢ κακῶν) ; chance, 
that 15,18 not to be regarded as the cause, however uncertain, of the 
greatest blessings or ends—it can only confer the opportumities for 
good and evil and not the lasting blessings or evils themselves, which 
are παρ᾽ ἡμᾶς 1 think his suggestion 1s on the nght lines, but too 
obscure in phraseology, and prefer to think that πάντων has dropped 
out before ἀβέβαιον αἰτίαν (cf. τὴν. δεσπότιν πάντων. . εἱμαρμένην 
in § 133. 6 above). chance 15 not the cause, even the uncertam 
cause of everything, for it cannot give the vital good or evil, but 
only the opportunines for them. 

7. (οὐκ) οἴεται μὲν yap... δίδοσθαι if is clear that a negative must 
have dropped out somewhere, and Usener’s οὐκ at the beginning seems 
a better coriection than Gassendt’s μή (why not οὐ 5) before δίδοσθαι 
The position of μέν 15 strongly in favour of a preceding negative 

8 ἀρχὰς μέντοι. ὑπὸ ταύτης χορηγεῖσθαι. 1 e chance may start 
good or evil, but st 511]}} εϑίβ with us to use the occasions furnished by 
chance rightly. 

§ 185 2 vopife: see note on |. 4 above. 

βέλτιον γὰρ. . . ὀρθωθῆναι διὰ ταύτην as the sentence stands 
tn the MSS, it does not make sense Usener reads βέλτιστον. 
‘for it 1s best of all that a well-judged action should succeed through 
chance’, but (a) there 1s no authority foi βέλτιστον ; (6) γάρ, as 
Bignone points out, 1s unsuitable; the parenthesis would not then 
give a reason for the previous opimuion ; (c) 1t 1s doubtful whether 
Epicurus would have said that this 15 best ; (4) the idea 15 at any rate 
alien to the context. Bignone retains βέλτιον but would substitute 
δ᾽ αὖ for yap, ‘but it 15 still better that...’ I believe that once again 
homoecoteleuton has caused a loss of some words and that Epicurus 
WEOLE: something like βέλτιον γὰρ ἐν ταῖς πράξεσι τὸ καλῶς κριθὲν 
σφαλῆναι μᾶλλον ἢ τὸ κακῶς κριθὲν ὀρθωθῆναι διὰ ταύτην, ἃ restatement 
of the previous idea from ἃ. new point of view Madvig’s insertion 


(μὴ ὀρθωθῆναι ἢ τὸ μὴ καλῶς κριθέν) adopted by von der Muehll would 
give the same sense, 


COMMENTARY. ἐᾷ 134-135 343 


5 ταῦτα οὖν .. ἀθανάτοις ἀγαθοῖς. The peroration of the letter. 
The disciple must meditate on (cf, § 123. 1) these precepts alone and 
with his feilow-disciples, and such practice will enable him to attain 
so complete an ἀταραξία that he will be a god on earth 

σεαυτόν Gassendi’s correction for ἑαυτόν perhaps not quite 
necessary as ἑαυτόν 1s not infrequently used for other persons besides 
the third. In the neighbourhood of τὸν ὅμοιον σεαυτῷ it would how- 
ever be very improbable 

6. (re) after πρός 18 a necessary insertion 

7. ὡς θεὸς ἐν ἀνθρώποις is not a mere rhetorical exaggeration. The 
gods in their perfectly untroubled life are the ideal of what human life 
might become, and the man who has come near to this ideal meght 
justly be said to have become a god on earth (cf Lucr m. 322 ‘dignam 
dis degere vitam’). This explains how, agam not metaphorically or 
in mere adulation, his later disciples could speak of Epicurus himself 
as a god, e.g Luer v. 8 ‘deus ille fuit, deus’. 


ΚΎΡΙΑΙ AOZAI 


Tue ΚύριαιΔόξαι are a series of brief aphorisms dealing with Epicurus’ 
ethical theory, and in particular with the conditions requisite for the 
tranquil Ife of the Epicurean philosopher. They are troduced by 
Diogenes Laertius! as ‘the crown (κολοφῶνα) of all Epicurus’ writings 
and of the philosophic life’, and are quoted by name and with 
unmistakable references by Plilodemus? and the Epcurean waiters $ 
in the Herculanean rolls, who speak of ‘ those who wiite agamst the 
Κύριαι Adfat’. Plutarch, Diodorus,> and Lucian® refer to them 
under the same title Cicero 1n one passage’ appears to translate the 
title as ‘ Authoritative Sayings’, in another? as ‘Selected Sayings’, but 
undoubtedly regards them as the work of Epicurus. 

There can then be no doubt that in antiquity the Κύριαι Δόξαι were 
looked upon as an authentic work of the Master deserving very special 
esteem and consideration. Modern critics have, however, been inclined 
to treat them with less respect. Gassend:,® although he gave them the 
title of Rasae Sententiae, yet stated dogmatically that they were ‘a Flori- 
legrum culled from various writings of Epicurus’, and Usener,’° 
fastening upon Cicero’s alteinative ttle Seatentiae Selectae,1s at pams lo 
prove that they are a compilation from various sources put together 
by some faithful but not very intelligent Epicurean disciple. His 
contentions were resisted by Giussami" and have recently been fully 
dealt with by E Bignone,” but, as the question 1s one on which every 
reader 1s bound to form his own judgement, it 1s woith while to give 
a brief summary of the position 

Usener’s chief lines of attack are’ (1) important poits in the 
Epicurean doctrine are omitted and pots of secondary importance 
included. There 1s no mention of the cardinal principles of the 
physical theory or of the Canonrca, nor 1s even the nature of the soul 
explained: on the other hand the points included about poltucs (e.g. in 


DL x 138. 3 Phil. de Jra, col. xlin, 
5 Vol. Herc col. xv ibid, col xxvu 4 Plut adv Coloten, 31, p 1125 ¢€ 
5 Diod I xxv, fr. 1, Dind ® Luc. Alexandn, c. 47. 


7 Cic de Fim αι 7. 20 ‘ Epicun Kupias Δόξας, τὰ est quasi maxime ratas’. 
® Cic. ὧς Mat Deor. 1 30. §5 “τῷ illis selectis e1us brevibusque sententus, quas 
appellatis Rupias Adgas’. 
Anmimadverstones, p 1693 10 Usener, Eprcurea, xiii ff 
11 Giussam, Stud Lucr., p. xxx, note 1 
15. Rendiconts del R. [stst. Lombardo ds τε. ¢ dettere, 1908, pp. 792 ff, and in an 
abridged form in £prexro, Introd., pp 8-26. 


IV. KYPIAI AOZAI 345 


XXXII and XXXVII) are not the basis ofEpicurus’ position, which was 
that politics should be altogether excluded (2) Some of the maxims 
read hike extracts from personal letters and are quite inappropniate in 
a summary of doctrines (e g X, XX, XXIV) some are even left in the 
second person, as they were in their orginal context. (3) Many of the 
maxims are mere duplicates of one another (e g. 11] aud XVIU, XI, XU, 
and XIUI, XXXVifand XXXVII). (4) There is the greatest possible 
disorder: all kinds of subjects are jumbled iogether and theie is no 
sign of any fundamental scheme. 

Of these points the second 1s easily dealt with; the use of the second 
person singular’ in such maxims 1s common not only in Epicurus and 
1s no necessary indication of an extract from a more colloquial work. 
The other three are more serious and can only be properly appreciated 
after a careful study of the aphorisms as a whole and in deta, and an 
attempt to gather the purpose and character of the work. As regards 
the supposed omissions Usener has certamly mistaken the character 
of the whole work, if he imagines that it was intended as a complete 
summary of the whole Epicurean system. Its purpose 1s essentially 
ethical, and there is therefore no attempt to explain the physical 
doctrine or the principles of the Canonica (XXIII and XXIV come in 
incidentally as an claboration of the idea in XXII of the necessity for 
a well-ordered hfe of the understanding of the eaternal world) such 
knowledge was contamed in other Epicurean summaries (e g Ep i) 
and 1s assumed tn the Κύριαι Δόξα. Nor indeed are the maxims 
meant to cover the whole range even of the mora) theory their 
content might, as Giussam: has suggested, be descnbed as ‘ Man in his 
own consciousness and the external world’, and they constitute in fact 
a kind of practical handbook for the professed Epicurean, by which he 
may attain the life of ἀταραξία. This will explain not only the 
omissions, but the insertion of certain precepts which Usener regards 
as of secondary importance, e g the stress laid on the Epicurean view 
of justice (XXXII, XXXVI, &c) 1s necessary because the Epicurean, 
essentially an individualist, must be instructed as to the attitude which 
he should take up to the society in which he hves and to its laws and 
customs Bignone? has also pointed out that some of these apparently 
unimportant points are in reality rephes to rival schools of thought, 
ee main guiding principle of their choice 1s the scope of the work 
itseil. 

As regards Usener’s ‘doublets’, Bignone has dealt in detail with 
each mdividual case. it may be said m general that whereas no doubt 
the same ideas do recur from time to time in the aphorisms, they are 
put from a different pomt of view and gai a new significance in their 
context. If the framework of the δόξαι 18 understood,® it 1s seen that 
the repetition is always valuable and significant. Thus, ἴοι instance, 


1 Giussani, loc, cit. Bignone, p. 10 
7p. τι. 3 See p. 346 


346 IV. KYPIAI AOZAI 


in IIT the idea of the quantitative hmit of pleasure is stated as one of the 
four fundamental principles of the ethical system, in XVIIT1t 1s intro- 
duced and amplified by the notion of the ‘variation’ of pleasures as 
the foundation of a discussion of the ‘ pleasures of the flesh’. In XI 
the value of physical science 1s maintained as conducive to mental 
ἀταραξία, in XII it 1s asserted as saving man from the falsehoods of 
myth, in XIII it 1s regarded as a necessary supplement to * protection 
from men’, The one instance in which we may with some probabihty 
assume a ‘doublet’ is XXXVII and XXXVIII, though even there the 
former seems to Jay stress on the umversality of the fundamental char- 
acter of the ‘just’ action, the latter on the vanabiltty of the particular 
actions which in different circumstances may be just or unjust 
The accusation of ‘ disorder’ may also, I think, be met. It may be 
that some transpositions should be made Gassend: had proposed a 
rearrangement of XXVI-XXX, and Guiussam, with has usual passion for 
transposition, would apparently be prepared to carry this further, though 
he does not specify the changes which he would propose The charge 
15, however, very considerably minimized, if the true character of the 
‘Maxims’ 1s reahzed They are clearly not mtended to be a consecu- 
tive logical whole, and any attempt to twist them into such will neces- 
sarily fail. Rather they are to be regarded as a series of groups of 
aphorisms, each group being imternally consistent, but often only 
loosely connected with that which precedes or follows, The vanous 
points on which the faithful Epicurean may need instruction or guidance 
are dealt with as ΠΟῪ occur, and he 1s left at the end with a whole 
which 1s complete but not continuously consecutive. To estabhsh this 
oint, 11 1s necessary to suggest a brief analysis of these groups * 
(1)I-IV The rerpadpdppaxos—the four fundamental principles necessary 
for the tranquil hfe, (2) V. The relation of pleasure and virtue, (3) 
VI, VII Protection from external disturbance, (4) VIII-X. The selec- 
tion of pleasures; (5) XI-XIII The ethical value of physical science ; 
(6) XIV-XXI, The wise man’s hfe in relation to nature, his fellow- 
men, and to true pleasure (this group can be subdivided) , (7) ΧΧΠ- 
XXVI_ The tests and standards of moral (1 e. truly pleasant) action , 
(8) XXVIII, XXVIII Friendship; (9) XXIX-XXX The classification 
of desires, (10) XXXI-XXXVUI Jusuce and Injustice, (11 XXXIX, 
XL. The wise man’s life in the Epicurean community, This analysis 
might no doubt be vaned, and there 1s often an interretation between 
group and group, so that some aphorisms might be more justly 
regarded as links between groups rather than as belonging exclusively 
to one rather than the other The question of the amount of disorder 
in the aphorisms must be judged by every reader for himself, but the 
cfiterion must not be a general framework, such as Usener would 
postulate, but a sausfactory distribution in groups. 
We may take it then that the Κύριαι Δόξαι ts a practical manual of 


1 The individual Inks of connexion between aphorism and aphorism will be 
dealt with more fully in the notes 


COMMENTARY. § 139 347 


guidance for life intended for the professed Epicurean, that it does not 
claim to be a consecutive treatise on ethics, but deals successively 
with the various topics of importance for its own practical end. With 
all the ancient testumony which we have in its favour, there seems no 
sound reason for doubting that it 1s the work of Epicurus himself, nor, 
if its character be rightly understood, does tts working out seem 
unworthy of him or more appropriate to an unintelhgent compiler. 
The picture of the ‘trne Epicurean’ which it represents 1s consistent with 
what we learn fiom other sources, and in particular from the third letter, 
to Menoeceus. It 1s based on a relentless working out of the idea of 
pleasure as the end of life (which ts charactenstically never stated in 
the aphorisms), and though in some details, such as the conceptions 
of justice and friendship, its individualism strikes the reader as almost 
incredibly cynical, yet the image of the tranquil life has is strong 
attractions, and the vision of the Epicurean community with which 
the serics concludes has a considerable beauty of its own, We may 
safely regard the ‘Principal Doctrines’ as Aa/ae, the authentic dicta of 
their Master, and also as Se/ecfae in the sense that they do not attempt 
to cover the whole field of ethics, but only to lay down the condinons 
for the true Epicurean hife 


The first four aphonsms hang closely together and form the basis 
of the Fpicurean moral system ‘The principles which they enunciate 
were known to the school as the ‘quadruple remedy ’ (retpadappaxos), 
and are found summed up under this ttle in the Herculanean Rolls 
1005, col. 4 καὶ πανταχῇ παρεπόμενον (Cronert παρέστω μόνον Us) ἡ 
τετραφάρμακος' ἄφοβον ὃ θεός, ἀνύποπτον (Cronert. ἀναίσθητον Us ) 
6 θάνατος, καὶ τἀγαθὸν μὲν εὔκτητον, τὸ δὲ δεινὸν εὐεκκαρτέρητον ‘The 
four principles are again summed up as the full equipment for the 
moral life in Ep iu, § 133, and are dealt with fully and in order in the 
earher part of that letter, The mght beltef about the gods and about 
death, and the true understanding of pleasure and pain, secure ἀταραξία 
for the mind and enable us to aim at ἀπονία for the body, 

§139 1 Sums up the teaching with regard to the nature of the 
gods and corresponds to Ep 1n, §§ 123, 124 

I. μακάριον καὶ ἄφθαρτον so ἄφθαρτον καὶ μακάριον, Ep. τι, § 123 3 
ἄφθαρτον, ‘ifidestructible’, 1s a typically Epicurean word, based of 
course on the purely maternal conception of atomic structure 

οὔτε αὐτὸ , παρέχει. The divine beings themselves enjoy perfect 
ἀταραξία and do not disturb that of others cf. Ep. 1, ὃ 77. 1 οὐ yap 
συμφωνοῦσιν πραγματεῖαι Kal φροντίδες καὶ ὀργαὶ Kai χάριτες μακαριότητι 

3 ἐν ἀσθενεῖ exist only “ἢ a weak nature’, almost ‘are a sign of 
weakness’ so Ep. 1, § 77. 2 ἀλλ᾽ ἐν ἀσθενείᾳ καὶ φόβῳ καὶ προσδεήσει 
τῶν πλησίον ταῦτα yiverat, Which brings out the meaning here. Anger 
and favour are characteristics of a weak nature dependent on others, 
and not of the perfect strength and independence of the divine. 


348 IV. KYPIAI AOZAI 


Sent. Vat. i has ἐν ἀσθενείᾳ, which would correspond with the passage 
in Ep. 1, but it seems unnecessary to alter the neuter. 

After the first aphorism there 1s a very important scholium ; see 
app.crit. This obviously bears very closely on the Epicurean conception 
of the nature of the gods. We may notice certain points in the scho- 
hum here. (1) λόγῳ θεωρητούς is not likely to be Epicurus’ own 
expression, but 1ts meaning will be that the εἴδωλα of the gods are not 
percepuble by αἴσθησις but only by the mind (cf. Lucr v. 1170 

egregias amo facies vigilante videbant 
et magis in somnis mirando corporis auctu). 

(2) The following clause obviously corresponds very nearly to the 
passage in Cic. WV, D 1.49 ‘nec. . adnumerum, .. sed imagi- 
nibus similitudine et transitione perceptis, cum infinita simile 
marum imaginum species ex innumerabilibus individuis exsistat’, It 
may therefore be taken as certain that ods μὲν. ods δέ cannot be 
night. there 1s no trace elsewhere that Epicurus conceived of two 
categories of gods, and it 1s inconsistent with such evidence as we 
have . Gassendi’s conjecture οὐ μέν for obs μέν, accepted by Giussani 
(Stud. Lucr , p 234) and Bignone, may be taken as fairly certain, and 
for ots δέ we should read either ὡς δέ with Gassendi, or more probably 
οἵους δέ suggested by Bignone On the other hand, I regard Kuhn’s 
change of ἀποτετελεσμένων to ἀποτετελεσμένους (followed by Usener 
and Guussani) as unnecessary. ὑφεστῶτας can be continued into the 
second clause, and ἀποτετελεσμένων refers to the formation of the 
εἴδωλα by the atoms. The gods ‘do not exist as numerable material 
bodies, lke other atomic compounds, but by identity of form, owing 
to the constant afflux of similar images which are completed at the 
same spot’. The expression 15 very condensed, but 1s, I think, intelli- 
gible. The form of the divine body remains always the same its 
material constitution 1s a succession of atomic formations, the individual 
atoms coming together within the hmuts of the form to constitute the 
divine body fora moment and then coming off together in the combina- 
tion of an ‘image’ to pass into the mindof man. The use of εἰδώλων 
1s therefore proleptic, and there 1s some confusion, as 1n the passage of 
Cicero, between the formation of the divme body and tts cogmition by 
men through the medium of the εἴδωλον. (3) ἀνθρωποειδεῖς. the 
divine body was always conceived by Epicurus as anthropomorphic in 
form (cf. Cic. W. D, 1. 46 ‘a natura habemus omnes onrium gentium 
speciem nullam aliam nis: humanam deorum’). 

II. The second aphonsm states the second condition of ἀταραξία, 
the true knowledge with regard to death, and corresponds therefore to 
Ep. in, § 124.7 

4. ὁ θάνατος οὐδὲν πρὸς ἡμᾶς. The regular Epicurean formula, as 
in Ep. in, ὃ 124. 7, and Lucr. 1. 830 ‘mil igitur mors est ad nos’. It 
is here enforced by a bnef and interesting syllogistic argument. 

τὸ γὰρ διαλυϑὲν ἀναισθητεῖ : death means the atomic dissolution of 
the living being and atomic dissolution means the loss of sensation, for 


COMMENTARY. § 139 349 


sensation is due to the juxtaposition and movement of the soul and body 
atoms. So more bnefly Ep. iu, § 124, 8 στέρησις δέ ἐστιν αἰσθήσεως 
ὁ θάνατος Lucr u1.558-614 explains the theory carefully and at length. 

5. τὸ δ᾽ ἀναισθητοῦν οὐδὲν πρὸς ἡμᾶς for we are sentient beings, and 
a non-sentient existence, whatever it might be, 1s not us. Lucr m 
847-869 again gives a useful commentary. 

1 The first two principles concerned external things, the gods 
and death, with regard to which a nght understanding 1s necessary to 
avoid fear, The tmrd and fourth concern the internal feelings of 
pleasure and pain and the attitude to be taken up towards them 
Bignone (p 56 note 1) has pomted out that the third aphorism con- 
sists of two parts and must be considered in relation to the doctrines 
which Epicurus 1s combating. In the first he states that the quanti- 
tative lhmit of pleasure 1s the complete removal of pain if all pain is 
eliminated, then perfect pleasure has been secured. Here he 1s 
attacking the doctrine of the Cyrenaics, who regarded the removal 
of pain as a merely negative state of calm, while pleasure was the 
addition beyond that of a κίνησις. In the second part he 1s attacking 
the Platonic idea of the μικταὶ ἡδοναί, pleasures in which there 1s an 
element of pain where you find something in a state of pleasure 
(τὸ ἡδόμενον), there 1s no element of pain either bodily or mental. 
In other words, pain and pleasure are mutually exclusive, and Plato’s 
μικταὶ ἡδοναί are not genuine pleasures The practical inference was 
of great importance for the Fpicurean ethic pain can be removed by 
simple means, but it requires elaboration to produce the Cyrenaic 
plcasure hunger 1s satisfied by bread, but the Cyrenaic needs an 
elaborate banquet. Moreover, these elaborate pleasures involve pais 
and are therefore to Epicurus’ mind not true pleasures. We come 
then to the ‘simple life’ as the foundation of Epicurean morality— 
Epicurus was no ‘ epicure’—and this third aphorism does in fact corre- 
spond, though at first sight 1t seems remote, to the third article of the 
τετραφάρμακος, τἀγαθὸν εὔκτητον. The point 1s brought out in the 
more elaborate treatment in Ep. wm, §§ 129-130, and is the underlyng 
notion of Lucr u 20 ff 

6 ὄρος, ‘mit’, beyond which greater pleasure cannot be produced, 
but as he points out in XVIII, pleasure can only be varied Here he is 
in direct and immediate contrast to the Cyrenaic view. 

παντὸς τοῦ ἀλγοῦντος Usener quotes an interesting note from 
Voll. Here Coll, IL. τὸ ναι, f 14, which shows that even in antiquity 
there was a division of authorities as to whether παντὸς should or 
should not be read here. Its exclusion would not weaken the main 
position, but rather limtt it to a parucular case, the removal of what 
on each occasion canses pain τὸ ἀλγοῦν 15 strictly ‘ bodily pain’, as 
it 1s used just below, as opposed 10 τὸ λυπούμενον, ‘mental pain’, but 
it appears here to be used in a comprehensive sense, covering both. 

ἡ. ὑπεξαίρεσις. Voll. Herc., :dz¢. assures us that ‘all the good 
copies’ have ἐξαίρεσις, but the compound seems more probable and 


35° IV. KYPIAI AOZAT 


the meaning is not affected. We may compare the parallel passage 
in Ep. in, § 130. 11, ὅταν ἅπαν τὸ ἀλγοῦν κατ’ ἔνδειαν ἐξαιρεθῇ (So again 
inK.A XVIII) 

ὅπου δ᾽ ἂν... : the second point, which really follows from the 
first ; sf pleasure is the complete absence of pain, then if pleasure is 
present there can be no pain. We cannot then have the μικταὶ ἡδοναΐ, 
and all pleasures which involve pain must be eschewed 

8. ἢ τὸ συναμφότερον. Logically the addition 1s superfluous ; 1f there 
18 neither bodily nor mental pain there cannot be the combination. 
But the idea of the close connexion of the two and their interaction 1s 
constantly present to Epicurus. 

§140. IV The fourth aphorism deals with bodily pain, and 1s an 
expansion of the Jast clause of the rerpaddppaxos, τὸ δὲ δεινὸν εὐεκκαρ- 
τέρητον. Acute pain does not last long and chromic pain permits of 
an excess of pleasure So that there 1s nothing in our physical con- 
stituuon to make a life of pleasure as described in ILI impossible 
The general idea is repeated epigrammatically in Ep in, §133 5 τὸ δὲ 
τῶν κακῶν (πέρας) ὡς ἢ χρόνους ἢ πόνους ἔχει βραχεῖς, and 1s echoed by 
Diogenes of Oenoanda, 5 tvir. We may also compare another saying 
of Epicurus’, quoted by Plutarch, de Poetts Audtendats, 14,Ρ. 365 οἱ μεγάλοι 
πόνοι συντόμως ἐξάγουσιν. οἱ δὲ χρόνιοι μέγεθος οὐκ ἔχουσιν, with which 
he compares a line of Aeschylus Θάρσει πόνου γὰρ ἄκρον οὐκ ἔχει 
χρόνον. It seems doubtful whether sufferers from pain would accept 
Epicurus’ position, but Cicero (de Ofic in 33 117) acutely observes, 
‘non 1d spectandum est quid dicat, sed quid consentaneum sit εἰ dicere, 
qui bona voluptate terminavenit, mala dolore’. 1t was essential for Epi- 
curus to maintain that there 1s open to every one at least a preponder- 
ance of bodily pleasure over pain Two points in the aphorism may 
be noted. (1) Epicurus apparently speaks here of a coexistence of 
pleasure and pain, which at first sight seems inconsistent with III. 
But he is now considering pain in the body as a whole some part 
may be 1n pain while other parts are free, but there cannot be pleasure 
and pain in the same part at the same {1Π|6 - ὅπου δ᾽ dy τὸ ἡδόμενον ἐνῇ, 
καθ᾽ ὃν ἂν χρόνον 7, οὐκ ἔστι τὸ ἀλγοῦν (2) He 1s speaking here solely 
of bodily pain he held of course that even the severest bodily pain 
might be exceeded and overcome by mental pleasure, and 11 was the 
funcuion of the philosopher to secure this. 

I, συνεχῶς goes of course with χρονίζει R.D. Hicks tdkes τὸ ἀλγοῦν 
συνεχῶς togethe1, ‘continuous pain does not last long’ this seems a 
paradox which even in this paradoxical aphonsm Epicurus did not 
contemplate. 

ἐν τῇ σαρκί, ‘in the flesh’, a favouiite use of Epicurus’ where most 
writers would have said ἐν τῷ σώματι so again in XVIII and XX. 
Remember that σῶμα in Epicurus’ vocabulary includes the corporeal 
ψυχή, 50 that he was forced to look for another word to express 
the body without the soul It is also one of the signs of the approach 
of Epicurus’ diction to Hellemstic Greek: cf. the use of αἰών in XX. 


COMMENTARY. §& 139-140 351 


ἃ. τὸ μὲν ἄκρον, ‘the crisis’ ofacute pain. The use of ἀκεραίους τὰς 
ἡδονάς in XII makes it tempting to conjecture ἀκέραιον here, but the 
point of the aphorism 15 that bodily pain 1s neve absolutely without 
alleviation, and the line of Aeschylus strongly supports ἄκρον: 
Epicurus may possibly have had it in mind So in Diog Oen. 
Jr. Win τῶν ἀλγηδόνων αἱ ἄκραι χρονίζειν οὐ δύνανται 

3 Bywater's συμμένει for συμβαίνει would improve the sense, but it 
has no authority. 

V. After the exposinon of the τετραφώρμακος Epicurus proceeds to 
the conditions reqmred for the pleasant hfe, and maintains that it 
must have the three qualities of prudence, honourable action, and 
justice a life which 1s based on these three will of necessity be 
pleasant The first half of the aphorism 1s repeated verbally in 
Ep in, δ 132,9 and in Diog Oen /r hv, who confirms Gassendi’s 
addition. ΔΒ regards the second sentence there are divergeut views, 
but with the text adopted Epicurus eufoices Ins statement with a 
reiteration from anothe: point of view 

7 (οὐδὲ... δικαίως); Gassendi’s addition must be accepted as in 
the corresponding place in Ep in, ὃ 132, 10 [{ι5 now confirmed by 
Diog Oen JP liv 

8. ὅτῳ δὲ τοῦτο . τοῦτον ἡδέως ζῆν As this sentence stands in the 
MSS. (see critical notes) it cannot construe, and some correction 1S 
necessary Usener emends ὅτῳ δ᾽ ἐν τούτων μὴ ὑπάρχει οἷον ζὴην 
φρονίμως καὶ καλῶς καὶ δικαίως ὑπάρχει, οὐκ ἔστε τοῦτον ἡδέως ζῆν, ‘but 
if a man lacks any one of these, as for instance prudence in life, even 
though he has honour and justice, it is not possible for him to lve 
pleasantly’ The sense 1s at first sight good, not only cannot a man 
live pleasantly who lacks all these quahtics, but the want of one of 
them 1s fata} But there are several objecuhons to the restoration. 
(a) the alteranons δ᾽ ἕν τούτων for δὲ τοῦτο and οἷον ζῆν for οὐ ζῇ are 
too violent, (4) the grammat of καὶ καλῶς καὶ δικαίως ὑπάρχει in the sense 
of ‘and yet possesses an honourable and just life’ 1s surely impossible , 
(c) the most important objection hes in the resulting sense. The 
language of Ep. ut, § 132 shows that Epicurus thought that φρόνησις 
was the controlling force in life, and itself produced the subordinate 
virtues it 1s, therefore, surcly impossible to suppose that he could 
have rmagined that a man could hive καλῶς καὶ δικαίως, if he did not 
hive dpovfuws Bignone takes this point strongly. 

Bignone himself reads (é€) οὗ Lav . , ‘ but the man who 1s without 
that from which a prudent, honourable, and just hfe 1s derived, cannot 
possibly live happily’; he explains that τοῦτο ἐξ οὗ 1s φρόνησις, and 
refers to the emphasis laid on it in Ep im, § 132. Palacographically 
the correction is simple, but the expression 18 surely too vague to be 
probable and the explanation 1s unnatural, as 11 would of course be 
impossible to hve φρονίμως without φρόνησις 

Von der Muehil follows Sen¢ Vas. v. in omitting the words from οὐ 
ti to ὑπάρχει. 


352 IV. KYPIAI AOZAI 


I suggest that the MS. text is mght as far as it goes (with the 
obvious correction ζῇ for ζῆ), but that here again there has been a loss 
owing to parallelism of expression. τοῦτο then refers to ἡδέως ζῆν, 
the nearest subject in the previous sentence, and ἐκεῖνο to φρονίμως καὶ 
καλῶς καὶ δικαίως ζῆν. The sentence then becomes a reinforcement of 
the maxim by the appeal to experience: ‘if in fact we see a man’s life 
18 not pleasant, then we may be sure that he 1s not living virtuously : 
if we see that he 1s not living virtuously, we may know that he cannot 
be living pleasantly’. It does not greatly add to the previous maxim, 
but Epicurus is fond of such repetitions to enforce smportant points 
(he uses one in the corresponding place in Ep. ni, § 132), and the 
correction involves very little textual change. 


VI and VII go closely together If, as 1s stated in V, the pleasant 
hife involves prudence, honourable living, and justice, how 15 this to 
be secured? The first necessity Is ἀταραξία from without: for a man 
to live his own hfe well, he must be protected from molestation by 
others. It 1s thercfore necessary to seek for such protection, and any 
means which can provide it 1s a ‘natural good’ (VI) In VII he goes 
on to consider certain false attempts to secure protection. The general 
idea of these two aphorisms 1s referred toin XIV, XXVIII, XXXI, 
and XX XIX, and 1s imphcit in much of Lucretius’ description of early 
civilization in ν xorg ff and 1105 ff. 

[1 θαρρεῖν ἐξ ἀνθρώπων, ‘to have immunity from the attacks of 
men’, a condensed form of expression which Epicurus affects: cf VII 
τὴν ἐξ ἀνθρώπων ἀσφάλειαν and XIV τῆς ἀσφαλείας τῆς ἐξ ἀνθρώπων yevo- 
μένης, and the corresponding use of θαρρεῖν n XXVIII and XXXIX. 

fw the inferential imperfect used often in the Κύριαι Δόξαι" cf XII 
οὐκ ἢν. 

κατὰ φύσιν ἀγαθόν, ‘a good in accordance with nature’: cf VII τὸ 
τῆς φύσεως ἀγαθόν ἀγαθὸν ἐξ ὧν 1s certainly an odd construction, though 
not impossible for Epicurus. Usener suggests ἀγαθά, which would 
be easier, but possibly something lke ταῦτα ζητεῖν has dropped out. 

After κατὰ φύσιν the MSS. have ἀρχῆς καὶ βασιλείας, which Usener 
excludes δὲ a gloss on ἐξ ὧν. I had at one time thought the words 
might be retained and (ὀρέγεσθαι) added after them (cf VII ad jin 
ὠρέχθησαν). The aphonsm would then become an anticipation of the 
first part of VII ‘in order to obtain ἀσφάλεια men sought rule and 
kingship as the means by which they might attain theirend’. The 

“sense would be quite in accordance with Epicurus’ thought, but I do 

not think he could speak of this mistaken idea aS κατὰ φύσιν ἀγαθόν, 
and it is better to regard the words as an anticipatory gloss VI 1s 
the general statement and VII gives the detail. Von der Muehll 
retains ἀρχῆς καὶ βασιλείας, translating” presumably ‘the advantage of 
rule and kingship is a natural blessing’, but apart from the gram- 
matical difficulty, this is open to the same objection that Eprcurus 
could not have spoken of such things as a κατὰ φύσιν ἀγαθόν. 


COMMENTARY /§§ 140-142 353 


12. After τοῦτο Meibom inserted ris, which would again make the 
construction easier, but in Epicurus it is hardly necessary. 

§ 141 VII deals with a false attempt to obtain this necessary protec- 
tion from other men: persons have thought that they could do it by 
winning fame and high position which would place them above moles- 
tation. But in fact the struggle to obtain and maintain Ingh position 
is itself a serious obstacle to ἀταραξία, nor, as [prcurus points out here, 
15 the result attained one of real security Lucretius has a remarkably 
close parallel v 1120-1126 


at claros hommes voluerunt se atque potentis, 

ut fundamento βία] fortuna mancret 

et placidam possent opulent: degere vitam, 
nequiquam, quomam ad summum succedere honorem 
certantes iter infestum fecere vial, 

et tamen e summnio, quasi fulmen, detcit ictos 

nvidia interdum contemptim am ‘Tartara taetra 


3 ἀπέλαβον, ‘they obtamed to the full ςἰ. droAapBarew in XII 

τὸ τῆς φύσεως ἀγαθόν, ‘the good accoiding to nature‘ as in VI 

5 κατὰ τὸ τῆς φύσεως οἰκεῖον, ‘In accordance with that which 1s 
akin to nature’,1e the msunct for pleasure Cf. Ep πὶ, § 129 τὸ 
πᾶσα οὖν ἡδονὴ διὰ τὸ φύσιν ἔχειν οἰκείαν ἀγαθόν. 

VIII passes to a shghtly different topic, yet not unconnected with 
the fast two aphorisms. If men can be so deceived about ‘ natural 
goods’, what criterron can we have in the choice of pleasures? “This 
aphorism lays down the general principle all pleasures arc good in 
themselves, but in some the concomitant pain outweighs the pleasure, 
and these must be avoided The idea ts elaborated in IX and X and 
is dealt with fully in Ep im, § 129 

6. καθ᾽ ἑαυτὸ κακόν the neuter is quite natural, and the reading 
καθ᾽ ἑαυτὴν κακή Of FP® looks hke the emendation of a grammatucal 
purist But possibly von der Muchll’s καθ᾽ ἑαυτὴν κακόν is the most 
natural construction. 

7 ὀχλήσεις, ‘disturbances οὗ NI ἠνώχλουν and Ep πῇ 127 11 
ἀοχλησίαν, 

$142 1X ip ἃ unique statement in Epicurus but very important, as 
it gives the ground for the differentiation of pleasures Gassendi 
observed that it was duected against the Cyrenaics, who held 
(Ὁ L nu 87) that ‘no pleasure differs from any other nor is it more 
pleasant’: they believed also that pleasure was merely momentary 
and could not be prolonged, so that the object of life was to accumu- 
late as many pleasurable moments as possible, and it did not matter 
from what source they were derived itfe for them was simply and 
solely apolaustic. Epicurus’ view, on the other hand, was that 
although pleasure could not be increased quanttatively beyond the 
hmit of the complete absence of pain (III), yet pleasures could be 

2978 Ζ 


354 IV. KYPIAI AOZAI 


varied, and had qualitative drfferences. Here he also implies that 
they can differ in ‘density’ in three ways, either by lasting longer 
or by affecting the whole organism or by affecting tts more important 
paris (in particular, the mind) If all pleasures were alike in these 
respects, then there would be no difference at all between them, but 
as it 1s, a ‘calculus of pleasures’ becomes possible we can select our 
pleasures, either according as they are more pure, 1 e. more completely 
exclude pain (VIII and XI), or as they are more lasting or affect the 
whole organism or 115 more rmportant parts. The theory 1s an mtegral 
part of the ethical scheme and 1s needed to complete the argument of 
Ep. in, § 129. 

I, κατεπυκνοῦτο, ‘could be intensified’ or ‘condensed ’. 

After ἡδονή Bignone would insert καὶ μνήμη There 1s no doubt 
that memory played a part in Epicurus’ conception of pleasure 
(compare the general idea of Ep im, ὃ 122, and XVII of the Vatican 
aphorisms) and would be a means of καταπύκνωσις, but it seems 
hardly justifiable to introduce it into the text here Similarly Cronert’s 
insertion (καὶ révw) 15 superfluous. 

2 ἄθροισμα is used quite literally of the ‘aggregate’ of atoms of 
soul and body which composes the man. ‘Organism’ seems the 
nearest word in Enghsh, though it includes ideas foreign to the Greek 
woid cf Ep τ, §63 3 ἡ ψυχὴ σῶμά ἐστι λεπτομερὲς παρ᾽ ὅλον τὸ ἄθροισμα 
παρεσπαρμένον 

τὰ κυριώτατα μέρη. ‘the most rmportant parts’, 1. 6. especially the 
mind rather than the body. cf. Ep. 1, §&§ 35 6, 36.6. 

X-XIII may be regarded as going together and are naturally 
approached from 1X, Epicurus 15 applying the test of the κυριώτατα 
μέρη, and in partiwular of the mind For its pleasure the necessary 
conditions are, as has been learnt from the rerpadappaxos, a true 
knowledge of the nature of the gods and of death, and an undersiand- 
ing of the bounds to be set to desire and of the hmits of pain. Now 
the pleasures of scnsuality cannot help us here ; if they could, we might 
(apart fiom the accompanying pain) regard them as perfect pleasures. 
But for this purpose we must turn rather to philosophy, which gives us 
the sure knowledge of the nature of the world and the principles of our 
own conduct. 

X 1s a straightforward statement . if the pleasures of the body could 
give us what we need, we could find nothing to censure in them. 

4. τῶν περὶ τοὺς ἀσώτους ἡδονῶν. the regular Greek perphrasis with 
περί to avoid one geniuve dependent on another ἀσωμάτους F 18 a 
strange vanant, but does not point to any real alternative. 

5 μετεώρων : the movements of the heavenly bodies and the other 
phenomena of the sky, the subject in fact of the second letter. The 
fear about the μετέωρα is of course the 1dea that they are arbitrary acts 
on the part of divine berngs, which, according to the Epicureans, was 
one of the causes of the omgin of region: cf. XI and Lucr. v. 
1183-1240. 


COMMENTARY. ἐᾷ 142-143 355 


6. καὶ ἀλγηδόνων, ‘and its pains’, not ‘ pain * simply (as Hicks), for 
‘the fear of pain” would be an idea not found elsewhere in Epicurus. 

τὸ πέρας τῶν ἐπιθυμιῶν, ‘the limits set to our desires’, 1e that 
we cannot desire greater pleasure than the complete absence of 
pam ΠῚ 

It is clear that we require here the mention also of the limit set to 
pam (IV), and the insertion of ζκαὶ τῶν ἀλγηδόνων) would be sufficiently 
justified by XI. But, as Bignone has pointed out, it 1s now guaranteed 
by spe text of Diogenes of Oenoanda, 7 xlv, where this aphonsm is 
uoted. 
᾿ 7. μεμψαίμε!α The reading of B μεμφάμεθα is hardly enough 
authonty for altering the otherwise universal μεμψαίμεθα to the more 
grammatically correct ἐμεμψάμεθα 

8 ἐκπληρουμένοις a necessary coirection of the εἰσπληρουμέγοις of 
the MSS ἃ common error (K = 'c) 

9 ὅπερ sc.7d ἀλγοῦν καὶ τὸ λυπούμενον 

ΧΙ If we had no need of such knowledge, we could well lead a 
pleasant life without physiology, but as this knowledge ts the essential 
condition of pleasure, we cannot dispense with our understanding of 
nature. The general idea of this dircet value of scientific knowledge 
is dealt with in Ep 3, ὃ 78 

τι ἠνώχλουν cf VIIT ὀχλήσεις 

12. μή ποτε. ἦ τι «the form of the expression strongly recalls 
ὃ θάνατος οὐδὲν πρὸς ἡμᾶς in 11 and elsewhere, 

τε τὸ μὴ κατανοεῖν Is ἃ biilliant restoration for the MSS τετύόλμηκα 
νοεῖν B accentuates τετολμηκά and P hast τό μηκα, which point to 
a corruption, and a marginal note in B describes the reading of the 
text as σφά(λμα) 

ὃ 143 XII makes one step faither in advance. There are two 
possible sources of information about the heavenly phenomena and 
death, rehgion and science The ordinaly man derives his concep- 
tions from the myths of religion, but they are pecuharly calculated to 
inspire fear and so to destroy pleasure if pleasure is to be based on 
complete ἀταραξία, and so to be absolutely pure, we must learn the 
truth about the umverse from physical scunce Agatn Ep 1, § 78, 
puts the pomt fully 

1, οὐκ ἦν, ‘at 15 not possible’ the inferential imperfect again. cf. VI 
ἦν κατὰ φύσιν 

ὑπὲρ τῶν κυριωτάτων, ‘about the most important matters’, 1e the 
μετέωρα auddeath cf Ep.1, ὃ 78 1 τὸ τὴν ὑπὲρ τῶν κυριωτάτων αἰτίαν 
ἐξακριβῶσαι φυσιολογίας ἔργον εἶναι δεῖ νομίζειν also §§ 35, 36. 

2 τοῦ σύμπαντος “ nothing short of a knowledge of the universe will 
really suffice, or at least of the general principles of 1ts working 

ὑποπτευόμενον the fear of the arbitrary action of the gods in 
phenomena gives us a ‘suspicion’ cf ὑποψίαι τῇ XI. Normal Attic 
uses the verb only in the active, and Usener proposes to read to- 
πτεύοντα, but this may be accepted as a later usage. 

22 


356 IV. ΚΥΡΙΑΙ AOZAI 


4 ἀκεραίους, ‘unalloyed’, entirely free from pain, and in this case 
from the mental pain of fear Lucretius puts the point well in 
ul. 37 fF ᾿ 

et metus ille foras praeceps Acheruntis agendus, 
funditus humanam qui vitam turbat ab :mo 
omnia suffundens mortis nigrore neque ullam 
esse voluplatem liquidam puramgue relinqut 


ἀπολαμβάνειν “ cf VII ἀπέλαβον τὸ τῆς φύσεως ἀγαθόν 

XIII 1s ἃ connecting Ink between the immediately preceding topic 
and that of VI and VII, to which Epicuius returns in XIV. It is no 
good to secure freedom from molestation by other men, unless we 
combine that with the greater freedom of mind, which 1s due to the 
true knowledge of the universe Our ἀταραξία must be complete both 
on the physical and mental sides, if we are to have true pleasure cf 
Lucr wm. 27 and u τό ff 

5. τὴν Kar’ ἀνθρώπους ἀσφάλειαν. cf V1 θαρρεῖν ἐξ ἀνθρώπων, 
VIL τὴν ἐξ ἀνθρώπων ἀσφάλειαν κατ᾽ ἀνθρώπους is here a natural 
vaniation 

6. ὑπόπτων cf XI ὑποψώι, XIL ὑποπτευόμενον, the word which 
hnks these three aphorisms together the root idea 1s fear arising from 
uncertainty 

τῶν ὑπὸ γῆς always coupled by the physiologists with ra μετέωρα, as 
Ep. 1i and Lucr vi 

ἢ. τῶν ἐν τῷ ἀπείρῳ things outside our κόσμος, sc other worlds and 
the gods So Lucr.1 74 of Epicurus, ‘omne immensum peragravit 
mentc animuque’ 

XIV A most difficult and obscure aphoiism in which both text and 
meaning are uncertain. It returns to the topic of the ἀσφάλεια ἐξ 
ἀνθρώπων, which had been broached in VI and VII and referred to 
again in ΧΠῚ VI showed its necessity for the tdeal hfe, and VII 
that the effort to gain it by fame and position 1s mistaken = Epicurus 
now considers the question how it 1s to be attained: the aphorism 
must be considered im close connexion with AXXIX where he recurs 
again to this question Our view as to his answer must be determined 
by the text adopted both here and in XXXIX_ According to the 
text here given Epicurus holds that there must as a preliminary be 
some force (Svvapts)—even though it were only persona! imfluence— 
which can bamsh from one’s hfe the elements which are hkely to cause 
disturbance (ἐξοριστική, Cf ἐξωρίσατο in XXXIX) But besides tms 
force, by far the purest source (εὐπορία εἰλικρινεστάτη) Of ἀσφάλεια 18 
that which anses from one’s own quiet hfe and retirement from the 
world, Here then we have the answer to the question raised in VII 
The men who aim at political power think to secure their ἀσφάλεια 
wholly by force They are wrong: it is true that some force 1s neces- 
sary to banish certain molestations, but the true solution is to eschew 
politics altogether and hve one’s own life in peace. This was, of 


COMMENTARY. ξὲ 143-144 357 


course, the regular Epicurean view, characteristic of its general indi- 
viduahstic attitude compare Lucr. v. 1127-1128 

ut satus multo 1am sit parere quietum 

quam regere imperio res velle et regna tencre 
For other views of the aphorism see notes below. 

8 γενομένης μέχρι τινός the start towards ἀσφάλεια must be made 
by an exercise of force or power which can secure it to a certain 
degree 

9. δυνάμει τινὶ ἐξοριστικῇ, ‘by a certain force of expulsion’, .e of 
getting rid of certain elements of interference and placing them beyond 
the borders of one’s life The text 15 very uncertam I accept with 
some hesitatron Usener’s correction τινί for re. among the many MS 
variations of the next word, the almost universal perispomenon accent 
points to a dative rather than a nominative ἐξοριστικῃ would be 
strongly supported by ἐξωρίσατο in XXXIX, which in my view 1s based 
on the same general idea ‘The man who secures ἀσφάλεια makes all 
things he can akin to lim (ὁμόφυλα) or at least not ahen (ἀλλόφυλα) 
for the rest, he either does not mix with them (ἀνεπέμικτος ἐγένετο), OF 
else banishes them from his life (égwpéraro)’ There is, however, an 
exactly similar doubt as to the text there 

Usener takes δυνάμει tad bv iself and reads ἐξερειστική ‘the 
ἀσφάλεια asing fiom ἡσυχία and ἐκχώρησις 15. ἃ support to and the 
purest source of the ἀσφαλεία flom men which has becn obtamed to a 
certain extent by a ceitam force’ = But (1) δυνάμει τινί 15 very weak 
and does little but repeat μέχρι τινός, (2) ἐξερειστικη 15 feeble in sense 
and grammaticall) awkward in combination with the substantive 
εὐπορία this Usener feels limself and suggests im his notes ἐξέρεισις 7 , 
(3) 1he general sense 15 unsatisfactory the hfe of retirement cannot 
well be described as ‘a support’ to ἀσφάλεια 

R Τὸ. Hicks, accepting Useuei’s text, translates ‘then on a basis of 
power arises most genuine bliss’ this is surely an impossible sense 
for ἐξερειστική, Which cannot be passive in meaning, and εὐπορία must 
go with the genitive τῆς ἀσφαλείας 

Bignone retains the τε of the MSS and reads δυνάμει τε ἐξερειστικῇ 
καὶ εὐποριᾳ εἰλικρινεσζτάτῃ ἐπεξεργαστικωγτάτη γίνεται, ‘both by its 
powel of offering support and by its unalloyed gifts of goods 1s most 
productive of’ the ἀσφάλεια ἐξ ἀνθρώπων But δυνάμει ἐξερειστικῇ 15 
an odd eapression, and the addition to the text 1s very considerable 

εἰλικρινεστάτη, ‘most pure’, because it 1s not tainted by the clement 
of ὄχλησις, which 15 involved in the use of force to bamish molestations. 

10 ἐκχωρήσεως the bulk of the MS authority 1s for ἐγχωρήσεως, 
but that must be a mere mistake 

§ 144. XV deals with the topic of Ep.in § 130. to satisfy the desires 
of nature (the ἀναγκαῖαι ἡδοναί) very httle 1s wanted, and that can 
easily be obtained. But to satisfy the empty cravings of those who 
are not philosophers is an almost endless task. The idea 1s familar 
and the expression straightforward Besides Ep in, § 130 Ὃ τὸ μὲν φυσι- 


358 VI. KYPIAI AOZAI 


κὸν πᾶν εὐπόριστόν ἐστι, τὸ δὲ κενὸν δυσπόριστον, We May compare an 
aphorism preserved by Stobaeus, Ζγογιῖ xvii. 23 (_/r. 67, Usener 469) 
χάρις τῇ paxapla Φύσει, ὅτι τὰ ἀναγκαῖα ἐποίησεν εὐπόριστα, τὰ δὲ δυσπό- 
ριστα οὐκ ἀναγκαῖα, and Lucr v. rr17-1119° 


quod si quis vera vitam ratione gubernet, 
divitiae grandes homini sunt vivere parce 
aequo animo; neque enim est umquam penuria parvi. 


1. ὃ τῆς φύσεως πλοῦτος : cf the epigram in Athenaeus (Usener 

Jr. 47t). 
τᾶς φύσιος δ᾽ ὁ πλοῦτος ὅρον τινὰ βαιὸν ἐπίσχει, 
αἱ δὲ κεναὶ κρίσιες τὰν ἀπέραντον ὁδόν. 

ἃ. τῶν κενῶν δοξῶν, ‘the wealth demanded by idle imaginings’, 
1.6. suggested by the baseless mental images of persons who have not 
learned the true wisdom. So Epicurus, as quoted by Porphyrius, ad 
Marcellam, 24, Ὁ 208. 2 (7. 68, Usener 471) οὐ σπάνιόν γε εὑρεῖν 
ἄνθρωπον (πένητα) πρὸς τὸ τῆς φύσεως τέλος καὶ πλούσιον πρὸς TAS κενὰς 
δόξας Cf. also XXIX παρὰ κενὴν δόξαν γινόμεναι. 

XVI. A new topic, the comparative importance of .chance and 
Teason in life Chance can at times hinder the wise man, but only to 
a small extent. 1t must be reason that throughout his life decideg his 
action and therefore hts fate. The tdea 1s reproduced in several 
Epicurean passages and 1s foreshadowed τῇ Ep. 1h, § 134. 

3. βραχέα: the neuter plural (internal acc.) has the better MS. 
authority as against βραχεῖα, and, as Usener points out, 1s supported by 
Cicero’s rendering (de i, i.19. 63) ‘exiguum (ποῦ exiguam) fortunam 
intervenire sapienti’. Epicurus, too, 1s almost certainly adapting 
Democritus’ aphorism βαιὰ yap φρονήσι τύχῃ μάχεται, τὰ δὲ πλεῖστα ἐν 
βίῳ εὐξύνετος ὀξυδερκίη κατιθύνει, where we have the same neuter plural. 
τὰ δὲ μέγιστα just afterwards confirms it. 

The same parallels are conclusive against Cobet’s τύχῃ for τύχη. 

4. ϑιῴκηκε is clearly intended by the MS. διώκηκε and 15 read by 
Stobaeus, when he quotes this passage. Usener, who quite arbitrarily 
excises διοικεῖ καὶ διοικήσει at the end of the sentence as a gloss, reads 

ὕκησε 88 ἃ gnomic aorist and cuts out the καί which follows it in the 
MSS. Epicurus wishes to emphasize the continuance of the process 
by the use of all three tenses. Bignone also takes this view of the text. 

XVII gives us the direct connexion between justice and the 
Epicurean ideal, Justice, as we shall see (XXXII), has in itself no 
immediate value, but indirectly it is useful because it most contributes 
to the inward and outward peace (ἀταραξία) of the life of ideal 
pleasure: injustice, on the other hand, 1s the source of the greatest 
possible disturbance. The idea is strictly Epicurean, and besides V 
we may compare the fragment δικαιοσύνης καρπὸς μέγιστος drapagia 
(fr. 80, Usener 519), and particularly K. A. XXXV, which explains 
the cause of the ταραχή. ἡ 


COMMENTARY. §§ 144-145 359 


6. ὁ δίκαιος Bios is the form in which the aphorism appears in 
Diodorus and Sent, Vat. xii: the meaning 1s of course not different. 

In XVIII Epicurus passes back to the limitation of pleasures, 
onginally laid down im III, and speaks now more fully as regards 
both the body and the mind. The amount (μέγεθος) of pleasure 1s 
limited in both cases: both for body and for mind there 1s a point 
beyond which pleasure cannot be increased in’ quantity (τὸ πέρας), but _ 
only vaned in kind. For the body this pont 1s reached when there 1s 
drovia, when all pain due to want 1s removed by the satisfaction of 
the want (e.g. in hunger). For the mind the limit is the establishment 
of ἀταραξία by the reasoned comprehension of the limits of pleasure 
and the nght understanding of emotions like them, 1 e. the desires and 
fears connected with the conceptions of immortahty and death 
Beyond these limiting points we can only get vanation in our 
pleasures, and though for the mind such variation 1s good, for the 
body it means the introduction of means of pleasure which involve 
pain. The ideal of ‘ plain hving and Ingh thinking’ 1s thus shown to 
be the hfe of the fullest and purest pleasure’ cf X and Ep m, 
δξ 130-132. 

9. τὸ κατ᾽ ἔνδειαν ἀλγοῦν, ‘the pain due to want’: cf. IIL and 
Ep. iii, § 130. 

ποικίλλεται, ‘is varied’, in the means by which it 1s satisfied. This 
1g ἃ new point m addition to the πέρας doctnne of ΠῚ The luxunous 
hfe, which as was seen in X does not produce ἀταραξία, cannot 
increase the quantity of pleasure, but only vary its means of satisfac- 
tion. 

10, ἀπεγέννησεν᾽ a curious word, meant perhaps to suggest the 
reaching of ihe limit in the process. 

Il ἧ.. τούτων αὐτῶν ἐκλόγισις, ‘the thinking out of these very 
pleasures’, 1 e. the comprehension by reason of their limits The 
understanding of the limits of pleasure of body and mind will not only 
give a rule of conduct but will itself be one of the means of securing 
ἀταραξία. 

τῶν ὁμογενῶν τούτοις is probably rightly explained by Bignone to 
mean ‘the emotions lke them’, 1.e.the desires associated with 1mmor- 
tality and the fears connected with death which (before the Fpicurean 
philosophy9 used to be the greatest cause of mental fear. 

Hicks translates the clause, ‘ The limit of pleasure in the mind is 
obtained by calculating the pleasures themselves and the contrary 
pains’. But (@) this is not at all an Epicurean idea: he does not 
weigh pleasures against pains, but only admits ‘ pure pleasure’, (4) it 18 
a possible, but not the natural sense of ἐκλόγισις, (c) τῶν ὁμογενῶν 
τούτοις cannot be strained to mean ‘the contrary pains’. 

12. παρεσκεύαζε: a real imperfect ‘used to cause’ before the 
Epicurean philosophy was grasped 

§ 145. XIX. A point of great importance 1s introduced as ἃ deduc- 
tion from the previous aphorism. If there is a mit ofegreatness to the 


360 IV. KYPIAI AOZAI 


pleasure both of body and mind, and no pleasure can be greater than 
the complete absence of bodily pain and mental trouble, then com- 
plete pleasure can be attained in a limited time, and infinite time could 
not produce greater pleasure. The conception ts of great importance 
for Epicurus because it enables him to maintain that there 1s no reason 
why men should long for immortality, which could not give them 
greater pleasure than they can know in this hfe It is elaborated 
in XX. 

1. ἴσην: se. not greater. 

2, τὰ πέρατα: as in XVIII, the limits of bodily and mental pleasure, 
i.e. the complete absence of pain and anxiety. 

XX. A difficult aphorism tn which the editors have been inclined to 
tamper with the text, but 1t can, I think, be matntatned as tt stands. 
It is a contrast in the attnudes of ‘the flesh’ and ‘the mind’ towards 
pleasure, and 15 clearly intended to biing out further the point of XIX 
that infinite time 1s not required to obtain the greatest pleasure. 
Epicurus has also in mind, as usual, the view of the Cyrenaics. ‘The 
flesh’ 1s the body apart from the mind (IV). it can perceive individual 
sensations owing to the admixture of soul and body atoms, but cannot 
correlate sensations or reason about them Any individual sensation 
of pleasute is perceived by it as something which might be indefinitely 
increased or prolonged: if this were really the case the longer the 
time, the greater would be the pleasure, and infinite time would 
produce infinite pleasure. It is on this purely sensational basis that 
the sensual man (ἄσωτος, X) acts, and it 1s also the root of the Cyrenaic 
theory which advocated the accumulation of the individual moments of 
pleasure (μονόχρονος ἡδονή). But the mind, Epicurus holds, knows 
well that this 1s not so, but that there is a quantitative limit to pleasure 
both of body and mind. complete pleasure 13 therefore attamable in 
this life and there is no need of immortality. The man who holds 
this conviction will be content to cease to exist, when his time comes, 
without feeling that he has missed anything. The difficulties le 
chiefly in the first sentence. 

4. ἀπέλαβε, ‘perceives’, as in VII and XII, with no added tmplica- 
tion of reflection on the sensation. 

5. καὶ ἄπειρος αὐτὴν χρόνος παρεσκεύασεν, ‘and infinite time is (in 
that case) required to supply pleasure’. I think the sentence may be 
so translated without unduly straining the Greek. παρεσκεύασεν is the 
reading of all the MSS. and is exactly paralleled by τὸν παντελῇ βίον 
παρεσκεύασεν below. If the text 1s altered at all, it should be to 
παρεσκεύασ᾽ ἄν, or with Diels to κἂν... παρεσκεύασεν Usener reads 
ἀρέσκοι ἄν, αὐτήν being then τὴν σάρκα, ‘ infinite time would satisfy it’. 
But not only is this a violent alteration of a word which is almost 
certainly authentic, but, as Bignone points out in his admirable 
discussion of this aphorism (Introd., pp. 26—3a), 1t implies in the σάρξ 
something more than mere perception, and is therefore contrary to 
Epicurus’ doctrine. Bignone himself would read καὶ ἄπειρζον οὐκ 


COMMENTARY. §§ 145-146 361 


ἀπειργος, ‘and lmuited time can produce unhmited pleasure’. But 
(1) the phrase below οὐθὲν ἔτι τοῦ ἀπείρου χρόνου προσεδεήθημεν shows 
that there must have been a contrast between the σάρξ which does 
require infimite time and the διάνοια which does not; (2) though 
Epicurus says that the flesh perceives pleasures as ἄπειρα, he surely 
would not go so far as to say that limited time gives it pleasure which 
ts ἄπειρον, for his whole doctrine 1s that there 1s always a πέρας. The 
expression is very obscure, but can, I think, stand as we have it, 

τοῦ τῆς σαρκὸς τέλους, ‘its ultimate purpose ’, or as Bignone trans- 
lates it, ‘its summum bonum’,t e to get rid of all parn and so secure 
ἀπονία : the τέλος 18 also the πέρας of pleasure. 

6. τὸν ἐπιλογισμόν, ‘the reasoned understanding’: cf. XVII ἡ... 
τούτων αὐτῶν ἐκλόγισις. 

7. τοῦ αἰῶνος, ‘the age to come’, the eternal hfe after death 
which religion assumes. The word 15 another of the stens of the 
approximation of Epicurus’ language to the Hellenistic: cf. αἰώνιον 
XXVIIL 

τὸν παντελῆ βίον, ‘the complete Ife’, which has attained tts τέλος of 
ἀπονία and drapagia. The analogy of XXI τὸ τὸν ὅλον βίον παντελῇ 
καθιστάν suggests the transposition παντελῆ τὸν βίον. But the present 
order perhaps accords better with Epicurus’ use of παρασκευάζειν, to 
‘afford’ rather than ‘to make’ 

8, προσεδεήθημεν is the reading of F and H and ts clearly indicated 
by the reading of P and ῷ The change of subject 1s quite natural 
and Usener’s προσεδεήθη" (ov) μὴν 18 unnecessary. 

9 οὔτε ἔφυγε τὴν ἡδονήν, an interesting point. Epicureantsm is not 
ascetic. 1t does not avoid pleasure, but only realizes its true limits. 

11. κατέστρεφεν, ‘ draws to its close’. cf. Ep. ut, § 126 6 τὸν δὲ γέροντα 
καλῶς καταστρέφειν and XL προκαταστροφήν. The aorist κατέστρεψεν, 
ghomic as all through the aphorism, would be more natural and was 
suggested by Bywater, and the imperfect may be due to the neigh- 
bouring παρεσκεύαζεν, which 1s a genuine imperfect tn relation to the 
other aorists. 

§ 146 XXI An ingenious connexton between the argument 
of the last aphorisms and the earher practical considerations of VII 
and XV. If we are really convinced of the hmits of pleasure, 
we shall know that but little is needed to secure drovia and ἀταραξία, 
and shall avoid, as unnecessary, the struggles for polttical power and 
position. We may compare Lucr. ii. 16-53 and v. 1105—1135. 

1. ὡς εὐπόριστόν ἐστι: cf XV. 

2 (78) the addition of the second article 1s necessary. 

τὸ ἀλγοῦν κατ᾽ ἔνδειαν : cf. XVIII 

4. ἀγῶνας : a metaphor from the games: the struggles for success 
and the prizes which they bring. We may perhaps translate 
‘competition ’. 

XXII. An mteresting and important link of connexion between the 
ethical theory and the general theory of knowledge. If we are to be 


362 IV. KYPIAI AOZAI 


sure that our actions are right, we must, as has been seen from the 
preceding aphorisms, always refer them to the ‘real end’ of life, 
namely ἀπονία and ἀταραξία (cf. XXV). But it is equally important 
to refer them also to the direct evidence of the senses, which is the 
ultimate basis of all knowledge (see Ep. i, ὃ 82). It is a cardinal rule 
in the field of φυσιολογία that all conclusions of opinion (δοξαξόμενα) 
must be tested by such reference to immediate sensation. In the 
ethical field there is a-double reason for doing this . firstly, in order 
to act rightly, we must have a mght understanding of the world around 
us and must therefore refer to our external perceptions (αἰσθήσεις), and 
secondly, we must refer to our internal sensations (πάθη), the 1mme- 
diate perceptions of pleasure and pain, to be sure that any action we 
choose is really productive of pleasure and not of pain. Unless we 
keep these rules, we are lable in the moral sphere, as in the 
physical, to be misled by προσδοξαζόμενα, unauthorized additions of 
the mind. 

5. τὸ ὑφεστηκὸς. . τέλος, ‘the real end’ of life, sc. drovia and 
ἀταραξία. For this meaning of ὑφεστηκός Bignone refers to the Life of 
Epicurus, ὃ 32, 6 ὑφέστηκε δὲ τὸ ὁρᾶν ἡμᾶς καὶ ἀκούειν, ‘our sight and 
hearing are realities’. Schneider’s proposal to expunge τέλος would 
make the aphonsm refer solely to the theory of knowledge without 
any connexion with the ethical theory—a very abrupt jump. Hicks 
translates ‘We must take into account as the end all that really 
exists’; this seems unmeaning, and is certainly not Epicurean. 

πᾶσαν τὴν ἐνάργειαν, ‘all the immediate evidence of sensation’, 
1.e. both of the πάθη and the αἰσθήσεις. For the meaning of ἐνάργεια 
see Ep 1,§ 52 3. Merbach (de Xpzc Canon., p. 19) notes that ἐπιλογί- 
ζεσθαι 18 definitely associated in Epicurus with ἐνάργεια 

6. ἐφ᾽ ἦν. a general statement, applicable both in the physical and 
the moral fields. 

ἡ. ἀκρισίας : because, unless we bear in mind the fundamental 
criterion of πάθος, we shall lose the power of discriminating between 
really pleasurable actions and the reverse. 

ταραχῆς : because, unless we attend to the evidence of the senses, 
αἰσθήσεις, in the physical world, we shall admit the fears which are 
primanily destructive of the pleasures of hfe. Ep. i, § 82, provides a 
close parallel. ’ 

XXII. The last aphorism took us back to the fundamental accep- 
tance of αἴσθησις as the final test, and the next two deal with this 
subject. Objection to the Epicurean principle might be taken on two 
grounds: either that some of our sensations were trustworthy, but 
others not, or that they are all untrustworthy. Epicurus deals with 
these two positions separately, and in this aphorism with the extreme 
eceptic position. If, he says, you reject all sensations you are left 
without any standard of judgement at all, by which even to condemn 
the senses: for, as Lucretius explains in an interesting parallel 


COMMENTARY. § 146-147 363 


passage, reason, the only other possible standard, 19 itself founded on 
the senses and owes to them its validity : 


quid maiore fide porro quam sensus haberi 
debet? an ab sensu falso ratio orta valebit 
dicere eos contra, quae tota ab sensibus orta est? 
qu: nisi sunt veri, ratio quoque falsa fit omnis. 
(Lucr. iv. 482-485.) 
There 18 no difficulty in text or expression. 

9. ἀναγωγήν, ‘reference’: cf. dvdyouev in XXII. 

ὃ 147. XXIV. Epicurus now proceeds to consider the more 
modified scepticism which does not reject all sensation as untrue, 
but maintains that this or that sensation 1s false He answers in 
effect, ‘If you reject any single sensation, you will produce confusion 
in them all, and so destroy the possibility of a standard of judgement’. 
The expression of the aphorism 1s, however, obscure because it is 
highly technica]. 11 should be read 1n conjunction with Ep.1, ὃ 50 
Both Giussani (who has a valuable comment on this aphorism in Stud, 
Lucr., pp. 181-182) and Bignone 1n his note explain the passage with 
reference to the famihar Epicurean instance of the man who sees 
a tower at a distance. He has a sensation of a round tower. If 
he 15 a good Epicurean he will say to himself, ‘this sensation is true : 
it represents the image which has come to me’, But he will not go 
on to affirm that the tower itself 1s 1ound, this he will regard as 
a problem awaiting (προσμένον) confirmation (ἐπιμαρτύρησιν) or con- 
tradiction (ἀντιμαρτύρησιν) on a nearer view’ (ἐνάργημα). But the man 
who 15 not an Epicurean, when he comes up to the tower and finds it 
square, will say, ‘my sense-perception was false’, not reahzing that 
the judgement that the tower was round was something added by his 
mind (προσδοξαζόμενον) to the actual sensation he ought to distin- 
guish the two. If, says Epicurus, we reject any single sense-percep- 
tion in this way we are really undermining them all by our groundless 
opinion, because the next tme that we have a similar sensation, we 
shall at once be inclined to doubt its truth and so on till we shake our 
belief in sensation altogether—for we may take up a similar attitude to 
immediate feelings (πάθη) or mages perceived by the mind (ἐπιβολαὶ 
τῆς διανοίας)» 

If, on the other hand, he continues, we bhndly accept these opmtons 
based on sensation—including both the actua! sensation and the addi- 
tion of thought—then, so far from escaping error, we shall introduce 
doubt into every judgement that we make " }f, for instance, we decide 
in the example given above that the tower zs round, we are simply 
wrong. 

Many difficulties are involved in this Epicurean principle, some 
of which were more clearly perceived by his successors than by 
himself. 

1, ἐκβαλεῖς ; the MSS. both here and in |. 5 support é«BdAAes: the 


364 IV. KYPIAI AOZAI 


parallel of XXIII εἰ μάχῃ - . . οὐχ ἕξεις might support its retention, but 
διαιρήσεις following immediately in the protasis, makes the future 
necessary. 

ἁπλῶς, ‘singly’, ‘ by itself’, as opposed to πάσαις ταῖς αἰσθήσεσιν in 
XXIII. Hicks’ translation ‘absolutely’ does not make sense. 

a. κατὰ τὸ προσμένον. xara has better MS. authority than xai, which 
Usener adopts, and very greatly improves the sense: the ‘ opinion based 
on the idea awaiting confirmation’ (that the tower 1s round) 1s con- 
trasted with ‘that which is actually present in sensation’ (the image 
of a round tower), and we thus get a natural division of the two 
things to be ‘distinguished’, whereas with καὶ the point at which the 
second part of the contrast begins 18 not grammatically obvious. κατά 
and καί are frequently confused in the MSS. of Diog. Laert. Bignone 
also reads κατὰ, and Merbach (de Epic. Canon., p. 39). 

8. καὶ τὰ πάθη : a similar error may be made in the region of feel- 
ing. Guussani (l.c.) suggests as an example, that we may have a 
sensation of pricking: opinion at once assumes an external body 
pricking us, and when we find there is none, we may be similarly led 
to conclude that the sensation itself was false, whereas, 1t was, in fact, 
due to some internal cause. 

καὶ πᾶσαν φανταστικὴν ἐπιβολὴν τῆς διανοίας For a discussion of 
the very difficult expression ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας see note on Ep. 1, § 38, 
and Appendix, pp. 259 f. I donot beheve that the epithet φανταστικήν 
here 1s intended to modify its sense, seeing that for Epicurus all 
thought was conducted by means of images. It seems hkely, however, 
that he is thinking primarily of those mental images which are caused 
by the attention of the mind to εἴδωλα, not perceptible to the senses, but 
visiting the mind directly. The kind of mistake then would be, as 
Gnussani again suggests, if seeing in sleep the vision of a dead fnend, 
and realizing on waking that he was dead, we therefore assumed that 
the dream-vision was false, whereas as a dream-vision it was true, and 
Epicurus on his theory of the persistence of the εἴδωλα, can explain its 
occurrence. 

4. τῇ ματαίῳ δόξῃ: by the same kind of ‘groundless opinion’ as 
caused confusion in the case of the single sensation, e.g. of the tower. 
The MSS. point to ματαίῳ rather than ματαίᾳ. 

5. Sore... ἐκβαλεῖς because, when you are similarly led to reject 
other perceptions, you will then be in the position of the objector of 
aphorism XXIII. 

el δὲ βεβαιώσεις... The exactly opposite process, the acceptance 
of all appearances (i.e. sense-perception plus the inference of opinion), 
will lead to exactly the same confusion. The only sure ground of 
procedure is the distinction of the two. 

6. τὸ προσμένον. . . τὴν ἐπιμαρτύρησιν : together. The addition of 
the accusative here is a valuable explanation of the real sense of τὸ 
προσμένον in passages where it is used absolutely as above, e.g. Ep. i, 
ὃ 50.10 Here τὸ προσμένον .. . τὴν ἐπιμαρτύρησιν is of course, in our 


COMMENTARY. §§ 147-148 365 


example, the idea that the tower is round, τὸ μή is the simple sense- 
perception of a round tower. 

7. οὐκ ἐκλείψεις 15 the MS. reading. Bonnet’s ἐκλείψει, adopted by 
Usener, would make the construction more normal, ‘ the error will not 
disappear ’, but it is probably possible to retain ἐκλείψεις in a transitive 
sense, either ‘you will not escape’ (so Bignone) or possibly ‘ you will 
not leave out’, ‘eliminate’ the falsehood. 

8. ὡς τετηρηκὼς . . . ἢ μὴ ὀρθῶς, ‘since jou will have preserved the 
whole ground of doubt in every judgement of nght or wrong’: the 
‘ground of doubt’ 15 always the προσδοξαζόμενον, and if we accept that 
in all cases, we make all our conclusions dubious. I have followed 
Bignone m reading κατὰ for the MSS καὶ" cf. the similar confusion 
m I, 2. 

Usener boldly alters to ὥστ᾽ ἀνῃρηκώς, ‘90 that you will have 
annulled all distinction and every judgement of night and wrong’. 
But apart from the very violent character of the change, it involves, as 
Guussani points out, the very unnatural sense of ‘distinction’ for 
ἀμφισβήτησιν, which should certainly mean ‘doubt’, ‘ uncertainty’. 
(Hicks with Usener’s text translates ‘ you will be taking sides in every 
question involving truth or error’ 1 can make nothing of this ) 

Giussani himself reads ὥστε τετηρηκώς and καὶ (ἀνῃρωκώς), “50 that 
you will have preserved every cause of doubt and destroyed every 
judgement of right or wrong’. This gives good sense, but Bignone’s 
correction 15 far simpler 

§148. XXV After this excursion into metaphysics in the two 
previous aphorisms, Epicurus now returns to ethics. Every action 
must be tested by direct reference to the ultimate end of nature, 
we. perfect pleasure, consisting Of ἀπονέα and ἀταραξία. If we stop 
short of that and try to test our actions by any intermediate standard, 
such as that of prudence or honour or justice, we shall find that our 
actions are deviating from the true ideal of pleasure and we shall no 
longer be practising as we preach 

2 τὸ τέλος τῆς φύσεως, ‘the end which our nature seeks’. cf. XX 
τὸ τῆς σαρκὸς τέλος and XV ὁ τῆς φύσεως πλοῦτος. 

προκαταστρέψεις . εἰς GAAS τι, ‘ yOu stop short before reaching the 
τέλος and turn to some other standard’: the picture 1s of proceeding 
upwards through a senes of correlated ideals, all dependent on the 
ulate end of pleasure and stoppmg before we reach the end of the 
series. For this intransitive sense cf. XL προκαταστροφήν from the 
derivative sense of καταστρέφειν, ‘ to depart from life’, KX. 

4: τοῖς λόγοις. Not merely ‘your words’ but ‘the principles you 
profess ’. 

XXVI-XXX. Considerable doubt has been raised as to the correct 
order of these aphorisms. It would appear at first sight that XXVI, 
which deals with the classification of desires, must have a close 
connexion with XXIX and XXX, while XXVII and XXVIII, which 
deal with fmendship, appear to interrupt that connexion. Gassendi 


366 IV. KYPIAI AOEZAI 


accordingly arranged them in the order XXIX, XXX, XXVI, XXVII, 
XXVIII, and Meibom following him inserted XXVI between XXIX 
and XXX. Bignone (Introd., pp. 21 ff) who is concerned to defend 
the sequence of the aphonmsms against the attacks of Usener, expresses 
some doubt at this point, and thinks it possible that a sentence has 
been lost linking up XXVI and XXVII. He has, however, made 
a good case for preserving the order of the MSS., and it seems better 
to retain it, bearing in mind, however, the possibility of a shght 
dislocation. 

XXVI. Bignone (Introd, p. 21) has pointed out that there is an 
essential Ink of connexion between this aphorism and XXV. We 
must always refer our desires to the ultimate test of ἀπονία and 
ἀταραξία, and the practical application of that test 1s that physical pain 
or mental disturbance results if the desires are not satisfied If then 
we find that no such result would follow, we may be sure that the 
desire in question 18 unnecessary. This is confirmed when we find 
that the craving passes away, if it 1s found that the object of desire is 
unattainable or likely to cause harm. 

5: ὅσαι μὴ ἐπ᾽ ἀλγοῦν ἐπανάγουσιν. Pleasure being the removal of τὸ 
ἀλγοῦν κατ᾽ ἔνδειαν (111, XXI1), 1f no such pain results, when desires are 
unfulfilled, they cannot be necessary. 

6, εὐδιάχυτον, ‘dissolvable’: cf XXX od διαχέονται. 

ἡ. ἦ (Ὧ) the variation in the MSS. points to the duplication which 
is required by the sense. Possibly δυσπόριστοι 4, adopted by von der 
Muehll, 1s a simpler correction. 

XXVII. The connexion of thought is here much less obvious, and 
as Bignone suggests (Introd., p. 22), 1 18 possible that an aphorism 
has dropped out, of which we may obtain the sense from Ep. in, ὃ 127. 
10 τῶν δ᾽ ἀναγκαίων (ἐπιθυμιῶν) αἱ μὲν πρὸς εὐδαιμονίαν εἰσὶν ἀναγκαῖαι, 
al δὲ πρὸς τὴν τοῦ σώματος ἀοχλησίαν, at δὲ πρὸς αὐτὸ τὸ ζῆν. On the 
other hand, a good Epicurean could supply the links. Some pleasures 
are unnecessary, some are necessary. of the necessary some are 
requisite for happiness, and of all those friendship is easily the most 
important. Friendship always played a large part both in the teaching 
and the practice of Epicurus. Just as love was condemned by 
Epicurean ethics as bemg an ‘unnecessary’ pleasure mvolving pain, 
so friendship is always extolled as helping to fill a want, but not 
causing excessive feeling. We may notice that there is'no altruistic 
element in it at all: it 1s only to complete one’s own pleasure that one 
acquires a friend. So Cicero (de Fin. u. 26. 82) quotes Epicurus as 
saying that ‘ fmendship cannot be divorced from pleasure and is to be 
cultivated for pleasure’s sake’. 

9. ὧν. As Cicero in translating this aphorism (de Fix. i. 20 65) says 
omnium rerum quas... Usener suggests that we should read ὅσων: 
but the rendering is natural m Latin as in English. 

παρασκευάζεται probably in a real middle sense:,‘ provides for 
itself’, ‘ acquires’. 


COMMENTARY. § § 148-149 367 


ὅλου, ‘the whole course of life’, or possibly in the technical sense of 
παντελής in XX and XXI. 

XXVIII continues the subject of friendship but is obscure, as it 
introduces an unexpected connexion of thought. It takes us right 
back to the ideas of the rerpaddpuanos. The thought that ‘death is 
nothing to us’ (II) assures us that there 1s no everlasting pain m 
a future life, and the knowledge that acute pain 1s of short duration 
(IV) gives us confidence as regards the pains of this hfe. Now this 
conviction has an importance for our view of friendship. Fnendship 
is both a requisite for happiness and also one of the best means of 
securing ἀσφάλεια ἐξ ἀνθρώπων, for our friends will protect us against 
attack. Now if they had a fear of death or of the long duration of 
pains which they might suffer as the result of their efforts on our behalf, 
they might be unwilling to risk danger on our behalf—as 1t is, having 
nothing to fear, they will not refuse The thought 1s a little far-fetched 
and almost cynical in its selfishness, but not inconsistent with the general 
Epicurean position about fnendship, and 1s an interesting instance of 
the way in which Eprcurus endeavours to link together different parts of 
his theory The aphorism must be compared with the free translation 
of itm Cic. de 215. τ. 20, 68 ‘eadem sententuia confirmavit animum, ne 
quod aut sempiternum aut diuturnum timeret malum, quae perspexit 
in hoc 1pso vitae spatio amicitiae praesidium esse firmissimum ἡ, 

12, αἰώνιον, ‘everlasting ’, in the Hellenistic sense. cf τοῦ αἰῶνος (XX) 

ἐν αὐτοῖς τοῖς ὡρισμένοις probably, as Bignone takes it, ‘in the 
hmited evils of this hfe’, as opposed to αἰώνιον δεινόν It may perhaps 
be more general ‘1n the present hmuited existence ’, 

13 ἀσφάλειαν φιλίας οἴ. Cic. (loc. cit.) pracssdium amucitrae, ‘the 
protection which 15 secured by fnendship’. The expression 1s a httle 
odd, but not mmpossible for Epicurus, and it is clear that Cicero read 
φιλίας. Usener would emend to φιλίαις, which might make the con- 
struction easier, ‘sees the protection. . perfected by means of friend- 
ship’, but the plural 15 strange. So Madvig’s ‘ vir doctus’ read φιλίᾳ, 
which 1s adopted by von der Muehil, but the alteration 1s unnecessary. 

κατεῖδε : the MSS. agree on κατεῖναι, but it 15 impossible to construe 
it, and Cicero’s perspex:f seems to make Madvig’s correction certain, 

§ 149. XXIX. After the digression on friendship Epicurus returns 
to the classification of desires which was started in XXVI. There he 
had taken ἰδὲ broad division of necessary and unnecessary desires. 
Here he makes a more elaborate division into three classes, The 
division is closely supported mn Ep. m, ὃ 127, and by Sews. Vat, xx 
(from which Bignone corrects the text) and Diog. Oen. 7 hh. Com- 
pare also Cic. de Fin. i. 13. 45. 

The meaning 18 best illustrated by the schohum on this aphorism 
(see app. cnt.): ‘Epicurus regards as natural and necessary desires 
those which put an end to pam, as for instance drink in the case 
of thirst: natural and not necessary are those which merely vary the 
pleasure but do not remove pain, as for instance expensive foods: 


368 IV, KYPIAL AOZAI 


neither natural nor necessary are for instance crowns and the setting 
up of statues ’. 

1. It is obvious that there is a lacuna in the MSS. caused by the 
repetition of φυσικαί, and the correction of Stephanus, adopted by 
Usener, would give the required sense satisfactorily. But the quotations 
of the aphorism in Sent. Vas. xx and Diog. Oen. /7. li, have enabled 
Bignone to make a slightly more elaborate correction, which may now 
however be regarded as certain. 

3- παρὰ κενὴν δόξαν : cf XV ὁ δὲ τῶν κενῶν δοξῶν (πλοῦτος) εἰς ἄπειρον 
ἐκπίπτει. He means not merely ‘ false opinion’ but, having as usual the 
image-notion of thought, ‘idle fancies , A mental picture of some object, 
which does not really contribute to pleasure, causes us to desire it. 

XXX This aphorism seems at first sight to be almost a duplicate 
of XXVI, but there are two points which distinguish it. In the first 
place, as Bignone has pointed out (Introd, p. 23), whereas XXVI 
deait with all unnecessary desires, this deals only with those that are 
physical and unnecessary, the second class in XXIX. Secondly, 
Epicurus is here dealing with a special class of desires, In XXVI he 
pointed out that all unnecessary desires are due to idle imaginings, 
which fade away when the object is found to be unobtainable or 
harmful. But here he has in mind the case where the effect 1s violent 
and prolonged: there is little doubt, I think, that he 1s thinking of the 
passion of love. Nevertheless, even here the same explanation 15 true’ 
the desire arises from a baseless mental image, and it is prolonged 
owing to the maintenance of that image in the man’s mind and not 
owing to anything in the nature of the desire, 

4. τῶν φυσικῶν ἐπιθυμιῶν. Usener suggests the insertion of μέν : it 
would be an improvement but 1s not essenual 

6. σύντονος, ‘intense’, used Of ἐπιθυμία also in Plat. Legg. 734 ἃ. 

ἡ. οὐ διαχέονται, ‘are not dissolved’. cf. XXVI εὐδιάχυτον. This 
clause adds to the notion of intensity that of prolongation, 

§ 150. From XXXI-XXXVIII follow a series of aphorisms on the 
subject of justice, and of the Epicurean philosopher’s relation to the 
laws of the community. 

XXXI lays down clearly Epicurus’ position. There is a kind of 
justice, which is in accordance with nature, that 1s, contnbutes directly 
to pleasure. To obtain pleasure we need ‘ protection from men’ : and 
this we may partly attain by making a compact between Ourselves and 
other men that if they will refrain from hurting us, we will not hurt them. 
Justice then is ‘a pledge of mutual] advantage’. The idea 1s developed 
τῷ the following aphorisms and is reproduced in Lucr. v. ro1g-1o0z0. 

tunc et amicitiem coeperunt iungere aventes 

finitimi mter se nec laedere nec violani. 
Critics have always seen in this theory of Epicurus an anticipation 
of Hobbes’ idea of the ‘social contract ’. 

1. τὸ τῆς φύσεως δίκαιον, ‘the justice which arises from nature’, 
ie. contributes to the natural end of pleasure. For the form of the 


COMMENTARY. §§ 149-150 369 


phrase cf. XXV τὸ τέλος τῆς φύσεως and more particularly XV ὁ τῆς 
φύσεως πλοῦτος. Epicurus implies of course that any kind of justice 
which does not contribute to ἀσφάλεια and so to ἀταραξία and 50 to 
pleasure is not natural and may be rejecied. 

σύμβολον τοῦ συμφέροντος, ‘a pledge of mutual advantage’: the 
compact lo act justly guarantees the advantage of both parlies. Cf. 
συνθήκας in XXXII and in XXXVI again ocupgépov γάρ τι ἦν. 
Bignone following Philippson (Arch. Δ Gesch. der Philosophie, 1910, 
pp. 291 ff.) would translate ‘symbol ’, ‘expression (Ausdruck)’, pointing 
out that Epicurus held that there was actually such a thing as natural 
justice, and that it was the ‘ outward sign’ of mutual advantage. But 
συνθήκας In XXXII and Lucretius’ phraseology seem 10 be against 
this, and the passages which Bignone adduces are not decisive for 
either version. 

XXXII 1s a deduction from the general idea of justice expounded in 
XXXI. Apart from the compact to refrain from mulual molesiation, 
justice does not exisi at all: no action, save in this sense, 1s ‘naturally’ 
just or unjust. Justice and injustice therefore do not exist for the 
animals, who from the nature of the case cannot make such a compact, 
nor (85 against the Pythagorean view, as Bignone points out) between 
men and animals, nor for such nations as either from their weakness 
are unable or from their savagery are unwilling to make tt. 

8. ὅσα τῶν ζῴων μὴ ἐδύνατο. ." that 15, all animals except men. 

4. ἄλληλα. With some hesitation I accept Gassendi’s emendation. 
The majority of the MSS. have ἀλλὰ, which Usener emends τὸ ἄλλα, 
but the variation of the other MSS and especially the indication of 
some letters lost in P point to some other word, and ἄλληλα is strongly 
demanded by the parallel of ἀλλήλους in XXXII. 

5 iv: the imperfect as Philippson suggests (Archiv fiir Gesch. der 
Phil. xvi, p. 298) looks to the time of the formation of primitive com- 
munities 

6. ἢ ph ἐβούλετο in the case of nations is of course a necessary 
addition. 

XXXIII at first sight seems to add little to what has already been 
said, except that its statement that justice does not exist in itself might 
be taken on a superficial view 10 be a contradiction of the statement in 
XXXI as to ‘natural’ justice. Its :mporlance hes, as Bignone points 
out, in its pofemical significance: 11 is direcled against those who 
regarded justice as a ‘metaphysical entity’ (καθ᾽ αὑτό) independent of 
the social relations of men, such as the P)thagoreans, Plato with his 
conception of the ‘idea’ of justice, and the Stoics who regarded the 
moral qualities as having ἃ corporeal existence. For Epicurus Justice 
like the other virtues was a συμβεβηκός, ‘an accident’, relative to the 
actions of men: see Ep. i, § 40, 68-73 and Lucr.1. 455 ff. There- 
fore, although it is a ‘ natural’ good, 11 can only be realized in social 
relations and has no existence ‘in itself’. There is no difficulty in 
text or expression. 

3:91 Aa 


370 Iv. ΚΥΡΙΑΙ AOHZAI 


9. καθ᾽ ὁπηλίκους δή wore ἀεὶ τόπους is important. There is no 
universal jusuce, but it arises naturally as a συμφέρον in different places, 
and may thus vary in its content. 

§ 151. XXXIV is the complement of the preceding proposition, and 
one of Epicurus’ most relentless logical deductione from his premises. If 
justice has no meaning apart from the contract for ἀσφάλεια, neither 
has injustice. Each man is concerned only with his own pleasure, 
and that may ofien be promoted by an act of injustice: but for the 
preservation of the contract society has appointed certain officials to 
punish acts of encroachment, and the fear that he may be caught and 
punished by them may be so disquieting to the offender as to make his 
action—purely from the point of view of his own pleasure—a bad 
thing for him. The theory 1s completely cynical and perfectly con- 
sistent with the whole Epicurean theory, but it must not be understood 
to mean that fear 13 the on/y motive for just action in Epicurus’ eyes: 
he is here stressing one side. 

2. εἰ ph λήσει after ὑποψίαν, almost dependent in sense, 

XXXV is an amplification of the latter part of XXXIV. The fear 
of detection must always be disquieting even to the most ingenious 
wrongdoer, for no man can have perfect confidence that he will not be 
detected. A thousand escapes give a man no secunty that he will not 
be taken before his death. The general idea is vouched for in many 
Epicurean references, e.g XVII ὁ δ᾽ ἄδικος πλείστης ταραχῆς γέμων, 
Clem. Alex. Strom. iv. 22 (ὕβεπεν /r. 582) πίστιν γὰρ λαβεῖν περὶ τοῦ 
λαθεῖν οὐ δύνασθαι, Lucr. in. 1014 ff. 

4. ποιοῦντα : the reading of the MSS. can well be kept, ὧν being 
constructed directly after λάθρᾳ, lit. ‘doing anything in secretion from 
what they contracted’, Usener’s alteration to κινοῦντα 15 gratuitous. 

5. πιστεύειν has of course the emphasis of the sentence: ‘he may 
escape detection, but he can’t trust to domg so’. Cf. Seneca, Ef. 
97. 13 ‘latendi etramsi felicitatem habent, fiduciam non habent’. 

6. ἐπί seems a necessary correction of the MSS. ἀπό or ὑπό, and the 
divergence points to some uncertainty. 

7. καταστροφῆς, ‘death’: cf κατέστρεφεν, XX, ἃς. μέχρι... . κατα- 
στροφῆς goes with ἄδηλον and not, as Bignone apparently takes it, with 
λήσει. You cannot tell until the moment of death whether he will 
finally escape. It 18 like Solon’s ‘ Call no man happy, until he 1s dead ’. 

XXXVI introduces a new point. Though justice 1 its definition 
and general character 1s universally the same, the advantage gained by 
this mutual compact, yet if we consider individual actions, we see that 
the same action may be just in one country, or at one time or under 
certain circumstances, and not in others: no particular action is 
universally and always just. 

The varieties of the codes of justice and its variability in character 
according to circumstance was of course a commonplace of Greek 
philosophers, and a fruitful cause of moral scepticism. Epicurus here 
states it from his own point of view. 


COMMENTARY. §§ 1g0-152 371 


8. (τὸν : a necessary addition made by Gassendi. 

9. κατὰ δὲ τὸ ἴδιον χώρας : a strange expression; ‘in reference to 
the individuality of country’. 

10. ὅσων δή wore αἰτίων: ¢.g. at different times, in relation to 
different persons, &c. 

§152. XXXVII is a considerable amplification of the idea of the 
variability of justice expressed in the last aphorism. The first clause 
insists emphatically that the supreme test of a just action 18 that it 
should contribute to ‘advantage’ m the sense m which Epicurus 
understands it of the Social Contract: that it should be just in some 
circumstances and not in others 1s of no moment. In the second 
clause he explains that mere ordinance by law does not make actions 
just: indeed, an enactment ts unjust, if it does not contribute to 
‘advantage’. Lastly, he asserts that the justice or injustice of a parti- 
cular action may change, but the action ΙΒ just so long as it 1s sincerely 
held to contnbute to ‘advantage’, even though subsequently it becomes 
unjust. The sense 1s clear, but the text in several places 1s uncertain. 

1 Td... ἐπιμαρτυρούμενον, ‘that which on examination 1s proved to 
be ...’, the regular Epicurean notion cf. XXIV, and for a fuller 
exposition Ep. i, § 50. We must not be content with a first im- 
pression that an actron is just, for our belief may be due to false 
opinion, but must try it by the test of ‘advantage’, and if it stands that, 
we can know that It is just 

2. τῶν νομισθέντων εἶναι δικαίων 15 excised by Usener as a trile for the 
aphorism which has by mistake crept into the text. But there is no 
parallel case of a title, the words will make good sense as a partitive 
genitive, they are strongly supported by XXXVIII τὰ νομισθέντα 
δίκαια, and greatly help the general idea. There are many actions 
‘customarily regarded as just’ or ‘sanctioned as just by law’ 
νόμος), but to each of these must be applied the test of ‘ advantage ’. 

he order is unusual, but it 1s difficult to see at what other point the 
genitive could be mserted. Buignone retains the words and Hicks 
imphes their retenuon in his translation. 

3. τὸ τοῦ δικαίου ἐνέχυρον. The text here is very uncertain: the 
MSS. vary between τὸ and τὸν and between εἶναι alone and χώραν 
εἶναι. Usener conjectured τὸν... χαρακτῆρα, ‘it bears the stamp of 
justice ', which would give good sense, but 1s palaeographically very 
remote. If we can suppose that the two words χώραν elvac have been 
transposed, then εἶναι χώραν is not far from ἐνέχυρον and τὸ 18 vouched 
for by F. The sense will then be ‘it has the guarantee of a just 
action’, and for the expression we may compare XL βεβαιότατον 
πίστωμα. 

4. νόμον : a certain correction of the MSS. μόνον. 

6. κἂν μεταπίπτῃ ...,‘evenif the * advantage ” in the matter of justice 
shifts’, i.e. 1t 15 at one time advantageous and so ‘just’ to do a certain 
action, at another not. 

8, πρόληψιν, ‘ general concept’ of justice: i.e. the idea which has 

aAaz2 


378 IV. KYPIAI AOZAI 


been formed in our minds by a series of apprehensions of acts which 
are just: cf. Ep. i, § 37, and notes there. We may remark the 
materialistic form of the phrase εἰς τὴν πρόληψιν ἐναρμόττῃ, as a coin 
might ‘ fit in’ to the mould from which it was mmpressed. 

9. φωναῖς κεναῖς, ‘sounds without content’, 1.6. words which have 
no real meaning, as would the word ‘just’ if apphed by mere associa- 
tion to an action which had seemed to lead to ‘advantage’: cf. Ep. 
i, § 37. 10 κενοὺς φθόγγους. 

ἀλλ᾽ εἰς τὰ is Usener’s correction for the MSS. ἀλλὰ πλεῖστα, ἃ rr 
being regarded as a dittography of ἀλλ᾽: it may be however that the 
letters really represent ἁπλῶς as Kochalsky has conjectured. 

§ 153. XXXVIII 1s an elaboration of the 1dea of the two last 
clauses of the preceding aphonsm and adds little that 1s new. Actions 
regarded as just are not just, if in practice they turn out not to be of 
advantage . actions which are 1eally just may, by a change of circum- 
stance, become unjust. Even Bignone, who is concerned to main- 
tain the genuineness of all the aphorisms and the correctness of their 
older, 1s ready to agree with Usener that this 1s a ‘duplicate’ of 
XXXVII, and suggests that 1t was either wntten as an alternative by 
Epicurus or inserted here from some other work as an illustration, 
which subsequently became incorporated τῇ the text. 

I. καινῶν, both here and in |. 4, 1s a certain restoration for the MSS. 
κενῶν : [5 κοινῶν here, and still more B’s καὶ τῶν in |. 4, strongly 
support the change. 

2. ἐναρμόττοντα : the MSS. have only ἁρμόττοντα, but evapporry in 
XXXVI makes Usener’s correction almost necessary. 

3. ἐπ᾿ αὐτῶν τῶν ἄργων, ‘in actual practice’, as opposed to the 
theoretic assumptions of the makers of laws or onginators of customs. 

δ. ἐνταῦθα δέ: a rather curious case of “ δέ in apodosi’: it has, how- 
ever, considerably better MS. authority than δή. 


τότε μὲν ἣν, . - ὕστερον δ᾽ οὐκ ἦν. In the first clause the imperfects 
geem to be real past tenses, in the second inferential as usual in the 
aphorisms. 


§ 164. XXXIX. An obscure aphorism with a very uncertain text. 
It returns from the special topic of justice to the wider subjects of 
immunity from external interference and fmendship (cf. VI, VII, 
XXVII, XXVUHI, XXXI1, and in particular XIV). The general 
idea is not very difficult: the wise man must first grapple with the 
element in external things which militates against ἀταραξία, then he 
must win over to his side (ὁμόφυλα) things which are akin to him 
Ep. in, § 124. 4 ταῖς γὰρ ἰδίαις οἰκειούμενοι διὰ παντὸς ἀρεταῖς τοὺς 
μοίους ἀποδέχονται) : others, if he cannot have with him, he must at 
any rate not allow to be ahen to him (οὐκ ἀλλόφυλά ye). But 
supposing it is impossible with some things to secure even this, then 
he must keep clear of them altogether either by refusing to have deal- 
ings with them himself (ἀνεπέμικτος), or by driving them beyond the 
borders of his life (¢€wpicarc). All through the neuter really implies 
persons: cf. I τὸ paxdpiov καὶ ἄφθαρτον. 


COMMENTARY. ἐδ 152-154 373 


For the general idea which is implied of a sort of league of 
Epicurean wise men against the world we may compare XL and Cte. 
de Fin. 1. 20.70 ‘sunt autem qu dicant foedus esse quoddam sapientium, 
ut ne minus amicos quam se ipsos diligant’. 

1. τὸ μὴ θαρροῦν. . . συστησάμενος is the reading of the MSS. 
Usener despatrs of it, and suggests in his notes that we must either 
tread συστειλάμενος (presumably ‘the man who best contracts (or 
‘narrows ’) the element of disquiet’), or τὸ μὲν θαρροῦν. . . συστησά- 
μενος (‘the man who has best organized :mmunnity ’), supposing that a 
corresponding δέ clause has dropped out. But it 15, I think, possible 
to retain the MS. text not, as Bignone takes τὸ, ‘the man who 15 best 
able to confront’ (@fronéare), but rather ‘ the man who 1s best able to 
order (or control) the element of disquiet’. For this use of συνίστασθαι 
we may compare its military use with such words as πόλεμον, κίνδυνον, 
ἐπιβολήν, &c., while the participial τὸ μὴ θαρροῦν will be hke τὸ ἀλγοῦν 
in 1V and τὸ φοβούμενον in ΧΙ]. 

2. ὁμόφυλα κατεσκευάσατο, ‘made akin to himself’, ht. ‘made mem- 
bers of his own tribe’: the metaphor ts political, though the reference 
of the aphorism 1s not political, but quite general. Hicks translates 
‘made mto one nation all the folk capable of uniting together’, an 
incredible action on the part of an Epicurean philosopher | 

4. ἀνεπίμικτος, ‘without imtercourse with’: so Bios ἀνεπίμικτος 
ὁμιλίαις, Plut. 2. 438 ¢. 

καὶ ἐξωρίσατο.. πράττειν a very doubtful and difficult clause. All 
MSS. except one give ἐξηρίσατο, artd the majority ὅσα τοῦτ᾽ ἐλυσιτέλει 
πράττειν. Usener, basing his text on ἐξηρίσατο, B’s τούτω and F's 
λυσιτελῆ, reads ἐξηρέσατο ὅσα τούτων λυσιτελῇ πράττειν, ‘he wins over 
all of them which it 1s profitable to treat thus (for ἐξηρέσατο with acc. 
in this sense cf. Dem. 1396 26 ἂν τοὺς κυρίους ἢ δώροις ἢ δι’ ἄλλης 
ἡστινοσοῦν ὁμιλίας ἐξαρέσηται). But (1) πράττειν by itself will not con- 
strue ; (2) the sense 15 not what ts wanted: thts idea has already been 
expressed in ὁμόφυλα κατεσκευάσατο, and it 1s absurd to say that he 
“wins over’ those whom he cannot even persuade to remain neutral | 
The only possible meaning for this last clause is ‘when he cannot even 
make them neutral, he either withdraws himself from them or expels 
them from his hfe’. This sense can be obtatned τῇ we follow Stephanus 
in reading éfwpicaro, which ts practically the reading of H The 
exact parallel to the meaning will then be found in XIV if we read 
there δυνάμει τινὶ ἐξοριστικῇ, and the idea ts also implied in ἐκ τῶν 
ὁμορούντων in XL. Bignone agrees in reading éfwpicaro. 

ὅσα τοῦτ᾽ ἔλυσιτέλει πράττειν is the text best supported by the MSS., 
‘all whom it was an advantage to treat thus’, τοῦτο πράττειν governing 
the acc. like εὖ ποιεῖν, &c. Bignone reads ὅσα τοῦτο λυσιτελὲς πράττειν, 
and translates ‘in so far as it 1s profitable’, but this appears to me tobe 
an impossible sense for ὅσα. 

XL. A summing up of the best kind of life in a community of true 
Epicureans. Men must first procure immunity from their neighbours : 


374 IV. KYPIAI AOBAI : 


then, as it were in a protected sphere, they may live in perfect security 
and close intimacy with their friends; and if a friend dies first, they 
may mourn their own loss, but not pity him, as they know that death 
is nothing to him, This is a fitting concluston to the Κύριαι Adgas, as 
it puts together many ideas which have previously occurred singly and 
leaves a very attractive picture of an Epicurean society such as must 
have lived in Epicurus’ own ‘ garden ’. 

The text is uncertain in some details. 

6. τὴν ϑύναμιν ἔσχον : because a certain power 18 requisite to estab- 
lish this security from neighbours: cf XIV δυνάμει τινὶ ἐξοριστικῇ 

τοῦ τό 15 a simple and inevitable correction, 

4. τῶν ὁμορούντων, ‘those on the borders of their life’. this is the 
same tdea of a circumscribed field of life as 1s rmphed in ἐξωρίσατο in 
ΧΧΧΙΧ. 

οὗτοι only F, but the οὕτω of the othe: MSS., which Usener keeps, 
can hardly be anything but a mistake. οὗτοι 15 implred in ὅσοι 

8. ἥδιστα +d: Usener’s correction for ἥδιστον τὸν B and other 
variations ; it 1s again required by the sense. 

9. ὡς πρὸς ὄλεον ; the Epicurean may lament his own loss of a 
fnend, but must not pity him: cf. Lucr. m1. 894~g911, a famous 
passage which brings out the idea very clearly. 

10 προκαταστροφήν:: cf. καταστροφῆς XXXV and κατέστρεφεν XX. 
It means surely ‘the decease of a fnend before oneself’, and not, as 
Hicks and Bignone take εἰ, ‘ before his time’, ‘ premature ’. 


FRAGMENTS 


Tue fragments here given are derived from two sources. The first 
is a collection of eighty aphorisms discovered in 1888 by C. Wotke 
ma Vatican MS. (Cod. Vat. gr. 1950) and published by him in 
Wiener Studien, 1888, pp. τοῖ ff., with a critical apparatus containing 
emendations by Usener and Hartel, and supplemented by observations 
by Usener himselfand by Gomperz The MS , which is of the fourteenth 
century, 1s a miscellany containing works of Xenophon, the Zhoughis 
of Marcus Aurehus, Epictetns’ Afanual, and other works. The present 
collection 1s headed ᾿Επικούρου Ἰ]ροσφώνησις (? Προσφωνήσεις, as 
suggested by Weil). Some of the sayings, denoted in the text by 
square brackets, came not from Epicurus but from his disciples, in 
several imstances from Metrodorus, About twenty of them were 
already known, several being quotations from the Κύριαι Δόξαι. The 
rest were probably selected from vatious works of Epicurus, not a few 
of them seeming to be quotations from private letters. Usener 
conjectured that the collection was derived from a florilegium made 
from the letters of Epicurus and his disciples which was used by 
Seneca, the sentences from the Κύριαι Δόξαι being added by the 
compiler, but Bignone ts probably right in thinking that there 1s not 
sufficient ground for any such definite statement 

The collection deals almost wholly with the moral theory of 
Epicurus and adds on many points to our knowledge of the system. 
The sentences containing new matter have been marked, as they were 
in Wotke’s publication, by an asierisk. The text is fairly sound and 
in most places can easily be corrected, but there rematn certain doubtful 
passages. 

The fragments which follow are almost all derived from the great 
collection of Zp~icurea made by Usener, who gathered from writers 
both Greek and Latin all quotations from Epicurus’ words and 
references to his doctrines. Here will only be found passages in 
Greek, which there is good reason to believe are actual quotations of 
the philosopher's words, though possibly in some cases (notably the 
extracts from Porphyrius, ad Afarcellam) slightly paraphrased. I have 
not included fragments in Latin (mainly quotations in Cicero and 
Seneca), even though they are probably often literal translations. 
These fragments have naturally not even so much coherence as those 
in the Vatican collection: they deal with all kinds of subjects, and 
were preserved for all kinds of reasons. Nearly half are extracts 
from personal letters of Epicurus to his disciples, which do not as 
a rule throw much light on his philosophy, but add greatly to the 


376 V. FRAGMENTA EPICUREA 


picture ofthe man: we understand more clearly what the ‘ Life’ means 
by his ‘unsurpassed kindness to all’ (§.9). But from the rest we can 
glean much confirmation of his doctrines, mainly on the ethical side, 
and often interesting additions to our knowledge. 

To Usener’s collection have been added a few further fragments 
from the Herculanean rolls and the inscription of Diogenes of Oenoanda, 
incorporated in his translation by Bignone. 


ΙΝ. This sentence is a brief epitome of K. Δ. iv, whch 18 quoted in 
Sentence III. It 18 couched τῷ epigrammatic form and probably 
intended to be committed to memory. 

1. σύντονον : Usener’s emendation 15 certain, σύντομον of the MS. 
being an anticipation of σύντομον immediately following. 

8. ἀβληχρόν. cf Hom. Ji. v. 337. A good instance of Epicurus’ 
use of a poetic word in a short maxim. perhaps it was easier to bear 
in mind. 

VII, This sentence again is an epigrammatic résumé of K. A. xxxv, 
which has just preceded it It occurs again in part in Plut. Confr. Epic. 
Beal. 6. τορος (77. 82) and 1s quoted in a pregnant Latin form by 
Seneca, Zp. 97. 13 ‘potest nocenti contingere ut lateat, latend: fides 
non potest ’. 

IX. Quoted by Seneca, Zp. 12. 10 (Usener_/r. 487) ‘malum est in 
necessitate vivere, sed in necessitate vivere necessitas nulla est’. Hartel 
on the ground of Seneca’s form of the maxim would read κακὸν ζῆν ἐν 
ἀνάγκῃ, but this is unnecessary, and Usener points out that Epicurus’ 
model was probably the famous lines κακὸν γυναῖκες, ἀλλ᾽ ὅμως, ὦ 
δημόται, οὐκ ἔστιν οἰκεῖν οἰκίαν ἄνευ xaxod. The epigramniatic form is 
again prominent. For the idea compare K, A xvi: the wise ΙΔ can 
80 regulate his life that he 1s little affected by circumstance, and at the 
worst he can put an end to his life. Bignone notes that this sentence 
by implication contradicts the popular notion that Epicurus forbade 
suicide, 

ΣΧ. This sentence 1s quoted with some variations as from Metro- 
dorus by Clement of Alexandria (Strom. v. 138), and is included in the 
collections of Metrodorus’ fragments (3, p. 43, Duen.: 37 Korte). 
Bignone notes that the most interesting variation is the inclusion of the 
vocative Mevéorpare, which shows that the quotation cofres from a 
private letter. For the general idea we may compare Lucretius’ 
description (i. 62 ff.) of the life and work of Epicurus. The quotation 
is from Hom. 77. i. 70. 

XI. There 1s no close parallel to this sentence, but it is obviously a 
striking contrast with the life of the Epicurean philosopher, for whom 
both rest and activity are a part of his drapagia. 

XIV. This aphonsm occurs also in the collection of Stobaeus ( F/orei. 
xvi. 28) and is quoted by Plutarch (Contr. Zptc. Beat. 27, Ὁ. 1104 8). 
It would appear to come from a private letter addressed to some one 


COMMENTARY. Fr. A. HI-XVI 377 


who was delaying to make a full study of Epicureanism. The idea, as 
Bignone notes, occurs in Hor. Od.i. 11.8 ‘carpe diem quam minimum 
credula postero’. 

2. κύριος may be supplied with certainty from Stobaeus. 

3. τὸ χαῖρον : Stobaeus has τὸν καιρόν. The variation 15 suspicious, 
but our text here may well be right, as Epicurus 1s particularly fond of 
these participial substantives and the sense 1s good. Epicurus’ corre- 
spondent is postponing the true pleasure of philosophy. 

XV. Both the text and the exact meaning of the aphorism are 
doubtful. Wotke on Usener’s suggestion read it thus: ἤθη ὥσπερ τὰ 
ἡμῶν αὐτῶν ἴδια τιμώμενα" ἄν τε χρηστὰ ἔχωμεν, καὶ ὑπὸ τῶν ἀνθρώπων 
ζηλούμεθα" ἄν τε μή, οὕτω χρῆσις καὶ τῶν πέλας, ἂν ἐπιεικεῖς ὦσιν, which 
he would presumably render, ‘ Our characters are esteemed as our own 
possessions. if they are good, then we are envied by men; if not, we 
shall find our neighbours ill-disposed as weil, if they are just’, 1.e. men 
will judge us and behave to us, as they find us. This was objected to 
by subsequent critics: the expression 1s jerky and the sentiment not 
particularly Epicurean: moreover, the participle τιμώμενα is awkward, 
and still more so Usener’s χρῆσις for the MS. χρή. 

I have followed the restoration of Bignone, based on conjectures of 
Wilamowuz and Weil. He notes that the idea is then closely parallel 
to the argument in Hor. Sa/.1. 3. ‘among friends allowances must be 
made for idiosyncrasies of character’, and points out that it bears clear 
marks of Epicurean ongin The notion that certain characteristics 
remain particular to individuals in spite of philosophic teaching is 
brought out in Lucr. πὶ. 310 ff., and the general conception of mutual 
indulgence among friends frequently recurs. 

1. τιμῶμεν of the MS. should certainly be retained: indeed τιμώμενα 
can hardly be construed unless the fragment 15 regarded as part of 
a longer sentence. 

dy re χρηστὰ. ἄν re μή gO more naturally together with Bignone’s 
punctuation than as Wotke arranged them with ἄν re μή introducing 
a new clause. 

2. ζηλώμεθα is a slight change for ζηλούμεθα, a second subjunctive 
frequently becoming corrupted in a dependent clause. Weil’s ζηλούμενα 
1s a less satisfactory correction. 

3. (rd) 18 an easy addition. 

ἐπιεικεῖς “must be taken in the sense of ‘ indulgent’, ‘ well- 
disposed’, which τ has not infrequently, e.g. Thuc. ni. 40. 3 καὶ ἡ 
ἐπιείκεια πρὸς Tous μέλλοντας ἐπιτηδείους... ἔσεσθαι . . δίδοται. 

If our friends are indulgent το us, we must behave similarly to them. 

XVI. Another rather doubtful aphorism in which I have again 
followed the reading of Bignone, which involves only two slight 
changes, βλέπων (Wotke) for βλέπτων (an obvious error) and ἀγαθῷ 
for ἀγαθῶς The reference then is to the ordinary man, and the idea 
is a commonplace of Greek philosophy after Socrates: no man 
dehberately chooses evil, but only when he 18 allured to it as good 


378 V. FRAGMENTA EPICUREA 


compared with what seems a greater evil. It is not easy to find an 
exact parallel to the idea in Epicurus, though Bignone compares 
K. A. xxv and /r. 38, but the commonplace may well have been 
introduced in a letter and selected rather injudiciously by the compiler. 

Usener quite unnecessarily altered the second part of the clause, 
ἀλλὰ δελεασθεὶς ὡς ἀγαθὸν προσὸν μεῖζον ἂν τοῦ κακοῦ ἐθηρεύθη, and 
took it to refer to the dehberate choice by the Epicurean phuosopher 
of a good which involves evil but surpasses it. This 18 good 
Epicureanism, but as Bignone points out, both δελεασθείς and ἐθηρεύθη 
are against it: to this may be added that οὐδεὶς makes the general 
reference clear. 

Crénert’s πρός τι μεῖζον for πρὸς τὸ μεῖζον 15 unnecessary : it 18 she 
evil which seems greater on each occasion. 

XVI. A characteristic aphorism on the blessings of old age, for 
which Bignone well compares the exordium of the letter to 
Menoeceus (ὃ 122). The young man is still tossed about by uncer- 
tainty and constantly changes his course, but the old man has reached 
harbour and, if he has lived well, can look back in thankful memory on 
the blessings he has received. 

2. νέος (ἂν) ἀκμῇ: the MS has νέος ἀκμῇ which Usener altered 
to évros ἀκμῆς, but there 1s an elaborate parallelism between the two 
clauses and 6 δὲ γέρων demands ὃ νέος Similarly ἐν λιμένι τῷ γήρᾳ 
suggests ἐν ἀκμῇ which gives a natural construction. Bignone, seeing 
the parallelism, wrote νέος ἀκμῇ, but the dative alone 1s unnatural, as 
is Cronert’s νέος ἀκμήν. 

πολύς: Haitel unnecessanly altered to πολλά. Not only the 
construction, but the metaphors are parallel] the young man 1s a 
wandering stream, the old man has reached harbour. πολὺς πλάζεται 
is therefore lke the familar πολὺς ῥεῖ. For πλάζεται, used in this 
sense of a stream, cf. Hom. JZ/. xvn. 750 ῥόον πεδίονδε τίθησι | πλάξων. 

5. χάριτι of the MS. 1s certainly nght and 1s used in Epicurus’ sense 
of ‘grateful recollection’: cf. £p. ad Men. § 122.7 ὅπως γηράσκων 
vedLy τοῖς ἀγαθοῖς διὰ τὴν χάριν τῶν γεγονότων and LV τῇ τῶν ἅπολ- 
λυμένων χάριτι. Hartel’s χάρακι 18 a clumsy completion of the 
metaphor which really loses the point of the aphorism. Memory plays 
a considerable part in the Epicurean conception of pleasure‘ cf. 
K. A. ix. 

XVIII. This is probably not a general maxim, but, as Usener 
thought, an extract from a personal letter to a friend, who had fallen 
m love. For the general attutude of Epicurus towards love, which he 
regarded as a violent disturbance of ἀταραξία, see Lucr. 1v. 1058 ff. 

XIX. Bignone has nghtly seen that this aphorism refers again to 
the importance of memory m the Epicurean conception of happiness. 
The philosopher, remembering the joys of the past, can renew his 
youth daily (cf. Zp. ed Aen. § 122), or rather remains continually 
young: but the man who is ever seeking new pleasures and 1s disap- 
pointed is plunged at once into the gloom Of old age. ᾿ 


COMMENTARY. Fr. A. XVI-XXIX 379 


1. τήμερον may therefore probably be retained in an emphatic and 
picturesque sense, though Usener’s αὐθημερόν would be the more 
conventional way of expressing the meaning. Gomperz’s τὴν (τὴμ) 
φρόνησιν misses the point. 

XX 1s important as it restores the right text of K. A. χχιχ see 
notes there. 

ΧΧΙ. For the idea see Zp. ad Men, §§ 127 ff. and Καὶ Δ xxvi, xxix. 

1. πεισόμεθα : the MS. has πείσομεν, which Wotke accepts and 
Bignone translates ‘we shall obey’. But this meaning is impossible 
except in the middle, and we cannot render ‘ we shall persuade’ It 
therefore seems necessary to read πεισόμεθα. 

2. τάς (τ᾽, Wotke’s addition, seems inevitable 

XXIII. The notion 15 exactly that of V2t Ep. § 120 καὶ τὴν φιλίαν 
διὰ τὰς χρείας... συνίστασθαι δὲ αὐτὴν κατὰ κοινωνίαν ἐν τοῖς ταῖς 
ἡδοναῖς ἐκπεπληρωμένοις. Compare alsoK Δ xxvit Friendship starts 
from need, but τὲ becomes a good in itself. 

1 αἱρετή, Usener, 1s a necessary correction of ἀρετή 

XXIV This aphorism 1s interesting as being the only one τῇ the 
collection which is not strictly ethical. For the doctrine of the εἴδωλα 
see Lp ad Hat. ὃδ 46, 49, and for the simulacra as the origin of 
dreams Lucr. iv 962 ff For Epicurus’ opposition to divination see 
Vit. Ep. § 135. 

XXV. This aphonsm appears in Seneca, 2p. 4 10 (Usener 477) 
‘magnae diviuae sunt lege naturae composita paupertas ’, and 1s echoed 
in Lucr. vy. rsrg—1119: 


quod si quis vera vitam ratione gubernet, 
divitiae grandes homini sunt vivere parce 
aequo animo; neque enim est umquam pelunia parvi. 


Compare also K. A. xv and /r 45 (Usener 202). 

XXVI. This 1s probably an extract from a private letter and refers 
to the philosopher's own works. 

XXVII. An ingenious claim for the supenorty of philosophy over 
other pursuits, which brings out its close connexion with the Epicurean 
ideal of pleasure. Bignone compares Diog. Oen 7, xxvi for the 
general idea of pleasures, in which the action and enjoyment are 
simultaneous. 

3 ἅμα :" μετά (Νὴ must be a mere mistake, a repetition οἵ μετά 
above. 

XXVIII. Friendship is not always acquired in the same way it 18 
sometimes fast sometimes slow in the making, but we must msk much 
for it. A charactenstic saying, to which we have no close parallel. 
At the end the MS. has παρακινδυνεῦσαι χάριν χάριν φιλίας, which 
von der Muehil retains- ‘ We must msk acts of kindness for the sake 
of fnendship ’- but the repetition 1s probably a mistake. 

XXIX. Epicurus’ claim to onginalhty and his scorn for popular 
acclamation, 


380 ν. FRAGMENTA EPICUREA 


I. φυσιολογῶν χρησμωδεῖν is an ingenious correction of Usener’s for 
an obvious corruption and may be taken as certamn. For the idea of 
the philosopher as an oracle compare Lucr. v. 110 ff.: 


qua prius aggrediar quam de re fundere fata 
sanctius et multo certa ratione magis quam 
Pythia quae tmpode a Phoebi lauroque profatur. 


Bignone also refers to Cicero’s ironical allusion in WV. D. i. 66 ‘haec 
ego nunc physicorum oracula fundo’ Von der Muehll adopts Crénert’s 
correction φυσιολόγῳ, which I do not understand: 18 it to be taken 
with παρρησίᾳ ὃ 

XXX This fragment is attributed to Metrodorus by Stobaeus, 
Flor. xvi. 20. As quoted by him in a fuller form, with the words ὡς 
βιωσόμενοι μετὰ τὸ λεγόμενον ζῆν after τὰ πρὸς τὸν βίον, it clearly refers 
to the preparations for a contmued hife after death, and Bignone there- 
fore believes that it 1s directed against the Orphics, In that case τὸ 
τῆς γενέσεως φάρμακον will be an ironic reference to the draught of the 
waters of Lethe taken by souls before they enter this hfe. As the 
fragment stands here it might equally well be taken to mean that men 
act as though this life would continue for ever. 

XXXII. This aphonsm is attributed to Epicurus by the Pans 
Gnomologium (Usener, /7. 339), but to Metrodorus by Stobaeus, 
Filortl. exvin. 33. Usener in hts notes on the Vatican collection 18 
inclined to give it to Metrodorus, as does Bignone on the ground of 
1ts metaphorical expression, For the Epicurean idea of ἀσφάλεια see 
K. Δ. vn, xiii, xiv. 

XXXII. The text of this sentence is corrupted in the MS. 
Usener’s ἀγαθὸν μέγα for ἀγαθῶν μετά may be accepted, and similarly 
in all probability his correction σεβασμός for σεβαστός. Bignone, 
comparing /r. 31, where Epicurus, addressing Colotes who had fallen 
down and worshipped him, says as σεβομένῳ γάρ σοι τὰ τότε ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν 
λεγόμενα, would read σεβαστὸς λόγος, but the parallel 1s not very close, 
and the present quotation is clearly more of a general aphorism. 
Usener would also change τῶν σεβομένων to τῷ σεβομένῳ, but though 
the dative would be more usual, the alteration is not imperative. The 
idea is interesting, that the veneration of a sage is really a blessing to 
his worshippers rather than to himself. 

XXXII. Protection from hunger, thirst, and cold are the necessary 
ee bao desires, and a man who satisfies these may have perfect 

appiness equal to that of the gods. The first part of the aphorism 
is quoted again by Porphynus (/7. 44) and may be compared with 
Lucr. ii. 16 ff. The second part reappears in several forms, the closest 
of which is that in Aelian, Var. Hist, iv. 13 (Usener, /r. 602) ὃ αὐτὸς 
ἔλεγεν ἑτοίμως ἔχειν καὶ τῷ Adi ὑπὲρ εὐδαιμονίας διαγωνίζεσθαι μᾶξαν 
ἔχων καὶ ὕδωρ. From this quotation we may with certainty restore Διί 
to the text. We may also compare the conclusion of the letter to 
Menoeceus (ὃ 135). 


COMMENTARY. Fr. A. XXIX-XL 381 


XXXIV. A subtle observation on fnendship to which there is no 
exact parallel, though the idea in K A. xxvu, that friendship provides 
ἀσφάλεια comes near to it. I cannot think of any very satisfactory 
way of retaining in English the double meaning of χρείαν... χρείας ; 
Usener ingemously translates ‘ Nicht, dass wir sie brauchen, brauchen 
wir von den Freunden’, 

XXXV. An ingenious argument for Epicurean contentment. We 
may compare Zp. ad Men § 127. 5 μνημονεντέον δὲ ὡς τὸ μέλλον οὔτε 
ἡμέτερον οὔτε πάντως οὐχ ἡμέτερον, ἵνα μήτε πάντως προσμένωμεν ὡς 
ἐσόμενον μήτε ἀπελπίζωμεν ὡς πάντως οὐχ ἐσόμενον Seneca, Lp. 15. 10 
also suggests 1t, and Bignone traces the same idea in Hor. Saé. τὶ. 6, 
zat, Compare also Lucretius’ phrase of the discontented man (in, 
957) ‘semper aves quod abest, praesentza temnis’. 

2. τῶν εὐκταίων, ‘among the things to be prayed for’, not of course 
that Epicurus believed in prayer for blessings: the word 15 conven- 
tional, and to Epicurus would mean ‘to be hoped for’. 

XXXVI. This fragment clearly cannot be attributed to Epicurus 
himself. Usener would assign it to Hermarchus, his successor as 
head of the school. 

2. αὐταρκεΐας : Bignone notices the two sides of tlus word ‘internal 
contentment’ arising from self-sufficiency, and also ‘self-control ’, 
‘independence of desires’ It 1s perhaps sigmificant that it 1s the 
word chosen by the Stoics to express their moral ideal: Epicurus fully 
satisfied the Stoic standard, 

XXXVI. An Epicurean paradox [ΙΓ pleasuie 1s the end of hfe, 
then the natural inclination to it 1s a source of strength 

XXXVIIL Though Epicurus did not forbid suicide (cf/r. IX), he had 
some contempt for τ cf Seneca, Zp. 24. 23 (Usener 498) and V4. 
£p ὃ 119° also Lucr. im. 79 ff. 

I μικρός 1g probably nght, and Usener’s emendation to oixrpds 
really weakens the sense Bignone suggests that 1f any correction 1s 
needed, we should read μικρόψυχος. 

XXXIX. Another subtie observation on friendship which we may 
compare with XXIII, XXVIII, and XXXIV. The expression 1s a 
httle obscure 

2. συνάπτων sc. THY χρείαν τῇ φιλίᾳ. To Epicurus (cf. XXIV) 
χρεία 1S an essential element in friendship. 

καπηλεύει TH χάριτι τὴν ἀμοιβήν, ‘takes the retuin of favours in the 
place of kindly feeling’. 

3. Thy περὶ τοῦ μέλλοντος εὐελπιστίαν : what 1s described in KXXIV 
as ἡ πίστις ἡ περὶ τῆς χρείας. 

XL. A clever argument of Epicurus, who stoutly maintamed free 
will, against Democritus, who held that necessity was supreme, 
Bignone compares a fragment of the repi φύσεως pubhshed by Gomperz 
in Wiener Studien, 1879, where it 1s argued that you cannot persuade 
any one else of error, unless free will is admitted: for if necessity 
is supreme, you cannot be sure that you have always the necessity of 


382 V. FRAGMENTA EPICUREA 


reasoning right and your opponent of reasoning wrongly. We may 
compare the parallel argument as to scepticism in Lucr. iv. 469 f. : 
denique nil sciti si quis putat, 1d quoque nescit 
an sciri possir, quoniam ni scire fatetur. 

2. Usener quite arbitrarily added the word γέλων to the end of this 
aphorism, deriving it from γελᾶν at rhe beginning of the next sentence 
(XL). Ir completely destroys the argumenr and 1s required where it 
stands. 

ΧΙ. An interesting injunction: philosophy is not to be divorced 
from ordinary life but associated with it at all mmes. 

1. γελᾶν was arbitrarily excluded by Usener and attached (as γέλων) 
to the previous aphorism. But 1 is clearly in place here and Bignone 
finds a parallel for it in the fragments of Philodemus (περὶ Ἐπικούρου 1x), 
ἐν μέρει δὲ θέλειν εὐωχεῖσθαι αὐτοὺς γελανῶς (cf. Riv. ὧν Frl. 1915, 
pp. 538 ἢ). 

So too Plut. de Defectu Oraculorum, 19 (Usener, 2,7. 394) εἰ δὲ χρὴ 
γελᾶν ἐν φιλοσοφίᾳ. Cronert’s μελετᾶν 1s therefore unnecessary. 

3. φωνάς : ch. Ap. ad Hal. ὃ 36. τι διὰ βραχεῶν φωνῶν and XXXII 
σαρκὸς φωνή. 

XLII. A rather obscure fragment, which 11 is impossible ΤῸ interpret 
with certainty without ils context. τὸ μέγιστον ἀγαθόν must be 
‘ pleasure’, and rhe general sense will then be thar pleasure 1s enjoyed 
at the moment when it 1s brought into being: the two processes are 
simultaneous. Bignone believes 11 to be an argument againsr the 
Platome doctrine that pleasure 1s ἃ γένεσις NOt an οὐσία, and compares 
it with K. A. 1ii, where Epicurus denies thar pleasure and pain can 
coexist. But it seems difficult to take the present fragment ag 
a replesentation of the Epicurean point of view, as 11 can hardly be 
reconciled with the importance attached to the pleasures of memory, 
and it looks more like a statement of rhe Cyrenaic view of the 
μονόχρονος ἡδονή But compare XXVII, which suggests that the 
reference here may be to the pleasure of philosophic study. 

2. ἀπολαύσεως, Usener, seems a certain correction of ἀπολύσεως. 

XLII. An imteresting aphorism on avarice, which Greek thought 
ranked among sensual vices. 

2. μετὰ τοῦ δικαίου : Bignone translates ‘even in a just man’, bur 
it must surely be neuter. 

XLIV. A continuation of the same subject. The texr has got 
corrupted: Usener’s ἐπίσταται is certain and συγκαθεὶς may be nght 
in the sense of ‘having accommodated himself to’, but possibly we 
should prefer Gomperz’s correction συγκλεισθείς. For the meaning of 
αὐτάρκεια see note on XXXVI. Usener is inclined to refer this maxim 
to the period when Athens was besieged hy Demetrius in 294 Β.0. 

XLV. An interesting description of what Epicurus takes to be the 
physical effect of the study of natural philosophy. Note that the con- 
trast is not between pride and humility, but between an outward 
Dboastfulness and an innér confidence. 


COMMENTARY. Fr. A. XL-LII 383 


τ᾿ φωνῆς can, I think, stand by itself without Usener’s addition of 
κενῆς. 

8. σοβαρούφ: I agree with Bignone that this can be retained: the 
philosopher has a pride and disdain, but it 1s not expressed in idle 
vaunting. 

- XLVI. A rather commonplace sentence which Usener thinks comes 
from a private letter: von der Muehll reads ἐκδιώκομεν but without 
critical comment: the subjunctive 1s more natural. 

XLVII The first part of this fragment was already known as 
Metrodorus’ (Duen 26- Korte 49); for the second Brgnone compares 
Diog, Oen. yr. n, col. 2. 

2. σήν: it 1s hardly necessary to insert the article, as Usener 
suggested. 

3: περιστάσει: ἃ favoumte Epicurean word for ‘surroundings’, 
‘environment ’, used sometimes 1n a concrete, sometimes 1n an abstract 
sense, 

4. προσπτύσαντες : a violent expression, which Usener notes was 
often used by Metrodorus, but not often by Epicuius himself (see 
however /rs. 37 and 79). 

τοῖς... περιπλαττομένοις Bignone has, I think, shown that the 
MS. text may be kept, περιπλάττεσθαι being used of shell-fish holding 
on to rocks; Usener emended it unnecessarily to περιπλεκομένοις. 

6. παιῶνος ἃ bnilhant emendation of Usener’s for the MS. πλείονος. 
The metaphor here may be, as Usener suggests, from the comic 
chorus leaving the stage with a τήνελλα καλλίνικος at the end of the 
play . cf. Aristoph, Ach, 1232. 

XLVIII. Another rather commonplace aphorism, which in the topic 
of life and death has a connexion with that which precedes. 

1. πειρᾶσθαι the regular infinitive in such aphorisms, δεῖ or χρή 
being ‘ supphed’. 

τὴν ὑστέραν τῆς προτέρας may well be retained, as Bignone has 
shown, if ὁδόν be understood. Usener preferred to change to τὴν 
ὑστεραίαν (sc. ἡμέραν) τῆς προτεραίας. 

2. ἐν ὁδῷ: the MS. has ἐν ὃ ὁδῷ, which 1s probably a mere 
dittography~ Bignone corrects to ἐν προόδῳ, which 1s more hkely to be 
nght than Cronert’s ἐν εὐόδῳ. 

4. ὁμαλῶς, ‘equably ’, ‘ contentedly ’. 

LI 1s clearly an extract fiom a private letter to a disciple who had 
asked for advice. The form of the answer, stating the conditons of 
permission and then denying the possibility of their fulfilment, shows 
a certamnn touch of humour uncommon in Epicurus. There is a 
certain number of small corruptions in the MS. text which the 
editors have put nght: ἔθει for ἔθη might possibly be retained with 
von der Muehll. The general aphonsm at the end recurs in V2, 
Epic. § 118. το. 

LIL A more than usually picturesque and metaphorical aphorism : 
the chain of Epicurean friends is imagined as extending round the 


at Vv. FRAGMENTA EPICUREA 


world, every man exhorting his acquaintances to embrace the true 
life of happiness. 

1. ἡ φιλία : Bignone defends the MS. text, and for the personifica- 
tion compares the address to Venus in Lucr. i #4. The expression 
is certainly unusual, but not extravagant, Of the corrections Hartel’s 
ἡ φιλοσοφία might possibly be nght, but Usener’s Ἡλίου σφαῖρα is 
palaeographically improbable and gives a picture which seems strangely 
unlike Epicurus. 

“ περιχορεύει : with an idea of joyful motion, not merely ‘ runs round’, 
as Bignone translates it. 

2. ἐπὶ τὸν μακαρισμόν, ‘to the felicitations given to one who enjoys 
true happiness’: the Epicurean sage 1s felicitated both by Epicureans 
and by others who see his happiness. Bignone notes the frequency 
with which Epicurus and his disciples congratulated one another on 
their lives, and quotes in support a saying about Epr:curus from Dionys. 
Episc. Περὶ φύσεως in Eus. Pracp. Lv, xiv. 27 8 οὕτω πάντας ἐπὶ τὴν τοῦ 
μακαρισμοῦ τούτου μετουσίαν ἐξομοιωθησομένους ἐκείνους τοῖς θεοῖς wapa- 
καλεῖ. The expression is again strange, and Weil may be right in 
conjecturing ἐπὶ τὸν μακάριον βίον which 18 simpler. 

1.111. A straightforward argument against envy. 

LIV. This aphorism was already contained in vanous /lorilegia 
(σ. 53). 

LV. 2. χάριτι, ‘grateful recollection’: cf. Zp. ad Men. δ 122 and 
Vat. Sent. xvi above. 

LVI-LVII are given in the MS as one sentence, though imperfect. 
Wotke separates the two parts, supposing ὃ Bios. . . ἔσται to refer to 
some different subject, and adopting Usener’s completion of the first 
half στρεβλούμενος (αὐτὸς } ὁρῶν στρεβλούμενον) τὸν φίλον. Bignone 
however, following Thomas, thmks that the two parts ought to be 
related: he notes that after the publication of the Vatican Sentences, 
the first part of the maxim was found in a gnomologium ina MS, at 
Heidelberg, the last words running ἢ στρεβλουμένου τοῦ φίλον. Adopt- 
ing this he would then proceed (kai ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ τεθνήξεται: εἰ γὰρ 
προήσεταρ) τὸν φίλον, ὃ Bios αὐτοῦ was κτλ. But there are, I think, 
two objections to this restoration: (a) it neglects μὲν at the beginning 
of the sentence, which should be followed by a contrasted δὲ clause ; 
(δ) it neglects the technical Epicurean sense of ἀπιστία: frendship 
gives ἃ πίστις (cf. Seat. Vat. xxxiv, xxxix), a trust that’ your friend 
will serve jou if need comes, and what destroys this πίστις is an 
injury done to you by your frend, which shows that you can no longer 
trust him. I should therefore accept Usener’s restoration of the first 
half (the text of the Heidelberg anthology 1s probably a mere variation), 
and if one is to conjecture the words lost in the second half, would 
propose εἰ δὲ ἀδικήσει αὐτὸν ὃ φίλος: ‘The wise man will be as 
distressed for his friend’s suffering, as for his own, but if his friend 
proves unfaithful, then his whole life will be confounded.’ 

- 1. στρεβλούμενος : for the idea cf. ἔπ, Zp. § 118, 3. 


COMMENTARY. Fr. A. LII-LXII 385 


LVIII. For ἐγκύκλια in the sense of ‘affairs’, ‘routine’, cf. Ep. ad 
Pyth. §85, 4 τοῖς εἰς ἀσχολίας Baburépas τῶν ἐγκυκλίων τινὸς ἐμπεπλε- 
ioe and for the Epicurean notion of the importance of the withdrawal 

rom politics compare also K. A. vii and V2/, Ep. § 1109. 

LIX. A straightforward attack on greed. Usener’s insertion of the 
article before γαστρὸς is hardly necessary. 

LX. This fragment is quoted by Seneca, Zp. 22. 13 ‘nemo non ita 
exit e vita, tamquam modo intraverit’. There is considerable doubt 
about its interpretation and reference. Seneca interprets it in a moral 
sense, ‘a man leaves life no better than he entered it’, and comments 
‘falsum est, peiores mommur quam nascimur’. Usener compares 
Lucer. iti. 972, 973: 

respice item quam nil ad nos anteacta vetustas 

temporis aeterni fuerit, quam nascimur ante, 
and takes it to mean that our condition after death will be as it was 
before birth, i.e. we shall feel and know nothing—but it is very difficult 
to extract this from the Greek, Bignone takes it to refer to the 
accompaniments of this life, ‘We brought nothing into this world and 
It 15 Certain that we shall take nothing out’. If one looks simply 
at the Greek text it surely refers to the brevity of life and the little 
that any man accomplishes in it: ‘every man at his death is like a 
new-born child’ ; his life 1s gone as τὶ were in a few hours. 

LXI. Another fragment where both text and interpretation are 
difficult. Bignone has mghtly seen that it must be an extract (as 18 
shown by καὶ) from a longer passage on friendship: Epicurus has 
probably been speaking of the advantages of friendship in mutual 
service and protecuon, and has imstanced first the friendship of true 
Epicureans, which he regards as the highest. Then he passes to 
the friendship of members of a family, where kinship forms a natural 
basis for such mutual confidence. 

1. ὄψις is the actual bodily presence of those who live together: 
Usener’s σύναψις 1s quite unnecessary. 

2. 4... ποιουμένη: I would retain the nominative of the MS., 
regarding εἰς which follows ἡ as a dittography of εἰς before πολλήν" 
it 1s the actual ὄψις which 1s a spur to mutual confidence, just as in 
XVIIL he said that πρόσοψις was the great incttement to love. The 
editors wish to refer this clause to συγγενείας and agree in changing 
ποιουμένη ἰο“ποιουμένης : Wotke accepted Hartel’s καί for ἡ εἷς, and 
Bignone would read κεὶς ἀεί---ἃ strange exaggeration. But I think 
the nominative 1s right and makes better sense. 

εἰς τοῦτο is thén the general purpese of mutual confidence, which 18 
the subject of the whole section from which this sentence 1s taken. 
The saying 1s nteresung as showing Epicurus’ behef in famuly hfe, 

LXII. Again the text 1s difficult and uncertain, but the general 
meammng is clear. It 1s never of any use for children to be angry with 
parents who are angry with them if the parents’ anger 18 justified, 
then retaltation 1s futile, if 1t 1s irrational, resentment only ingreases their 
passion, but ‘a soft answer turneth away wrath’. 

sera Bb 


386 V. FRAGMENTA EPICUREA 


4. γελοῖον πάνυ τὸ προσεκκαίειν τὴν ἀλογίαν θυμοκατοχοῦντα : I have 
with hesitation adopted the text put together by Bignone from sug- 
gestions by Weil and Crénert. I feel considerable doubt about προσεκ- 
xaiew in the sense of ‘increasing’ the irrational passion, but θυμοκατο- 
xotvra appears to be supported by the usage of θυμοκάτοχον of a magic 
medicine in passages quoted by Crénert (Rhem. Mus. \xi, p. 421), 
Dict Abrax. 118. 17 θυμοκάτοχον πρὸς βασιλεῖς καὶ μεγιστᾶνας, Pap. 
Lond, 1. 114. 941 θυμοκάτοχον καὶ ὑποτακτικόν. The MS. has πᾶν τὸ 
πρὸς ἔκκλησιν τὴν ἀλογίαν θυμωκατοχοῦντα, for which Usener read 
σιγᾶν τὸ πρὸς ἔκκλισιν τὴν ἀλογίαν (ἄγον) θυμῷ κατασχόντα, a large 
correction, which does not give satisfactory sense. 

6. αὐγνωμονοῦντας V- it 15 unnatural to take this with τρόπους, and 
it 1s probably better to read the singular εὐγνωμονοῦντα to correspond 
with θυμοκατοχοῦντα. 

LXIII 18 interesting as showing that Epicurus did not wish to push 
his idea of the simple life to excess: the ascetic will suffer bodily 
distress like the glutton and so fail to attain ἀπονία. The text of the 
first few words 1s corrupt but has been set nght by Usener. Bignone 
compares Hor, Sav. I. i. 102 ff. Won der Muehll reads ἐν λεπτότητι 
καθαριότης, but I do not understand the meaning of λεπτότης here. 

LXIV. The true Epicurean is glad to receive praise (cf. LII) but he 
must not seek for it. his care is for his own bodily and spiritual welfare. 

LXV 18 clearly part of an argument against the current practice of 
prayer. The gods cannot ever answer it, and often a man could get 
for himself what he prays for. 

LXVI, Usener is probably mght in holding that this fragment cannot 
refer to sympathy with living friends (θρηνοῦντες is against that), but to 
feeling for friends who are dead The true Epicurean will not idly 
lament their death, but meditate on their lives. Compare K. A. xl οὐκ 
ὠδύραντο ὡς πρὸς ἔλεον τὴν τοῦ τελευτήσαντος προκαταστροφήν 

LXVII Great possessions cannot be obtained by the true Epicurean, 
and if he has them by chance he can distribute them, and so win the 
good-feeling of friends which is the true wealth. 

1. ἐλεύθερος. Usener suggests ἐλευθέριος but ἐλεύθερος 18 better. 
The philosopher’s life is ‘free’ because it 1s not encumbered by the 
necessity of courting others. 

ἃ. (μήν must be added. 

3. συνεχεῖ δαψιλείᾳ can hardly stand alone and σὺν is a more 
probable insertion than ἐν. πάντα κέκτηται can well stand by itself in 
the sense of Bignone’s amplification wd(vra τὰ cupddpowra κέκτηται. 

LXVIII. In the form in which it stands here, the aphorism appears 
to mean that a fastidious man is never satisfied. But the sense 1s 
a little feeble, and as it is quoted by Aelan, Var. Hust. iv. 13 (/r. 69) 
ᾧ ὀλίγον οὐχ ἱκανόν, ἀλλὰ τούτῳ ye οὐδὲν ἱκανόν, ‘the man who 1s not 
satisfied with little, 1s satisfied with nothing’, it is far more pointed. 
We should however perhaps hardly be justified in reading here ᾧ ὀλίγον 


οὐχ ἱκανόν. 


COMMENTARY. Fr. A. LXII-LXXX 387 


LXIX. The point is truly Epicurean - it is not bodily hunger which 
makes one desire dainty foods, but a greed of the mind which imagines 
and then desires new vaneties. After the satisfaction of the need 
there can be only variety in pleasure. Adyvos with the gen. is quoted 
from the fragments of Menander (Jncer? i. 10 λίχνος τοῦ κεκρυμμένου). 

LXX. A common Epicurean theme which recurs in K. A. xxxiv, 
xxxv and Sent. Vat. vir. 

LXXI Another straightforward aphorism, which suggests the 
Epicurean ‘hedonistic calculus’. In the presence of every desire we 
must ask what amount of pleasure and what amount of pain does 
it involve and decide accordingly. Compaie Zp. ad Afen § 129. 5 ff. 

LXXMHI. A rather interestung statement of the value of experience 
in the case of physical health. 

LXXIV. A paradox of dialectic 

LXXV. This is of couise a reference to the story of Solon’s saying 
to Croesus (Hdt.1 30 ff). The quotation ts the end of an 1ambic Ime 
and 1s attributed to Solon in Schohon on Dio Chrys. On 72. 13 and 
on Lucian, tv, p 137. To the Epicurean on the other hand the 
memory of past pleasures was one of the chief sources of present 
happiness cf XVII, XIX. 

LXXVI. There 1s some doubt as to the authorship of this fragment, 
which evidently comes from a petsonal letter. Usener attributes it to 
Epicurus and thinks thal it 1s addressed to one of the earher disciples, 
who was older than Epicurus himself posnbly to Leonteus of 
Lampsacus. Bignone comparing it with a fragment of Metrodorus 
(Korte 41, Plut adv. Col, 31), which is somewhat simular in tone, 
prefers to attribute it to him. 

Bignone in his translation does not sufficiently bring out διέγνωκας 

. ὁποῖόν ἐστι... καὶ οἷον : this must imply a distinction between two 
methods of philosopmzing, exoteric and esoteric = Epicurus’ philosophy 
was to be proclaimed to the world (cf. XXIX, 1.11), and the contrast here 
must be with some other sect who kept their philosophy to themselves. 

LXXVII may be compared with XLIV and LXVII. αὐτάρκεια 
must be taken in the same wide sense as in XLI1V which cannot be 
fully translated in English. 

LXXVIII is perhaps the most remarkable of all the exaltations of 
friendship in Epicurus, It is called immortal because it gives a man 
happiness equivalent to that of the gods: compare Zp. ad Alen. § 135. 7 
ζήσεις δὲ ὡς θεὸς ἐν ἀνθρώποις. οὐθὲν yap ἔοικε θνητῷ ξῴῳ ζῶν ἄνθρωπος 
ἐν ἀθανάτοις ἀγαθοῖς 

LXXIX. With this saymmg we may compare what 18 said of the 
nature of the gods in K. Δ. ι τὸ μακάριον καὶ ἄφθαρτον οὔτε αὐτὸ πράγ- 
ματα ἔχει οὔτε ἄλλῳ παρέχει. 

LXXX. A well-spent youth will have put ἃ man on the safe path for 
the rest of his hfe. 

The opening of the sentence is blurred in the MS.: vop der Muehll 
conjectures yervaiy. 

Bb2 


388 Vv. FRAGMENTA EPICUREA 


3. οἰστρωδεῖς : lit. ‘ gad-fly like’, a typically picturesque word. 
LXXXL The first part of the sentence is alluded to in Porph. 
de Abstin, i. 51 (Usener, /r. 470). 
1. οὐδὲ τὴν need not be altered with Usener to οὐδέ rw’. 
,3: περίβλεψις : cf. K. Δ. vii ἔνδοξοι καὶ περίβλεπτοί τινες ἐβουλήθησαν 


4. τῶν παρὰ τὰς ἀδιορίστους αἰτίας : lit, ‘things connected with 
unlimited causes’, i.e. causes of unlimited desire, such as there is for 
wealth, honour, power, &c. Bignone takes it to mean ‘causes not 
proportional to the natural end’, but this seems less natural. 


OTHER FRAGMENTS 


1 (Usener 2). This sentence is quoted in the Ζ of Epicurus by 
Diog. Laert. (x. 136) in a passage where he 1s contrasting the 
Epicurean idea of pleasure as the absence of pain with that of the 
Cyrenaics. See notes there. 

ἃ (Usener 18). The fragment is quoted by Plutarch in a work 
(adv. Colofen), which is a violent attack on Epicureanism, He inter- 
prets the reply to mean, ‘ Yes, I will act so, but I do not wish to 
admit it’, and Cicero, in a passage (de 415. u. 9. 28) which seems to 
allude to this book, says that Epicurus ‘sometimes gets into great 
difficulties, and when the general conscience of mankind 1s removed, 
seems ready to do anything, however disgraceful, for pleasure’s sake ’. 
But it is obvious from its occurrence in a book of ‘Problems’ (or we 
might say ‘Casuistry’) that Epicurus regarded this as an open 
question, and the reply given here is therefore to be taken quite 
seriously. Ses#, Va/. li suggests that conflict with the laws is likely 
to mean ultimately conflict with Epicurean principles. At the same 
time Κ. Δ. xxxvii and fragments 81, 83 suggest that the laws were 
made for man and not man for the laws, and there might have been 
cases in which Epicurus would have answered this question affirma- 
tively. ‘ 

8 (Usener 27). This sentence is again quoted in the Life of 
L£picurus (δ 135) in a passage where he is summing up various 
characteristics of the Epicurean philosophy. The expression is not 
very easy: see notes there. 

4 (Usener 29). Epicurus held that the atoms had no colour, but 
that colours were produced in things by the arrangements and move- 
ments of the component atoms (cf Zp. ad Has. §§ 54, 55, Luer. in. 
730 ff.). One of his arguments is here recorded, that even in our 
experience things have no colour in the dark (cf. Lucr. 1i. 746, 747). 


COMMENTARY. Ἐκ. B. 1-6 389 


δ, 6, '7 (Usener 58, 59, 60). These three passages, all cited from 
Plutarch’s attack on Colotes, must be extracts from a discussion in the 
Sympostum on the results of differences of atomic arrangement in 
compounds, illustrated by the effects of wine on the human body. 
Sometimes it 1s felt to be coo], sometimes it produces heat. How can 
this be? Not according to Epicurus, because wine is absolutely ether 
hot or cold, but because it contains in itself particles which may be 
productive of heat and others which may be productve of cold. If 
then the ‘heat-particles’ come together, the effect 1s warming, if the 
cold, then cooling. But the atomic conformation of the body which 
it enters 1s also of importance: for heat or cold particles in it may 
come and join those in the wine and so increase the one effect or the 
other. The whole explanation 1s, in fact, closely parallel to that of 
the differences of taste which the same thing will have for different 
persons given by Lucretus in iv. 633 ff. 

The general sense is clear, but there are difficulties of text and of 
the detailed interpretation of the passages. 

δ This is part of a dialogue between Polyaenus, Epicurus, and 
others, and it 1s quoted piecemea] by Plutarch. The first question is 
definitely assigned to Polyaenus, the second remark it seems most 
natural to take as an interruption by one of the other characters, and 
the third (quoted as occurring ‘a little later ’) will be part of Epicurus’ 
reply. 

“ἢ ὑπέλαβέ τις οὐ. . . ἀποφαίνεσθαι : we may with Bignone retain 
the MS. text and interpret ‘some one interrupted saying that it did 
mot appear’. the ‘some one’ will be a supporter of Epicurus, 
Usener, wishing to assign this remark to Epicurus himself, would read 
ὑπέλαβε Tis οὐ. . . ἀποφαίνεται, but this is not only unnecessary but 
does not really give good sense. 

4. τοῦδε δέ τινος. I take this genitive, like τῆς δὲ τοιαύτης φύσεως κτλ. 
in /r. 6, to be objective after θερμαντικός, ‘ capable of warming a body of 
a certain kind’, 1.e. that you must not only have the right amount of 
wine, but the mght atomic structure in the body of the drinker to assist 
the warming process as descnbed 1n_ /7.6 Buignone in all these places 
takes the genitive apparently as descriptive, ‘a certain quantity of wine 
at a certain temperature’. This seems to me very doubtful Greek, 
and moreover it neglects the essential point of the conformation of the 
body of the’ recipient. 

8. 2. τῆς δὲ τοιαύτης . . . θερμαντικόν, ‘capable of warming a certain 
body which is in a certain disposition’, i.e. a body containing the 
right kind of particles in the nght arrangement~ see note on_//F. δ. 
Bignone again takes it as descriptive, ‘a certain quantity of wine at a 
certain temperature and arranged in a specific manner’. 

4. φύσεις, here, ‘atoms’: it was Democritus’ technical term, and 
Epicurus himself spoke of af ἄτομοι φύσεις. : ᾿ 

5. «εἰ, δέον ye,: this 15 the MS. text, and I think it may just be 
retained ; ‘in the compound there are certain particle# out of which 


390 V. FRAGMENTA EPICUREA 


cold might be produced, if, when occasion requires, united with other 
particles they could form a structure which would cause cold’. The 
particles are always there, and it requires only the combination with 
other particles in the body to form the mght atomic structure to 
produce the effect of cold. But the sense of δέον ye 1s rather strained, 
and we should perhaps accept Bignone’s suggestion εἰ (eis) δέον ye 
ἑτέραις παραζυγεῖσαι, ‘if appropriately united with other particles’. 
The same sense would be obtained by Wyttenbach’s εἰς δέον re, but 
Usener’s alteration ἢ af ye is both violent and unsatisfactory. 

7 is more straightforward and reinforces the general argument with 
‘the statement that wime 1s frequently drunk without any perceptible 
effect of heat or cold, which shows that it is neither hot nor cold 
absolutely. 

8 (Usener 62) occurs in V2¢. Hp. ὃ 118, and recurs at the end 
of Sent, Κα! \i with the subsutution of ἀφροδίσια for συνουσίη In 
Vit. Zp. it is quoted as a common saying of the Epicureans, but Plut 
Quaest, Conviv. ii. 6. 1 makes the attribution to the Symposrum 
certain. 

9 is not included in Usener’s collection, but was included by 
Bignone from the Herculanean Rolls on rhetoric. The text 1s corrupt 
in the papyrus and was first put in order by Gomperz: I have noted 
the points in which Sudhaus, from whom I here take the text 
(Philodem Voll. Rhet. Suppl, p. 50), differs from him The frag- 
ment 1s clearly a double version of a saying and may, though not with 
certainty, be attributed to Epicurus himself. It 1s of course very 
ironical in tone and 1s fully m accordance with Epicurus’ usual con- 
tempt for rhetoric. 

10 (Usener 67). This fragment is quoted as from the περὶ τέλους 
by Athenaeus, and also, with abbreviations at the end, in Vit. Ep. ὃ 6 
(see notes there). It was maliciously used against Epicurus by his 
detractors, but is in fact an extremely emphatic statement that bodily 
pleasure must be regarded as just as essential for complete happiness 
as mental pleasure. It should, however, be read in conjunction with 
such passages as 2. ad Men. ὃ τῶν, where Epicurus says that all 
pleasures are good, but not all aiperai. 

11 (Usener 68). An interesting fragment for Epicurus’ idea of 
bodily pleasure. ἀπονία becomes a permanent stable condition of 
body and this produces χαρά, which is a strong and posttive feeling 
of pleasure. 

12 (Usener 70). A clear statement of the doctrine that pleasure 1s 
the supreme test: beauty and virtue have no validity in themselves. 
Compare /r. 79. 

18 (Usener 75). This of course is the fundamental doctrine ot 
Epicurean physics and may be compared with £p. ad Ha?. ὃ 39 and 
Lucr. Bk. 1. 

14 (Usener 76). A slight variation of the preceding statement, but 
there 1s no reason to doubt that they both occurred in the first book of 


COMMENTARY. Fr. B. 6-14 gt 


the περὶ φύσεως. τόπος was one of Epicurus’ regular terms, for ‘empty 
space’: cf. Lucr. i. 426 ‘locus ac spatium quod inane vocamus ’, 

15 (Usener 81). This fragment is quoted as from the eleventh 
book of the wept φύσεως by the schohast on Ep. ad Pyth. ὃ οἵ (see 
note there). It 1s clearly an argument for the Epicurean view that 
the size of the sun is as we see it It must be compared with 
Lucr. v. 564 ff., where it 1s argued that terrestrial hghts become con- 
fused in outline before they appear to diminish in size. Much more 
so would this happen with the sun whose great distance from the 
earth would be very likely to cause such blurring. But the outline of 
the sun 1s not blurred: therefore we must suppose that his size is not 
diminished. Bignone in his note on Zp ad Pyth, § 91, has, I think, 
shown clearly that this 1s the meaning and that there is no reason for 
any alteration in the text. 


Other fragments of the περὶ φύσεως have been found in the 
Herculanean Rolls (see Λαο Chapters in the History of Greek 
Literature, Powell and Barber, 1921, p. 40, note by J. L. Stocks). 
Some of these have been published with conjectural restorations, but 
the text 1s so fragmentary and uncertain and the restorations at pre- 
segt so far from satisfactory that I have not mcluded any in the present 
collection. It may, however, be well to give some account of the extent 
of these fragments and their contents with references to the sources 
where they may be found. 

A. Fragments defimtely assigned to certain Books : 

1. Book 77. Eleven fragments from V7! vol. τι, edited by Rosini 
and Orelh (Zpicur: Fragmenta, Veipzg, 1818). These deal with 
the theory of sense-perception by means of effluences, and in particular 
with the εἴδωλα which are the cause of vision. Col. in gives an indi- 
cation of Eprcurus’ theory of the atomic construction of the εἴδωλα, 
and col vil appears to point out that the εἴδωλον preserves the same 
shape and the same space intervals as the omginal, but that its content 
(βάθος) 18 not solid (σῶμα) but void (κενόν). Further references to 
these fragments will be found 1n an article by Gomperz (‘ Neue Bruch- 
stiicke Epikurs’, Si/sungsberichte der karts. Akad der Wissenschaften, 
Ixxxu, 1876, p. 87), which contains a summary of the rept φύσεως 
fragments then known. 

2. Book® XJ. Thirteen fragments from VA’ vol. ii, edited by 
Rosim and Orelli(op cit.); corrections and additions from the Oxford 
copies of cols. ix to xn, published by Gomperz (Zesschrift fur 
die Ocsterrachischen Gymnasien, xvi, 1867, pp. 207 ff.). see also 
Siulzungsberichte der kas. Akad. \xxxu, p. 81). This book deals with 
cosmogony and is largely occupied with a discussion of the earth’s 
position at rest in the middle of the κόσμος. The idea expounded by 
Lucretius (v. 534 ff.) is elaborated, and the earth 1s said to owe Its 
freedom from motion to 1ts ition in the centre, so that there is 
equal pressure of air on it from all sides. There 1s ‘incidentally a 


392 ΟὃΘῸ7Ὸ᾽  Υ. FRAGMENTA EPICUREA 


diacussion of the means by which we can obtain information as to 
τὰ lp hte {An alternative version of these fragments (except 2, 3, 
and 4) was published by Mancini (4s del Congresso Internazionale dt 
sctensze stortche, vol. ii, 1905, pp. 249 ff.) based on a MS. in the 
University Library of Messina (Fondo Monastico 37). This MS. is 
a transcript made by one Foti, who assisted Rosim: in the decipher- 
ing of the Herculanean Rolls, and was apparently taken from an 
earlier facsimile than that from which VA was published : its readings 
may therefore have occasional value, though Foti’s own restorations 
are for the most part very poor. } 

3. Book XIV. Ten fragments published by Gomperz (Zettschr. fur 
Oest. Gymn., loc. cit., pp. 241-213), which are part of a polemic on 
the question of the original φύσις, and are directed, as Gomperz 
thinks, against the theory of Plato in the Zimaeus. 

4. Book XV. A fragment of the title of the book giving an indication 
of the date of its writing. Discussed by Gomperz (ibid., pp. 669-670), 

5. Book XXVIII. Thirteen fragments from the Apographa 
Oxoniensta, each composed of two halves taken from different 
parts of the reproduction, the pages of the roll having been torn 
in half and copied separately: pubhshed by Cosattini (Hermes, xxix, 
1894, pp. 1-15). These represent the latter portion of the bapk 
and look lke the records of a conversation, Metrodorus being 
frequently addressed by name. They deal with the principles of the 
Canonice, and in particular with the truth of αἴσθησις and the impor- 
tance of the use of words in their primary sense (see Zp. ad “1. 
§ 37). Cosattini thinks that they show a greater interest in questions 
of logic than is usually attributed to Epicurus. 

B. Unassigned Fragments: 

1. On the Will. Six fragments and one fairly continuous passage 
of some length published by Gomperz (Si/sungsberichte der hats. Akad. 
Str Wiss. \xxxii, 1876, pp. 92 to 95, and Wrener Studien, i. 1879-1880, 
pp. 27-31). The fragments appear to discuss from an atomic point 
of view the reaction of the mind to the εἴδωλα coming from without, 
and tend in Gomperz’s view, to show that Epicurus, though the oppo- 
nent of fatalism, was not opposed to determinism. These fragments, 
if they could be satisfactorily restored, would throw a great deal of 
light on Epicurus’ psychology, and go illuminate his moral theory. 

a. On generahon. Seven fragments published by Cosatttni (Avesta 
at Filologia, xx, 1892, pp. 510-516) and attributed by him to Epicurus 
himself on the ground that no other Epicurean work περὶ φύσεως 
is known in the Herculanean collection and the writing resembles 
that of the fragments of Book II. The passage appears to deal with 
the process of generation from the atomic point of view. 

3. On error, A short fragment from the conclusion of a book 
published by Gomperz (Si/sungsd. hats. Akad , ibid., p. 96) dealing with 
the origin of erroneous ideas in the mind. 

4. On the ‘myth’ of αἱ future hfe. A few scraps published by 


COMMENTARY. Fr. B. 14-33 393 


Gomperz (ibid., pp. 96, 97), which appear to be part of a polemic 
against the popular religious ideas of punishment after death (cf. Zp. 
ad Men. §& 124 ff.). 


16 (Usener 92). These definitions may well be included among 
the genuine fragments, though Usener does not admit them. They 
are entirely in agreement with Epicurean doctrine and are expressed 
in the language of Epicurus. 

17 (Usener 93). This quotation occurs in the Vif £p.§ 7, 11, and 1s 
directed against Nausiphanes, a pupt] of Democritus, from whom 
Epicurus undoubtedly learned much, though he heaped scorn and 
abuse on him. For the text and interpretation see notes there. 

18 (Usener 97). This and the following two fragments (19) come 
from the Herculanean Rolls. Their restoration is naturally very 
tentative. , 

r. 8: se. that pleasure has a limit: cf. K, A. τη. 

1@ (Usener 99) These two much corrupted fragments from 
Philodemus’ περὶ εὐσεβείας must have been quoted by him for the sake 
of the pious expression θεῶν εἵλεων ὄτων This 18 strictly inconsis- 
tent with Epicurus’ view of the gods, but it is notable that both he and 
his disciples occasionally used such conventional phrases: cf Lucr. 
ii. 434, Vv 1156. 

20 (Usener 105). The fragment is quoted by Theo as an example 
of a bad order of words, and is placed by Usener among ‘ Spunous 
Letters’. But there seems no particular reason to doubt it. It is 
almost impossible to guess the context. 

I. οἶσθ᾽ ἅπερ ἡμῖν is a brilliant restoration of Crénert’s (Ahem. Mus , 
1906, p. 422) for the mamfest corruption of the MSS.: Usener’s 
ἔστιν ἃ πρὶν μέν is much less probable. 

2. yeyéynrat’ Cronert’s obvious correction for γένηται. 

Ὧι (Usener 113). This fragment, which is about Nausiphanes, 18 
quoted in Vis. ΖΡ. § 8, 2.: see notes there. Bignone has, I think, 
clearly shown that the MS text διδάσκαλον may be retained without 
alteration or addition. 

ΔΆ (Usener 114). These quotations are again about Nausiphanes 
and are given ky Sextus Empincus. There is litue doubt that Epicurus 
did derive some of his knowledge of atomism from Nausiphanes, but 
he is alway# very violent in proclaiming his independence. 

1. Bapuorévous is given by Plutarch (contr. Ep. Beat. 2, p. 1086 e) 
among a lst of abusive epithets which Epicurus hked to burl at other 
philosophers. 

2. τοῦ πλεύμονος, ‘the Mollusc’: Sextus explains that Epicurus 
gave him this nickname, ὡς ἀναίσθητον. 

428 (Usener 116). Epicurus 1s here clearly contrasting the motive 
of his moral philosophy with that of others. They invite men to a 
laborious round of virtues, which may or may not profit them, he 
invites them to continuous pleasure. 


394 vV. FRAGMENTA EPICUREA 


24 (Usener 117}. The fragment is preserved in Athenaeus, but the 
name Apelles is restored from a reference in Plutarch. Athenaeus 
quotes it in connexion with Epicurus’ claim to have been free him- 
self from all traditional education, and notes his congratulations to 
disciples in the same condition : cf 75. 33. 

1, αἰκίας is an ingenious emendation of Bignone for the meaning- 
less αἰτίας of the MSS. It would be quite in Epicurus’ manner to 
refer to education on traditional lines as ‘contamination’. It is there- 
fore better in sense, as well as palaeographically, than Wachsmuth’s 
παιδείας which 18 accepted by Usener. 

δ (Usener125). Another fragment from ΚΔ Zp. ὃ 5. 6, addressed 
to Themista, Leonteus’ wife. It shows Epicurus in a playful mood, 

26 (Usener 130). A considerable number of fragments survive 
addressed to Idomeneus, who was one of the leading disciples. This 
fragment refers to the voluntary contribuuons (cf /rs. 40, 41) made 
by the disciples for the support of their master The phraseology 
used is religious and playful in tone, but the Epicureans began quite 
early to give the founder a form of religious veneration. 

27 (Usener 131). This invocation, hke /r 20, was quoted by Theo 
as an example of bad prose rhythm, the fault here bemg that the 
rhythm is too close to that of verse. Rohde in his copy of Usener, 
now in my possession, has noted that if the word κινήματα be removed, 
the remainder is a rough iambic verse. 

as (Usener 135) 18 rightly referred to by Seneca (ZY. 21.7) asa 
nobilis sententia. 

I. χρημάτων is the reading of the MSS, and should be retained as 
a partitive genitive. One MS. corrects to χρήματα. Seneca translates 
non pecuntae adictendum, from which Meineke restored χρήμασι, but 
there seems no authonity for the construction 

a. τῆς. . . ἐπιθυμίας : probably specifically ‘the desire for money ’, 
and not ‘desires’ in general, as Bignone takes it. Seneca has 
cupiditat: detrahendum est. 

20 (Usener 1368 8, p. 345). This is quoted by Stobaeus with the 
heading ᾿Απολλώνιος Εϊδομένῃ. It 1s certainly Epicurean in expression 
and Usener is probably mght in recognizing Ἰδομενεῖ in Εἰδομένῃ. 
᾿Απολλώνιος May, as he suggests, come from the next heading in 
Stobaeus, ᾿Απολλώνιος τοῖς γνωρίμοις, or, aS Hense thinks, it may be 
that Stobaeus took the saying from Apollomus quoting Epicurus. 

I. τὴν αὐτάρκειαν must be taken here in its narrower sense of the 
control of desires. 

2. θαρρῶμεν, ‘may be content’, and so free from any disturbing 
desires for luxurious food. 

80 (Usener 138). A dying letter to Idomeneus quoted in Vii. Ep. 
§ 22. 2 (see notes there). An almost identical letter to Hermarchus 1s 
translated by Cicero, de Fin. ιἷ. 30. 96. It is probable that Epicurus 
sent shght variations of the letter to different disciples. 

δι (Usener 140). The tone of this fragment 1s probably ironical: 


COMMENTARY. Fr. B. 24-42 395 


Epicurus wished to discourage Colotes’ extravagant signs of devotion 
and so paid them back to him and addressed him in the excessive 
reverence of the second sentence. 

2. ἄἀφυσιολόγητον, ‘not to be accounted for by scientific method’, 
‘unaccountable ’, obviously a semi-ironical expression: cf. the use of 
the word in/r 44. 

3: πάσης... ἐπιλήψεως, after ἐπιθύμημα, γίνεσθαι after εἰθισμένης 

4. τινῶν the MSS. have τιμῶν, for - which, Wyttenbach conieciuied 
ae but the nearer correction τινῶν, though a little feeble, is probably 
safer. 

82 (Usener 143). Another playful extract quoted in the Vi/ Ep. ὃ 5. 3. 

88 (Usener 163). For the text see note on Vit. EP. § 6 6. 

84 (Usener 165) Quoted in Vt Ep. ὃ 5 8 as a phrase which 
brought censure on Epicurus for his excessive flattery of a young 
man 

85 (Usener 176). A charmmg letter to a child written on one of 
Epicurus’ visits to see his disciples in Asia Minor, where he had lived 
and taught before coming to Athens- see }7/. Zp. ὃ το. 

86 (Usener 177). Another portion of a Setter obtained from the 
works of Philodemus in the Heiculanean Rolls. It may be compared 
with /r. 30. 

87 (Usener 181) A clear statement of the argument for the 
‘sitnple life’. it satisfies bodily needs and does not involve consequent 
pains, as luxury does. 

2. προσπτύω : a violent word, for which see its use by Metrodorus in 
Sent. Vat. xivu, and by Epicurus again in /F. 79. 

38. This fragment, which is not in Usener’s collection, was 
recovered from the Herculanean papyri by Cronert (Ahem. Afus. 1x, 
p. 426). Itis hke in character to 30 and 36. 

89 (Usener 182), Another fragment on the simple life from Vit Ep. 
§ 11 6: see note there on κυθριδίου. 

40 (Usener 183). A reference to the contribuuons made by the 
disciples for the support of Epicurus: see /r 26 

1. ϑαιμονίως seems a safer correction of the MS δαίως than Cobet’s 
Sayidws* it 18 also more in accord with the phraseology of the 
fragment. ς 

2. οὐρανομηκῆ.. an intentionally poetic word. 

41 (Usentr 184). Another reference to the σύνταξις, which shows 
that 11 was a well-organized subscription of a substantial amount levied 
on all disciples. It would presumably be required for the upkeep of 
the house and gardens in Athens and for the sustenance of Epicurus 
and the disciples who lived there. The opening of the fragment 
looks as though some official of the community was authorized to 
assess the amount. 

42 (Usener 185) Another fragment from Philodemus said to be in 
reference to a boy who had brought the philosopher a, present of 
a sheep (the preceding words in the papyrus should surely be read καὶ 


396 Vv. FRAGMENTA EPICUREA 


δάντος πράβατον παιδίου τινὸς ἐν] πλεϊκἸγῶι τοί t}, and not as they 
were edited, παιδίῳ τινί): Tricdae wath him La Ave Bignone 
for some reason omits this fragment. 

τ, ἀντίδοσιν : the papyrus has αἰνοῦσαν, out of which Usener admits 
that it is practically impossible to extract any sense. ἀντίδοσιν would 
give what is required and is not palaeographically a very large 
alteration. - 

43 (Usener 187). Epicurus was always contemptuous of the ‘man 
in the street’, and did not wish or expect to be understood by him. 
Compare Sen?. Vat. xxix. 

44 (Usener 200). The quotation is not assigned by Porphyrius to 
any author, but apart from its language the coincidence of part of it 
with Sent Vat. xxxii makes it certain that this is Epicurus. Bignone 
enters a caution about Porphynus’ quotations, and in particular points 
out that it is not easy to determine where the quotation stops and 
Porphyrius’ comment begins. But the whole of this extract may 
safely be assigned to Epicurus. 

1. ἀφυσιολόγητον : οἷ. fr. 31. 

45 (Usener 202) We may compare Sew/. Vat. xxv, and for the 
general idea K A xviit. 

4. ἐστιν (οὐ πλοῦτος ἀλλὰ πενία). In the MS. of Porphyrius the frag- 
ment ends with ἐστιν, the next sentence (_/*. 68) beginning with the 
words of σπάνιον. Usener wrote ἐστι πενία, thinking presumably that 
οὐ should be excluded and that πενία had dropped out owing to con- 
fusion with σπάνιον. Bignone, who retains of, suspects the larger 
omission due to the reputed ov. 

46 (Usener 203). Fears arise because we forget the laws of 
nature, desires because we forget the natural limits of pleasure. 

48 (Usener 207) is very close in expression to Lucr. u. 34-36: 


nec calidae citius decedunt corpore febres, 
textilibus si in picturis ostroque rubenti 
iacteris, quam si in plebe1a veste cubandum est, 


1. κατακειμένῃ and ἐχούσῃ are changed by Usener to the masculine, 
presumably on the ground that Porphyrius, citing the quotation in his 
address to Marcella, would have adapted the participles to the 
feminine. But Epicurus’ correspondent may also have been a woman 
and nothing is gained by the change. χ 

49 (Usener 212). A more than usually fragmentary extract from a 
letter to a disciple who had written to the master on the relation of 
phenomena to the unseen (atoms and space). See Zp. ad Hat. § 51 
and elsewhere. The text given is that of Crénert (Ahem. Afus. Ἰχὶ, 
Ῥ. 425), who re-examined the papyrus. 

1, Before φέρων, ἐν μνήμῃ or the like must have preceded. 

50 (Usener 213) Bignone quotes interesting passages from 
Plutarch (contr. Ep. Beat. 1097 €) and from Metrodorus showing that 
Epicurus and his disciples recognized a peculiar joy in the tears of 


COMMENTARY. Fr. B. 43-59 397 


grief shed for a dead fmend. Memory is here, as always, an important 
actor in Epicurean happiness. 

51 (Usener 214) sounds a little cynical in expression, but Epicurus 
was probably thinking of the formation of habit. 

6&2 (Usener 215) is a half-hearted precept to do good to an enemy, 
but remarkable even as it stands. 

δά (Usener 221) is another unassigned quotation in Porphyrws, 
Stobaeus refers it to Pythagoras, but its likeness to Sen/. Vat, hv and 
other Epicurean sentiments seems to justify Usener’s attribution to 
Epicurus. 

65 (Usener 266). It is not certain that these are the actual words 
of Epicurus, but the tdea of revolving cycles or periods of time 18 
certainly his: cf. Luer. si. 856 ff. 

656 (Usener 356). This fragment deals with the gods to whom 
Epicurus himself attributed speech and supposed them to converse 
with one another, hke Epicurean sages, the nearest approach on earth 
to the gods. Philodemus goes on to argue that the gods speak in 
Greek, or in some language like it, for in no other language 1s philo- 
Sophy discussed. 

87 (Usener 387). An unusually interesting fragnient preserved by 
Philodemus about religious observances. Though Epicurus denied 
the imterference of the gods in the direction of the world, he was yet 
scrupulous in the performance of religious functions (cf, Vis Ep. § το. 5) 
and here recommends such piety to his disciples. He held no doubt 
that such performance of ceremonial did not involve any belief in the 
action of the gods in the world, but it 1s also clear from Luer. vi. 68 © 
that he conceived that the ssmudacra of the gods entering the mind of 
the worshipper could communicate something of the divine ἀταραξία : 
prayer for the Epicurean becomes communion. 

1. καὶ καλῶς 1s perhaps a closer emendation of the defective xa... 
adw than Gomperzs καὶ τἄλλα. 

3. περὶ τῶν ἀρίστων καὶ σεμνοτάτων : Sc. τῶν θεῶν. 

4. ἔτι 82. . . δόξης : the meaning is here obscure. It may be that 
Epicureans should be careful] not to incur any charge of impiety. 

5. φυσικῶς Liv: a few words after this can be made out, but sense 
can hardly be made of them. 

658 (Usener 388). A rather cynical argument for the general 
Epicurean viéw that the gods do not listen to prayer. 

59 (Usener 409). A relentless and startling exposition of the 
doctrine of pleasure which caused great scandal in antiquity. Com- 
pare the saying attributed to Metrodorus (7. νι, p. 47, Duen.: /7. 39, 
Korte) περὶ γαστέρα γάρ, ὦ φυσιολόγε Τιμόκρατες, τὸ ἀγαθὸν καὶ καλόν. 
If the mind 18 to have ἀταραξία in order to pursue philosophy, the first 
condition is ἀπονία of the body, and for that the first need is ἀπονία 
= ἡδονή of the stomach. It is a fearless piece of logic which was 
falsely interpreted as though Epicurus had made the pleasure of the 
stomach the first object of life. 


398 Vv. FRAGMENTA EPICUREA 


2. τὰ περιττά, ‘the things over and above’, mere ἀταραξία, those 
‘ variations ’ of mental pleasure which may be summed up as‘ culture’. 

60 (Usener 422). An emphatic statement of the Epicurean doc- 
trine of pleasure: the removal of pain constitutes pleasure, and if it 
has been accomplished no further pleasure is needed. ‘The satisfac- 
tion of the natural desire for the removal of pain does not incite to 
evil-doing, but only the striving for the fulfilment of unnatural desires. 

4. dv αἰσθήσει καθεστῶτες. sc. as long as we are alive and awake. 

3. ἡ τῆς φύσεως ἡδονὴ 1s the MS. text and may be kept. Bignone 
objects that the contrast between ἡδονή and ὄρεξις 1s inappropmiaie, but 
the contrast is between the natural pleasure fulfilled and the unnatural 
desires unfulfilled. Bignone himself would read ῥοπὴ in the sense of 
‘impulse’: this seems to me unnecessary, but is better than Crénert’s 
φωνὴ or Usener’s ἔνδεια. 

4. ἔξωθεν, presumably ‘ outside’ the person who conceives it: ‘puts 
ἀδικία into acuon’, 

61 (Usener 423). As pleasure 1s the removal of pain, so the height 
of pleasure is the removal of a great pain. If we grasp and hold to 
this, we need not engage τὴ Peripatetic subtleties. 

I. παρ᾽ αὐτὸ it seems impossible to retain, but none of the sugges- 
tions are satisfactory. Reiske’s παρ᾽ αὑτοῦ, ‘fiom the person himself’, 
15 odd Greek and poor sense, Usener’s πάραντα = παραντίκα 15 not 
very good sense and introduces an odd word. Bignone would read 
κατ᾽ αὐτὸ, ‘in itself’, and translates ‘the simple liberation from great 
pain’, supporting it by Plutarch’s words in the context τὴν τἀγαθοῦ 
φύσιν ἐξ αὑτῆς τῆς φυγῆς τοῦ κακοῦ, but the expression is still strange 

3. ἐπιβάλῃ, ‘ grasps it in mind’, a reference to the Epicurean con- 
ception of ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίᾶς. The aorist seems essential as against 
the MS. ἐπιβάλλῃ. 

περιπατῇ : Bignone is undoubtedly right in seeing an ironical allu- 
sion to the ‘ Peripatetics’, whose Anstotelian doctrine of pleasure 
involved subtle analysis. 

62 (Usener 442). This 1s good Epicurean doctrine (see Zp. ad Men. 
§ 129, 130), but, as Usener admits, we cannot be certain that these 
are actually Epicurus’ words. 

68 (Usener 445). As usual with these citations from Porphyrius 
we cannot feel certain of the actual words. Porphyriug goes on to 
explain that it 1s the mind which is to blame because of its vain 
desires and hopes : compare Diog. Oen./%. i. 

64 (Usener 447). For this Epicurean commonplace see K.A. iv 
and Sent. Var iv. 

65 (Usener 448). Anecho of the first part of the preceding fragment. 

66 (Usener 457). For the idea see Seneca, Ζῇ. 8. 7 ‘ philosophiae 
servias oportet, ut tibi contingat vera libertas’: the expression here is, 
as Usener points out, not quite like that of Epicurus himself 

67 (Usener 469). So in a less picturesque manner, Zp. ad Men. 
δ 130. 9 τὸ μὲν φυσικὸν πᾶν εὐπόριστόν ἐστι, τὸ δὲ κενὸν δυσπόριστον. 


COMMENTARY. Fr. B. 59-78 399 


68 (Usener 471). An elaboration of a commonplace dictum of 
Epicurus. The fool is poor in respect of ἀταραξία, the true end of 
life, and rich in fancies which lead to extravagant desires. 

1. οὐ σπάνιον : Usener in connexion with his emendation of the 
previous sentence (see /r. 45) omitted οὐ, but it 15 not easy to see how 
he then interpreted the remark. 

πένητα seems a necessary addition, as is νόσου in 1, 5. 

69 (Usener 473). A strange variant of this aphorism occurs in 
Sent. Vat. Ixvui. 

70 (Usener 476). αὐτάρκεια is here used in the narrower sense of 
self-control’, ‘control of desires’. almost, as Bignone translates it, 
‘ frugality ᾿ς 

71 (Usener 478). This looks more lke a long-winded paraphrase 
of some brief saying of Epicurus than an exact quotation of his words: 
cf, Sent. Vas Ixiii. 

72 (Usener 479). Riches involve a greater complication of life and 
therefore greater ταραχή. 

I, τὴν ἀπαλλαγὴν, ‘the escape’ which they desire . Usener’s change 
to rw’ 1s unnecessary. 

78 (Usener 480) A strange aphorism which again may be a hittle 
distorted in Porphyrius’ quotation, 

I. θηριώδους 15 Nauck’s emendation for the MS. θρηνώδους : one 
might hesitate to accept τὲ but for a close parallel in Philod. VAY? vn. 
179, /7. XX1V ἀπὸ yap ἀνημ[έρου καὶ] θηριώδους ἐρ[γασίας] κτλ. Epicurus 
is probably comparing the rapacious acquisition of riches with the 
ravening of a wild beast. 

74 (Usener 485) Fear and desire are the two great obstacles to 
ἀταραξία, which is the necessary prelude to philosophical study. 

75 (Usener 486). On the same theme again. It is not the poor 
man who is without luxuries who suffers, but the rich man tormented 
by his desires. 

1. τούτων 1s explained by τὸ τῶν πολλῶν ἀγαθόν, which has pre- 
ceded. 

πόνος is a little strange in view of φέρειν... πόνον, and Usener may 
be mght in suggesting κακὸν. 

76 (Usener 488). Fluctuation between extremes of feeling 1s the 
reverse of ἀταραξία. 

77 (Usener 489). For the Epicurean attitude to fortune see 
especially Zp. αα Men. § 134 and K.A. xvi. The text 15 uncertain 
in places, but in the latter half can be corrected from a quotation in 
the Byzantine gnomologion. 

4. παρατετάχθαι: cf. Vit. Ep. § 120. 3 τύχῃ τε ἀντιτάξεσθαι. 

78 (Usener 490). Usener aptly quotes Hor. 2%. 1. 4. 13: 


omnem crede diem tibi diluxisse supremum: 
grata superveniet quae non sperabitur hora. « 


For the play on ἥκιστα. .. ἥδιστα cf, Ep. ad Men. § 130. 8. 


400 Vv. FRAGMENTA EPICUREA 


79 (Usener 512). Epicurus had but little place in his system for 
esthetic appreciation, as such: cf. /7. 12. τὸ καλὸν has probably also 
a moral sense in reference e.g. to Plato’s use of it. 

1. wpoomrio: cf. δε). Vai. xlvii, fr. 37. 

80 (Usener 519). Virtue was not in Epicurus’ view of value in 
itself, but only in so far as it produced ἀταραξία. Compare K. A. xvii 
ὁ δίκαιος ἀταρακτότατος. 

81 (Usener 530). The wise man, as is explained in_/r. 83, will act 
justly without the compulsion of law, but the law protects him against 
those who have not such wisdom. 

82 (Usener 532). For the ideas compare K.A.xxxiv and xxxv; 
€8p. XXXV 2,117. οὐκ ἔστι τὸν λάθρᾳ τι ποιοῦντα... πιστεύειν ὅτι λήσει : 
also Sent. Vai, vii. Bignone omits this fragment, possibly because 
Plutarch introduces it with φασί, suggesting a general Epicurean 
source, but the words sound hke Epicurus himself. 

88 (Usener 533). The fragment is not specifically quoted as from 
Epicurus, but as it comes among a number of others definitely 
assigned to him, Usener 1s probably justified in his attribution. 
Epicurus may have in mind the story of Gyges and its use by Plato in 
Rep. ii. 359 d. 

1 τὸ τοῦ γένους τέλος is certainly a rather strange expression for 
Epicurus, but Bignone supports it by τὸ συγγενικὸν τέλος, Philod. 
Voll. Rhet. it. 14.15. It is of course equivalent to the more usual 
τὸ τῆς φύσεως τέλος, i.e. ἡδονὴ. 

84 (Usener 537). An interesting fragment, as it shows the basis 
on which, according to Epicurus, the ‘social contract’ was built. 
The man who causes fear in others may incite them to revenge, and 
so is full of fear himself. Compare K. A. vi, xxxi, Lucr. v. rorg, 
to20. Usener notes that the saying appears in a positive form in 
Maximus Abb guomol 9, p. 174 6 πολλοῖς φοβερὸς ὧν πολλοὺς φοβεῖται. 

85 (Usener 548). For the general idea see K. A. vii. 

86 (Usener 551). This is the famous Epicurean motto against 
which Plutarch wrote the treatise from which it is quoted. The idea 
18 that of the preceding fragment, that it 1s in the life which abstains 
from public affairs that ἀταραξία can most easily be attamed. Usener 
notes echoes of the idea in Hor. #. 1.17. 10 ‘ nec vixit,male qui natus 
moriensque fefellit’ and in Ovid, Z7zs¢, isi. 4. 25 ‘crede mihi, bene qui 
latuit, bene vixit’. 

87 (Usener 554). A curious fragment which may not contain 
Epicurus’ own words. The general sense of the passage 1s familiar. 

2. ἐξ ἀρχῆς : because, as is seen from K. A. vu, men originally seek 
for high position as a means of securing ἀσφάλεια and only later come 
to regard it as an end in itself. 


LIFE OF EPICURUS 


Tue ‘Life of Epicurus’ is in fact the tenth book of Diogenes 
Laertius’ Aisstory of the Philosophers, m which are embodied the three 
Letlers and the Man Principles. It 1s, as we possess it, a curious 
medley of statements concerning Epicurus’ life and his disciples, of 
attacks made upon him and the replies which might be given to them, 
of summanes of his doctrines, and of discussions of his differences 
with other schools, and especially with the Cyrenaics. And not only 
are these sections thrown together anyhow, but within the individual 
sections there is confusion, facts and opinions being foisted in at 
inappropriate places and consequently dislocating the sequence. The 
most conspicuous example occurs in §§ 120, 121, but there are others 
in §§ 6, το, 22 (see notes on these passages), and the exceedingly 
disjomted style which pervades the whole work can only be accounted 
for by the supposition of constant additions and interruptions, 

The recent work of scholars, and in particular of Diels, on the 
Greek Doxographers, has made us familar with the way in which 
works of this kind were constructed. They were in fact ‘ traditional 
books’: round the text would grow a collection of marginal notes, 
and each successive editor, incorporating almost at haphazard what he 
found, and adding perhaps further material of his own, would then 
publish hs own ‘edition’, Into this succession came Diogenes 
Laertius, who proceeded on the usual plan, or rather, engaged copyists 
to do it for him, for, as Usener warns us (p. xxn), ne seripsit guidem 
sed scribenda hbrarus commisit. Round the velustius tllud opus, guod 
Laeriit hbrarius exemplar fut (p. xxxv), itself a conglomeration, there 
had gathered marginal incrustations: sometimes, as in §§ 120, 121, 
we can peel these off: more often we are left with an inextricable 
confusion. The book 1s τῷ fact not an intellhgent compulation, but a 
growth, . 

It might reasonably be asked, What in that case ts τι8 value? When 
it has grown from so many sources, unknown to us, whose validity 
cannot now be estimated, what importance can be attached to its 
statements? The answer seems to be that it is of value, if used with 
discretion. In the first place there 1s no reason to doubt the main 
statements about Epicurus’ life. with the exception of one or two 
minor discrepancies as to dates, they tally well. In the second, the 
‘Life’ embodies a very considerable number of quotatfons from 
Epicurus’ writings, which, couched as they are in language very similar 


3073 cc 


402 VI. VITA EPICURI 


to that of the Zesters, we may fairly accept: they are in many 
instances confirmed from other sources. Thirdly, the disjointed 
expositions of his doctrines, which again agree well on the whole 
with the Lesiers, may be regarded as giving us an occasional addition 
to our knowledge. Lastly, though this is less important, the long 
section on the abuse hurled at Epicurus and the replies (δὲ 3-12), 
together with his sporadic ciiticisms on other philosophers, give us an 
interesting, though unpleasant picture, of the methods of philosophic 
controversy in antiquity. In short, though the process of its construc- 
tion has made the book almost intolerable as literature, it has not 
impaired the value of its contents, if duly sifted and compared with 
what is otherwise known. 

The text of the book, as might be expected from its origin, is 
seriously corrupted, but the acumen of Usener did much to restore 1t, 
and it has been in my opinion greatly improved, often m the 
direction of a return to the MS. tradition, by the work of Bignone. 

§1 1. The date of Epicurus’ birth 1s placed in 341 or the end of 
342 B.C 

2. Γαργήττιος : Gargettus was one of the Attic demes. 

3- Μητρόδωρος : one of the principal personal disciples of Epicurus, 
for the celebration of whose memory Epicurus provides in his will. 
Certain fragments of his works remain (ed. Korte) 

4. Ἡρακλείδης : sc. Heraclides Lembos, who wrote an epitome of 
the διαδοχὴ τῶν φιλοσόφων Of Sotion of Alexandria. 

κληρουχησάντων ... Σάμον: the colonization of Samos by Athens 
took place in 352 or 351 B.c. Epicurus’ father had therefore probably 
been settled there about ten years before Epicurus was born. 

δ- ὀκτωκαιδεκέτη : sc. in 323 B.C. 

6. Ξενοκράτους : Xenocrates of Chalcedon (396-314 Bc.) was a 
personal fiiend of Plato and head of the Academy for twenty-five 
years. 

8. ἐκπεσόντων : sc. from Samos, whence the Athenians were driven 
out by Perdiccas in 322 Bc. 

§ 2. 2. μαθητὰς ἀθροίσαντα : both in Colophon and also, as we 
learn from § 15, in Lampsacus and Mitylene. 

ἐπανελθεῖν : in 307-306 B.C. 

3. κατ᾽ ἐπιμιξίαν τοῖς ἄλλοις : this is interesting, as Epicurus always 
professed his complete independence of all other philosophers. 

4. ἀποφαίνεσθαι, ‘expounded his doctrines’, ‘taught’; the MSS. 
are obviously corrupt here, but Usener’s emendation is highiy pro- 
bable: Kochalsky ingeniously reads ἀποστατεῖν, ‘separated from them’ 

αἵρεσιν, ‘sect’, ‘ school’, 

10. τὰ περὶ τοῦ παρ΄ Ἡσιόδῳ χάους : the notion is that Epicurus 
came on Hesiod’s description of the original Chaos in the course of 
his school reading, and finding that the schoolmasters could not 
explain it to him, determined to go to the philosophers. 

II. γραμματοδιδάσκαλον : the natural interpretation of the words is 


COMMENTARY. § 1-4 493 


that Epicurus himself was at some time or other a schoolmaster, 
possibly during the period at Colophon. Usener, however, on the 
ground of γραμμαδιδασκαλίδης in Timon’s verses below, believes that 
the reference is to Neocles, Epicurus’ father: if so, the statement has 
got misplaced. 

12. Anpoxpirou; there can be no doubt, in spite of Epicurus’ 
denials, that he obtained his physical philosophy from the Atomists, 
and in particular from Democritus. 

§ 3. 3 γραμμαδιδασκαλίδης : probably the word 1s not to be taken 
as a patronymic, but, as Bignone points out, in the generally con- 
temptuous sense in which these terminations are employed by the 
comedians. ‘teacher of infants’. 

ἀναγωγότατος, ‘stubborn’, ‘unmanageable’, a word frequently 
apphed to sl-trarned domestic animals. 

6. φιλόδημος " the Epicurean teacher of the last century of the 
Roman Republic, contemporary of Cicero and instructor of L. Piso, 
whose whitings have been partly recovered from Herculaneum Cicero 
draws a most unfavourable and probably unfair picture of him in the 
in Pisonem, c 28. 

8. ἐν Ὁμοίοις : a very probable restoration for ἐν νόμοις. The work 
would have been a collection of historical parallels and comcidences, 

9. Διότιμος : Athenaeus xin, 611b speaks of a Theotimus who wrote 
a slanderous treatisc against Epicurus, who may be the same person 
as this Diotrmus. 

§ 4. 1. Ποσειδώνιος : the philosopher who succeeded Panaetius as 
the popular exponent of Stoicism at Rome and was Cicero's chief 
authonty for the Stoic position. Bignone points out that οἱ περί τῷ 
philosophic phraseology often denotes the original authority for a 
statement and the intermediate sources of information . so here it may 
mean ‘ Posidonius and his successors’. 

2. ἐν τοῖς δώδεκα... τῆς εἰκάδος : a very vexcd clause. The MSS. 
have ἐν rots δώδεκα... ἃἅ ἐστι mept τοῖς x6. Usener, whom I follow, 
keeps the MS. text at the beginning and adopts at the end Hibner’s 
emendation περὶ τῆς εἰκάδος. ‘in the twelve books of the work entitled 
““The Arguments of Diocles ”, which are about the Twentieth ’, 1.e. the 
Epicurean festjval held on the twentieth of each month in com- 
memoration of the Founder. This is a rather bold conjecture, but not 
improbable. " Bignone objects that it 1s improbable that any author 
would devote twelve books to the Epicurean festival, and accepting 
Gassendi’s emendation ἐν τῷ δωδεκάτῳ (B reads δωδεκάτω), proposes at 
the end ἅ ἐστι ὃ πρὸς τοῖς Κ, ‘which runs to twenty-four books’. But 
(1) wept τῆς εἰκάδος might well be taken as the tule given to the 
portion of Sotion’s work dealing with Epicureanism, which would be 
not unlikely to occupy twelve books ; (2) the comment which Bignone 
restores, that the Arguments of Diocles consisted of twenty-four books 
is wholly irrelevant and surely a most improbable parenthesis. ᾿ 

4. καὶ γὰρ σὺν τῇ μητρὶ. ἀναγινώσκειν ; seeing that jhis is the 

cc 2 


404 VI. VITA EPICURI 


precise charge made by Demosthenes (de Cor. 258) against Aeschines, 
it may well be discounted as a commonplace of abuse. 

ἡ. Λεοντίῳ : one of the most prominent of Epicurus’ disciples, the 
recognized companion of Metrodorus (see § 23). She appears to 
have been a woman of ability and learning. 

8. τὰ δὲ Δημοκρίτου : though no doubt Democritus’ work was the 
basis of Epicurus’ physics, he made many great changes in the theory 
of the atomists, in particular in his insistence on the truth of αἴσθησις 
as the basis of all inquiry. 

καὶ ᾿Αριστίππου - still less is it true that Epicurus adopted the 
pleasure-theory of Aristippus, the founder of the Cyrenaics. Epicurus 
regarded the absence of pain as complete pleasure, while the Cyrenaic 
theory took absence of pain to be itself indifferent, and regarded as 
the end the accumulation of moments of intense pleasure (μονόχρονος 
ἡδονήν), such as Epicurus strongly deprecated as involving ταραχή. 

10. Τιμοκράτης, brother of Metrodorus, was a disciple who subse- 
quently deserted the school (see ὃ 23); Ἡρόδοτος, the disciple to whom 
the first letter is addressed. 

12, Παιᾶνα, the title of Apollo, the Healer: see below ὃ 5. 3. 

§ δ. τ. "iSopevda; fragments of several letters to him from Epicurus 
are preserved ( /rs. 26-30). 

ἄκπυστα ... ποιήσαντας. it is not known what secrets they divulged, 
but 1t would be in accordance with Epicurus’ views of the walue of 
friendship to forgive them. " 

2. αὐτὸ τοῦτο can hardly mean here ‘for this very reason ’, but more 
likely idiomatically ‘all the same’. 

3. Παιὰν ἄναξ ( /r. 32): here an exclamation, not a vocative. One 
wonders whether the use of the same exclamation gave nse to the 
idea of Epicurus’ flattery of Mithres mentioned above § 4. 12. 

4. κροτοθορύβου : a facetious and playful word. 

ἐνέπλησας is quoted by Suidas in his note on κροτοθόρυβος and is 
probably nght as against the ἐνέπλησεν of the MSS. “ 

5. Θέμιστα (/r. 25) was the wife of Leonteus of Lampsacus, ἡ 
to whom Epicurus dedicated one of his works: see § 28. 

4. τρικύλιστος. again colloquial, ‘ with a hop, skip, and a jump’, or 
‘in my seven-leagued boots ’. a 

8. Πυθοκλέα (_/r. 34), to whom the second letter is addressed. 

10. νομίζει αὐτῇ παραινεῖν is the reading of the MSS., ‘he thinks 
that he is giving her advice’. This cannot be right, but no emenda- 
tion yet proposed seems satisfactory. Usener’s suggestions ὀνομάζει 
αὐτὴν éraipay or ᾿Αριάγνην are too far from the text, as 15 Kochalsky’s 
νομίζει αὐγὴν παρενεῖναι. Bignone following the suggestion of the 
edtho princeps would read νομίζει αὐτὴν περαΐνειν in an obscene sense, 
and explains that Epicurus’ expressions of tender affection were so 
exaggerated that they might be so described by a malicious critic. 
But this does not seem convincing. What is required is some ex- 
aggerated expression of flattery like those in the‘other quotations : 


COMMENTARY. §& 4-7 405 


ὀνομάζει αὐτήν i8 likely to be right, and the missing word should be 
ἃ proper name implying a flattering comparison. 

δ 6. 3. οὐ γὰρ ἔγωγε... (7. 10). There is no reason to doubt the 
genuineness of the quotation, but its citation without context and the 
interpretation put on it are malicious and quite misleading. Epicurus 
must not be supposed to have recommended all these pleasures ; the 
sentence should be read in connexion with such passages as Zp. 
ad Men § 129, where he says that all pleasures are good, but not all 
to be chosen (aiperad), or expressly goes on in ὃ 130 to exclude the 
pemeret of the table because they are not pure, but bring pain with 

m. 

4. ἀφαιρῶν δὲ τὰς... Possibly Meibom’s insertion of καὶ before 
τάς would make it a little clearer and more in Epicurus’ manner, but 
it 18 not necessary. 

5. τὰς διὰ μορφῆς, ‘ the pleasures arising from shape’, that is to say, all 
the pleasures of sight : it need not be confined, as Kochalsky supposes, 
to the appreciation of artistic work any more than τὰς δι᾿ ἀκροαμάτων 
refers only to the pleasures of music. μορφῆς 15 rightly restored from 
Athenaeus, the gen. sing. being corrupted in the MSS. to other cases. 

6. Παιδείαν δὲ πᾶσαν. .. (/r. 33). Again the meaning of the 
quotation 15 shghtly distorted. Epicurus always claimed independence 
of all the other philosophical schools, but 1s probably thinking here 
rather of the normal Athenian education in literature and music, 
‘culture’. 

τἀκάτιον ἀράμενος 15 a brilliant restoration of Gassendi of hopeless 
corruptions in the MSS. 

ἡ. Ἐπίκτητος, who would naturally attack Epicurus as part of the 
Stoic polemic. 

10, δὶς αὐτὸν... ἀπὸ τρυφῆς : this is probably pure slander, and if 
it has any foundation, may be explained by Epicurus’ weak health. 

L2. Thy μυστικὴν ἐκείνην συνδιαγωγήν : this 1s interesting as probably 
indicating that there was an element of an initiate commumty in 
Epicurus’ school. 

§ 7.1. πολλὰ... ἠγνοηκέναι : once again, Epicurus’ detachment 
from other schools of thought. His ignorance was probably less than 
he would have Jiked it to be thought. 

ἃ. τό τε σῶμα ἔλεεινῶς διακεῖσθαι: Bignone quotes evidence from 
the Herculahean writings of Epicurus’ bodily infirmiues, which is also 
supported by Plutarch, contr. Epic. Beat. 16. 

4. μνᾶν. .. ἡμερησίαν: possibly this was for the support of the 
whole community. 

6. ἐν ταῖς πρὸς τοὺς ἐν Μυτιλήνῃ φιλοσόφους. Crinert thinks that 
this 18 the ἐπιστολὴ περὶ ἐπιτηδευμάτων (Usener 171, 172): if 80, 
we ought perhaps to accept the correction of Menagius ἐν τῇ. 

ἡ. Mappdpiov: the name has been restored from Pinlodemus in the 
Herculanean Rolls: VA i. 149. 

9. ταὐτὰ λέγειν, “he repeats himself’: Kiihn’s ταὐτά for the ταῦτα of 


406 vi. VITA EPICURI 


the MSS, may certainly be accepted, but it is hardly necessary with 
Usener to insert re after ταὐτὰ and cut out τὰ πλεῖστα after Ναυσιφάνει. 
The inelegant repetition of τὰ πλεῖστα is not inconsistent with Diogenes’ 
usual style. 

10. Ναυσιφάνει: Nausiphanes of Teos was a pupil of Democritus, 
who continued the tradition of the atomic school. It is tolerably 
certain that Epicurus Jearnt much from him, but he always professes 
his independence and treats Nausiphanes with scorn. 

11. ἀλλ᾽ ἴτωσαν (77. 17) is a brillant restoration of Usener’s for 
ἀλλ᾽ εἴτως ἀλλ᾽ (B) and other hopeless corruptions in the MSS. It 1s 
certainly better than Stephanus’ correction ἀλλ᾽ εἴ tis ἄλλος εἶχε 
κἀκεῖνος. Kochalsky, believing the MSS. εἴτως to be composed of the 
two final syllables of λέξει and οὕτως, accidentally omitted and written 
in the margin, would read the whole passage καὶ αὐτῇ λέξει φάσκειν 
οὕτως, ᾿Αλλ᾽ εἶχε κἀκεῖνος. 

εἶχε... ὠδίνων τὴν... καύχησιν : Usener compares Iulian. Zp. 59 
νυνὶ δ᾽ ὥσπερ ὠδίνων τὴν καθ᾽ ἡμῶν λοιδοραν ἀθρόαν ἐξέχεας. 

§ 8. 3. διδάσκαλον ὑ7τι 21) is the reading in all the MSS., and 
Bignone has shown, I think, that it may be kept: ‘he called me 
sarcastically, ‘‘ The Master”.’ There would be considerable point in 
such a sarcasm from a master to a very obstinate and independent 
pupil, and there is the same kind of irony in Epicurus’ use of the 
epithet χρυσοῦς below for Plato. Kochalsky would read ἀποκαλεῖν 
διδάσκαλόν (μου éavrdv), but this would be feeble, and further ἀποκαλεῖν 
which always has an abusive sense would be inappropriate. Usener’s 
conjecture 1s also unnecessary. 

πλεύμονα, ‘mollusc’, the pulmo marius. Bignone compares Plat. 
Phileb 21 c ζῆν δὲ οὐκ ἀνθρώπου βίον, ἀλλά τινος πλεύμονος ἢ τῶν ὅσα 
θαλάττια per’ ὀστρείνων ἔμψυχά ἐστι σωμάτων. 

Sext. Emp. adv. Mash. 1. 3, quotes Epicuius’ application of the 
epithet to Nausiphanes and adds ὡς ἀναίσθητον, which gives the point, 
and makes impossible the inte pretation ‘lung ’, i.e. ‘ braggart’, 

δ: Διονυσοκόλακας, because of Plato’s relations to Dionysius of 
Syracuse. 

Χρυσοῦν, obviously a sarcastic epithet, like διδάσκαλον above. 
Bignone believes that there is a reference to the golden age and would 
take it to mean ‘simpleton’: he adds that it applies to Plato’s use of 
myths and belief in immortality. Is it not more probable ‘that it refers 
to the division of the classes m Rep. 415 a? Epicurus speaks of Plato 
ironically as the ‘golden philosopher ’, who himself of course belonged 
to the highest class, 

6. (ὅν), a necessary insertion by Hermann, 

7. στρατεύεσθαι : contemptuously. There seems no need to accept 
Usener’s suggestion τερατεύεσθαι, ‘he dealt in magic’, though no 
doubt it would go better with φαρμακοπωλεῖν. 

8. Ay Sate διδάσκειν : just asin § 3 Epicurus is called γραμμαδι- 


COMMENTARY. §§ 7-10 407 


9. κυκητήν, ‘the muddler’ in reference to Heraclitus’ well-known 
obscurity, which an opponent might regard as confusion of thought. 
Compare his nickname ὁ σκοτεινός and Lucr. i. 639 ‘clarus ob obscuram 
linguam ’. 

Napsenaae’ of course a feeble pun. Bignone notes however that 
elsewhere Epicurus speaks with respect of Democritus, from whom he 
certainly learnt his atomic theories. ; 

10. Σαννίδωρον : cf. σάννας, ‘zany’, n Cratinus, Jacer/. 33 and 
σαννίων in a simmiar sense in Arr. Epictet. mi. 22. 83. 

Κυνικούς is probably the right restoration of the Κυζηνεκούς of the 
MSS. Gassendi suggested Κυρηναικούς, but the epithet would be very 
inapplicable to them. 

11. τοὺς Siahexrixods, ‘the logicians’, those who believed, as Ep:- 
curus did not, im the value of logic and dialectic. Possibly more 
definitely ‘the Academics’ as the inheritors of Plato’s διαλεκτική. 

πολυφθόρους seems a safe correction of πολυφθονεροὺς, Of which it 
is difficult to make any satisfactory sense. 

Πύρρωνα: Pyrrhus of Elis (c. 365-275 B.c.), who afler some 
acquaintance with atomism, took up the attitude of a sceptic and was the 
founder of the sceptic tradition. Hus moral ideal of ἀπαθία was closely 
akin to Epicurus’ ἀταραξία and may have influenced him. 

§ 9, 1, τῷ γὰρ ἀνδρί: Gassendi’s correction of the MSS, reading 
τῶν yap ἀνδρῶν seems necessary, and 1s supported by the note in the 
margin of B yp. τοῦ yap ἀνδρός. 

2. ἡ ... πατρίς : sc. Athens, where he was born. 

5: Tats Soypanixais αὐτοῦ σειρῆσι προσκατασχεθέντες : a strong 
phrase. The faithfulness of the Epicurean school to the exact 
doctrines of the master was nolorious and comes out strongly in 
Lucretius, 

6. Μητροδώρου τοῦ Στρατονικέως. This Metrodorus was of course 
not Metrodorus of Lampsacus, Epicurus’ most faithful disciple, but 
apparently a pupil of Apollodorus who 15 mentioned in § 25. 

πρὸς Καργεάδην ἀποχωρήσαντος : 1.6, the famous Carneades of a 
century later, who was head of the New Academy. 

8. ἦ τε διαδοχὴ... ἐς ἀεὶ Siapdvouca. The conunuity of the Epicu- 
rean school night through the classical period is notorious, though an 
even greater claim might be made 1n the Roman era for the Stoics, 

9. νηρίθμους. the authority of the MSS. seems to be in favour of 
this spelling as against the more normal ἀνηρίθμους. 

ἀπολύουσα, ‘producing’, a rather unexpected word, which 1s however 
used in medical wntings of child-birth. 

§ 10. 1. πρὸς τοὺς γονέας, and especially towards his mother 
Chaerestrata. The letter in the fragment (ix) of Diogenes of 
Oenoanda, which was orginally supposed to be one of Epicurus’ to 
his mother, is more probabiy, as William thinks, a letter of Dio- 
genes’ own. 


408 VI. VITA EPICURI 


. THE... πρὸς θεοὺς ὁσιότητος. For Epicurns’ piety see Zp. ad 
Ms §1aqand /r. 57. It was probably a quite genuine religious 
feeling that the ἀταραξία of the gods could communicate itself to men 
in their devotions. 

7. ὑπερβολῇ γὰρ ἐπιεικείας... ἥψατο. The true reason for Epicurus’ 
abstention fran political hfe ‘was probably not his own ‘ excessive 
modesty’, but his strong conviction that politics were destructive of 
ἀταραξία and therefore to be avoided: cf. K. A. vit. 

χαλεπωτάτων ... τὴν Ἑλλάδα: this refers no doubt to the state of 
Athens during the blockade by Demetrius of Phalerum in 295 B.c., 
when Athens was reduced almost to starvation, Plutarch, V2#, Demefr. 
34, says that Epicurus rationed his disciples on a few beans daily. 

9. εἰς τοὺς : there seems no reason to follow Usener in omiiting eis 
which is read by all the MSS, Part of a letter to a child wntten 
apparently on one of these visits is preserved (/7. 35). 

- φησιν]. Usener was probably hatte in excluding these 
wards as a note by a Scholiast: it 18 impossible to fit them into the 
text satisfactorily. 

811. 6. ὕδατι μόνον... «: οὗ 37. 37. 

Πέμψον po. . .:. 39. 

η, κυϑριδίου is the Ionic form of χυτρίδιον. In the geniuve it must be 
adjectival ‘ potted cheese’, but there is much to be said for the reading 
κυθρίδιον, ‘a small pot of cheese’, 

§12. 2. ἄπληστοι seems a necessary correction of Usener’s; daAx- 
στον is hardly possible, either with κέρδος or adverbially with ἄρχετε. 

3, 4. This is Epicurus’ doctrine that pleasure has a πέρας, namely 
the removal of pain: cf. K. A. iii and 2%. ad Men. § 131. 

8. ῥητῶν has the better MS. authonty, but possibly ῥημάτων is the 
more natural word to use. 

10. ᾿Αναξαγόραν : Epicurus would be in agreement with Anaxagoras 
in holding that the original φύσις Was not one continuous substance, 
but innumerable ‘ seeds’, but violently opposed to his supposition that 
there were heterogeneous ‘seeds’ corresponding to every individual 
thing. 

᾿Αρχέλαον : Archelaus is said to have been a pupil of Anaxagoras 
and the teacher of Socrates, and may have hada special attraction for 
Epicurus in that A combined the study of ethics with that of physics. 

Ir. ἀγύμναϊε δέ... .: compare, for instance, his ingtruction to 
Herodotus to neta the doctrines by heart, Ep. i, § 36. 

δ 13. 3. Πραξιφάνους, a Peripatetic and pup:l of Theophrastus, 

4. Λεύκιππον, the undoubted founder of the atomic school, and 
teacher of Democritus, who took over and greatly elaborated the theory. 
Epicurus’ dental of his existence was probably a playful form of his 
assertion of independence. 

7, Zevoxpdrous : see § 1 note. 

9. λέξει κυρίᾳ must surely mean ‘ ordinary, current speech’, and not, 
as Bignone interprets it ‘propmeta di vocaboli’. It was one of the 


COMMENTARY. § ro-15 409 


points of the Canon that the ‘first word’, 1.e. the most obvious term 
should always be used (Zp. ad Ht. § 38), but in carrying out his 
principle Epicurus, though he avoided the technical phraseolozy of 
other philosophers, certainly created a terminology which may well be 
described as ἰδιωτάτη and was not always σαφής. 

10. ἰδιωτάτη, ‘most special or pecuhar’ to himself. It seems un- 
necessary to emend to ἰδιωτικὴ or ἰδιωτικωτάτη. 

11x. ἀξιοῖ, . ἀπαιταῖν, ‘he claims to demand’, i.e. requires of orators. 
He urged that the orator should aim at the same cadjve which he 
practised himself. This seems quite good sense and would not be 
improved by Usener’s suggestion ἀπαιτῶν, ‘he claims for himself when 
he demands of others’, or by Cobet’s ἀσκεῖν, ‘he claims to practise’. 
It is far more probable that the περὶ ‘Pyropixys contained ‘a demand 
for clearness from orators than any claim to clearness in his own 
writings. 

§14 τ. ἀντὶ τοῦ Χαίρειν : this may have been a mere idiosyncrasy, 
but more hkely that Epicurus on his own view of pleasure regarded 
ὁ reyorcing’ as excessive and inconsistent with true pleasure, and there- 
fore substituted expressions more consistent with his own ideal. It is 
hardly necessary to insert γράφει after χαίρειν with Usener or γράφειν after 
πράττειν with Kochalsky, constructing it with the previous sentence. 

3. ᾿Αρίστων : the MSS. have ἄριστον" οἱ, for which Cobet, seeing 
that this must stand for the name of some wniter proposed "Apiorwy $ 
Bignone wishing further to account for of m the MSS. would read 
᾿Αρίστων ὁ π(εριπατητικός). In vii. 164 Diog. Laert. speaks of ἕτερος 
᾿Αρίστων ᾿Αλεξανδρεὺς περιπατητικός and it is very probable that a 
Peripatetic philosopher, who 1s otherwise known to have written philo- 
sophy and history, should have made this charge of plagiarism against 
Epicurus. There seems no reason to go so far from the MSS. as 
Usener’s ᾿Αντίγονος or his other proposal Καρύστιος. 

τὸν Kavéva. see Ep. ad Hat. § 35, 36. 

5. Παμφίλου : Pamphilus is also mentioned by Suidas as one of the 
teachers of Epicurus. 

4. δύο πρὸς τοῖς τριάκοντα : it would appear from other sources that 
Epicurus was thirty-five when he set up his school in Athens, but he 
had previously taught in Lampsacus and Mitylene. See the next 
paragraph. 

δ τὸ τρίτον. . . δλυμπιάδος : ie. the end of 342 or the beginning 
of 341 BC. 

§ 15. 2. δύο καὶ τριάκοντα, i.e. 310 B.c., bul if he was five years 
teaching in Lampsacus and Mitylene, this would put his coming 
to Athens in 305, whereas on other grounds (see § 2) it seems best 
to date this in 307-306. Possibly he began his teaching in Asia earlier 
or did not continue it for so long, but the point is not of much 
importance. 

ἃ. οὕτως, ‘after that’. 

4. τὸ δεύτερον... ὀλυμπιάδος, i.e. 270 B.C. 


410 VI. VITA EPICURI 


7. Ἕρμαρχον : for his succession to the headship of the school see 
Epicurus’ will (§ 17). 

§ 16. 4. Χαίρετε. . . This poem has been included in the Palasine 
Anthology, vii. 106, though it seems hardly worthy of a place there: it 
is poor doggerel and may therefore be rendered by such. 

§: todos; Usener’s conjecture, is much better than οἷσιν found infand 
the Anthology, a substantive is badly needed 11 is not easy to account 
for the πρῶτος or πρῶτον of the MSS., of which no sense can be made 

6. ἐληλύθεεν is the rather odd form preferred by Usener. The MSS, 
point to ἐσήλυθε and the metre might then be put straight by καὶ τόν, 
as in f and the Anthology: but the article is not needed and would be 
strange. 

8. (δὲν, a necessary addition to answer μέν. 

9. The will of Epicurus 1s an interesting document, showing his care 
for the preservation of the garden and for the continuance of the 
school, and his interest in his friends and disciples. It 1s said to 
be drawn up in better form than most of the philosophers’ wills which 
have been preserved, but behtnd the legal phraseology one may detect 
the rather loose rambling style which we associate with Epicurus, and 
which may be taken as evidence of its genuineness. 

12. ἕν τῷ Μητρῴῳ: the Metroum was the office of the state- 
archives. 

817. 2 Ἑρμάρχῳ this provision practically appomts Hermarchus 
as head of the school. ξ 

3 ᾿Αγεμόρτου. the MS. reading ἀγεμάρχου is merely due to the 
neighbouring Ἑρμάρχῳ and the name may be restored with certainty 
from other places in the L2/e 

8. αὐτῶν : sc. of Amynomachus and Timocrates: the legal heirs are 
to act with the successors in the school. 

ἐν ᾧ ἄν ποτε τρόπῳ is an almost certain restoration for the MS. text 
ἐν ᾧ ἂν ἀποτρέπω : f has ἐν ᾧ ἂν τρόπῳ which points to it 

9. διατηρῶσιν: the subjunctive seems necessary in spite of the 
unanimous optative of the MSS. 

10. παραδίδωσιν seems (o be the word indicated by the MS, varia- 
tions: Usener on the ground of the accent in most of the copies, 
prefers the aorist παραδῶσιν. ‘ 

§18 3. évaylopara: the customary offermgs at the tomb of the 
dead: cf. the Roman festival of the Parentalia. ᾿ 

5. Τῇ προτέρᾳ δεκάτῃ: sc δεκάτῃ ἱσταμένου as opposed to δεκάτῃ 
φθίνοντος Cic. de Fim. 31. τοι ff makes a severe attack on Epicurus 
for these provisions for the celebration of his memory: zd fes/imonzo 
cavebtt 1s gui nobis quast oraculum edideril nihil ad nos pertinere post 
mortem? The answer would probably be that Epicurus did not 
suppose that such celebrations would affect him, but thought it would 
be valuable to the coming generations of his disciples to keep his 
memory fresh. From the festival on the zoth Athenaeus says that the 
Epicureans were known as the εἰκαδισται, 


COMMENTARY. §§ 15-22 4τι 


8. μνήμην was restored by Aldobrandinus from the corresponding 
words of Cic, loc. cit., uf ef sue ef Metrodor: memoria colatur. I agree 
with Bignone that it 1s unnecessary to go farther with Usener and 
change κατατεταγμένην to κατὰ τὰ τεταγμένα. 

ξ 19. 4. τῆς θυγατρὸς τῆς Μητροδώρου " the daughter of Metrodorus 
and Leontion, whose name was apparently Danae 

§ 20. 2. μετὰ rod: some of the MSS. read μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ. Possibly 
per’ αὐτοῦ τοῦ may be the ongin of both readings. 

τοῦ συγκαταγεγηρακότος ἡμῖν ἐν φιλοσοφίᾳ : this expression 1s very 
charactenstic οἵ Epicurus. Cf Ep. ad Men. § 122 μήτε γέρων ὑπάρ- 
χων κοπιάτω φιλοσοφῶν and farther on ὥστε φιλοσοφητέον καὶ νέῳ καὶ 
γέροντι, τῷ μὲν ὅπως γηράσκων νεάζῃ. .. 

6. ἀπὸ τῶν ὑπαρχόντων : 1.6. from the capital as opposed to the 
Interest (πρόσοδοι) 

8. χρείαν ἐν τοῖς ἰδίοις παρεσχημένοι : for an example of an appeat 
by Epicurus for such assistance see /7. 26 πέμπε οὖν ἀπαρχὰς ἡμῖν εἰς 
τὴν τοῦ ἱεροῦ σώματος θεραπείαν ὑπέρ τε αὑτοῦ καὶ τέκνων. 

11. παρὰ, Usener, 1s a rather violent correction for the MS. ἐπὶ, but 
it seems necessary. 

ὃ 21. 2. ἐὰν δέ τι τῶν ἀνθρωπίνων .. γένηται, the regular Greek 
penphrasis to avoid the mention of death (cf. /r. 36). γένηται ts only 
tread by F, but 1s more natural than the pres. subj. which 1s given in the 
other MSS. 

6. ὧν has more MS. support than ὡς, adopted by Usener, and as it 
will make good sense, should be preferred. 

4. ὅπως ἄν is Usener’s correction of the MS. ὅπως δή. dy seems 
necessary according to Eprcurus’ usage, but the change 15 violent. 

9 ἐλευθέραν is the natural word and has considerable MS. authonity, 
but there 1s strange variation. Usener reads ἐλευθερίᾳ, but the strange- 
ness of the expression and its position immedhately after the straight- 
forward ἐλεύθερον make 1t improbable. 

ὃ 22. τ. The extract from the letter to Idomeneus 18 a manifest in- 
sertion : in an earlier form of the ‘ Life’ καὶ διέθετο μὲν ὧδε Must have 
immediately followed the will, 

πρὸς ᾿Ιδομενέα (_/r. 30): the letter 1s also quoted with some vania- 
tions by Cic. ge #22 li. 30. 96, but as addressed to Hermarchus, 

2. καὶ ἅμα τελευτῶντες, ‘even though dying at the same time’, but 
the expression is a hutle strange, especially coming inside τὴν μακαρίαν 
ἄγοντες... ἡμέραν. Cicero has cum ageremus vilae beatum et eundem 
supremum diem, whence Davis has conjectured τελευταίαν for redev- 
τῶντες, which would certainly make the construction easier. 

3. ἀγράφομεν : a normal epistolary imperfect. 

παρηκολούθει, imperf. seems more probable than the MS. pluperf. 
παρηκολονυθήκει. 

8. διέθετο, a necessary correction of ἔθετο : see § 16. 9. 

LI. Mytpé8upor ... Λαμμακηνόν. The text is uncertain here: the 
MSS. seem to point to Μητρόδωρον ᾿Αθηναῖον ἢ Τιμοκράτην καὶ Ξάνδην 


4132 VI. VITA EPICURI 


ὄν. The researches of Duening (de Metrodort Epicurer 
vita ef scripits) seem to show that Metrodorus’ father’s name was either 
Athenaeus or Timocrates: we should then emend as in the text and 
take Sande to be the name of his mother. But (a) ἑλλογί points 
to the mention of more than one person here ; (4) the sentence ἔσχε δὲ 
nal... Τιμοκράτην, ὃ 23 7,1mphes a previous mention of Timocrates ; 
(c) there is some authonty (ἢ for καί instead of #. It is therefore 
ssible that the sentence originally ran Myrpddwpov καὶ Τιμοκράτην 
᾿Αϑηναίον καὶ Xdvdns Λαμψακηνούς" (καὶ Myrpddwp)os ἀφ᾽ οὗ... 

Σάνδης seems a strange mame and possibly we should accept 
Gomperz’s conjecture Κασσάνδρας. 

13. εἷς τὴν οἰκείαν : sc.to Lampsacus. Cobet’s restoration of οἰκίαν 
of the MSS. may be taken to be certain. 

§ 23. 1. ἀγαθὸς πάντα ΙΒ ἃ quite natural construction and the insertion 
of κατά with P*H 18 unnecessary. 

2. ἂν προηγουμέναις γραφαῖς is rightly interpreted by Bignone to 
mean ‘in prologues or prefaces to his writings‘, where he might well 
mention Metrodorus. It appears, for instance, that the 28th book of 
the wept φύσεως was dedicated to Metrodorus (Vol. Herc. vi, /r. 45). 

γραφαῖς again a necessary correction by Usener of γράφει. 

δ. ἀκατάπληκτος : the majority of the MSS. have the curious error 
ἀκατάληπτος, perhaps because it was a familiar technical word in the 
writings of Epicurus. 

ΣΙ, ἄσχε δὲ... Τιμοκράτην : if we adopt Usener’s text in ὃ 22. 11, 
we should also follow his suggestion (/a/rod. xxvi) that this sentence 
should be put in brackets as interrupting the account of Metrodorus. 
If on the other hand we suppose that Timocrates was mentioned 
in the first sentence of the paragraph, we must find room for this 
sentence somewhere, perhaps after the list of Metrodorus’ writings. 

ὃ 24. 6. Moddawos, whose memory Epicurus in his will (ὃ 18) 
enjoined on his disciples to preserve. 

ἡ. φιλικός, ‘fnendly, amiable‘: there seems no reason to adopt 
Cobet’s φιληκόος. 

Φιλόδημον : see note on § 3. 

§ 85. τ. ἐπιστολικὰ, probably ‘treatises in the form of letters". 

2. μαθημάτων, ‘science’, is a brilliant and fairly certain emendation 
of Casaubon’s for μαθητῶν. 

6. Κωλώτης was a devoted disciple of Epicurus, to whom 3s addressed 
an extant fragment of a letter of the master (/7. 31). He wrote 
a treatise to show that it was impossible to live according to the precepts 
of any of the other philosophers, to which Plutarch wrote in reply the 
adversus Coloten, which is one of our sources for knowledge of the 
Epicurean morals, 

7. Πολύστρατος : a work of his entitled περὶ ἀλόγου καταφρονήσεως 
‘was discovered at Herculaneum. 

9. Κηποτύραννος : probably a name given him by his opponents. 

11. Ζήνων was the master of Philodemus. 


COMMENTARY. § 22-31 413 


§ 26. τ, Διογένης of Tarsus wrote an abridgement of Epicurus’ 
ethics and also the ἐπίλεκτοι σχολαΐί here mentioned, probably a 
collection of philosophical dissertations. 

§. τέταρτος 15 a little odd (it includes Epicurus himself), but it is 
unnecessary to change the text to τρίτος. 

7- κύλινδροι are the rolls made by fastening the papyrus pages 
together, and, though there was some vanation, the average length in 
Pliny’s time was twenty sheets, but earlier the rolls were larger. 

2 αὐτοῦ : a good emendation of Cobet’s for the almost meaningless 
ανται. 

11. εἰ ydp te... Usener is of opinion that the following quotation 
comes from Clitomachus, not from Carneades. 

12. φιλονεικεῖ : the present is unusual after ei and opt., and Casau- 
bon’s ἐφιλονείκει 15 attractive. But there are historic presents or 
perfects all round, so that it 1s best to retain the present here. 

$27. 3. e«laxe: a very brilliant restoration of Cobet’s for the 
meaningless εἷλκε. 

10. φυγῶν is Gassendi’s certain correction of the MS. φύτων. 

ὃ 28. 3. περὶ τῆς ἐν τῇ ἀτόμῳ γωνίας : this work must have dealt with 
the doctrine of the ‘least parts’ or πέρατα in the atom; see AP, ad Hat. 
δὲ 56 ff.; Lucr. i 599. 

5. περὶ εἰδώλων" sc. the ‘images’ by which sight took place. cf. 
Ep, ad Hat & 49 ff.; Lucr. Bk. IV 

ἢ. νόσων is Gassendi’s emendation for vorwy which Usener retains. 
But ‘maxims about south-winds’ are very improbable, and one of the 
Herculanean papyrn refers to an Epicurean work, περὶ νόσων καὶ 
θανάτου. 

11, ἃ must be right: the MSS. have the extraordinary reading μίαν, 
which it 1s hard to account for. 

§ 29 3. κἂν: Usener’s restoration for κἀμέ, which cannot be nght. 

4. ἥτις .. Πυθοκλέα - there must be an omission owing to the 
clauses of similar form and the loss can be supplied with certainty. 

§ 80. 2. ἐφόδους : probably not ‘introduction’, as Bignone translates 
it, but rather the ‘ method of approach’ to the Epicurean philosophy. 
It is in the Canoncon, for example, that we should find the insistence on 
the supremacy of αἴσθησις. 

5. κατὰ στοιχεῖον, ‘in an abndged form’. The expression is not 
unnatural, ‘and Usener’s suggestion κατεστοιχειωμένον, though it would 
express it better, is unnecessary. The reference 1s surely to such 
letters as the three which Diogenes has given us, and not, as Cronert 
supposed, to any regular series of letters containing epitomes. 

ὃ BL. 1. «τὴν διαλεκτικὴν. . . ἀποδοκιμάζουσι. The Epicureans 
rejected both the Platonic dialectic and the Aristotelian logic on the 
ground that they both implied argument based on words and led away 
from the true basis of αἴσθησις. 

παρέλκουσαν, ‘misleading ’. Both Bignone and Kochalsky translate 
‘superfluous’, a sense which the word has in later Grgek. They 


414 VI. VITA EPICURI 


are no doubt influenced by the following ἀρκεῖν γάρ, but the more 
original meaning of the word is here stronger and better. Logic to the 
Epicurean is not only unnecessary : it 1s actively deceptive. 

2. κατὰ τοὺς τῶν πραγμάτων φθόγγους, ‘in accordance with the voices 
of things’, i.e. with what things tell us themselves by 1mmediate 
perception without the interpretation of δόξα, Bignone compares 
K. A. xxxvii τοῖς μὴ φωναῖς κεναῖς ἑαυτοὺς συνταράττουσιν ἀλλ᾽ εἰς τὰ 
πράγματα βλέπουσιν, and Lucr. i. 931 ‘denique si vocem rerum natura 
repente mittat’ (which 1s rather far from the notion here). The idea 
is akin to that in Zp. ad Hat ὃ 37. 6 τὰ ὑποτεταγμένα τοῖς φθόγγοις... 
δεῖ εἰληφέναι. 

8. ἐν... τῷ Κανόνι : in the extant works of Epicurus the nearest 
passages are “p. ad Hdt. §§ 38 (which comes closest to an exposition 
of the Canon), 51, 82, and K A. xxiv: see notes there, and Appendix 
to the letter to Herodotus, p. 259 In the first and last of these pas- 
sages Epicurus comes at any rate very near including the ἐπιβολὴ τῆς 
διανοίας among the κριτήρια of truth. 

4. καὶ προλήψεις, ‘the general concepts’ formed by a combination 
of αἰσθήσεις : cf. Lp. ad Hdt. § 72, and note there. Gassend: would 
insert τάς before προλήψεις, but it 1s possible that αἰσθήσεις and 
προλήψεις are grouped closely together as the κριτήρια of knowledge 
and ra πάθη added separately as the κριτήριον in the moral sphere. 

5. καὶ τὰς φανταστικὰς ἐπιβολὰς τῆς διανοίας, ‘the intuitive appre- 
hensions of the mind’, the apprehensions which consist τῇ grasping an 
image. For fuller discussion see K A. xxivnote and Appendix, p 259. 

6. (adds): an addition suggested by Grussani in his notes, seems 
necessary to bring out the sense. Besides the Ep:cureans Epicurus 
himself gives some countenance for the inclusion of ἐπιβολὴ τῆς 
διανοίας among the κριτήρια of truth, The reference 1s piobably to 
Lp. ad Hat. ὃ 38 and K. A. xxiv. Possrbly, as Bignone suggests, 
Epicurus did not include ἐπιβολή in the Canon, but later on put it in 
with the other κριτήρια. 

8. ἄλογος. 1.6. αἴσθησις carries 1s own conviction of truth without 
reasoning or Calculation, it 1s immediate. Nor is it μνήμης δεκτική: 
one sensation gains nothing 1n truth, though :t may in imterpretation, 
from the recollection of another. It cannot be started by itself, but only 
by an outside object, and when it 15 so started it cannot of itself add to 
or remove anything from the data of the sensation. 

g. ὑφ᾽ αὑτῆς 1s only read by ΕἾ, but seems obviously right. 

δύναται, Gassendi, is a necessary correction of ἀδυνατεῖ of the MSS. 

10. οὐδὲ ἔστι τὸ δυνάμενον αὐτὰς διελέγξαι, κτὰ. This idea recurs in 
K. Δ. xxui and xxiv, and 1s elaborated by Lucretius in iv. 482 ff. 

δ 32. 1. ὁμογενὴς : the MSS. have ὁμογένεια, which is improbable as 
an adjectival form, and may well have arisen from the neighbouring 
ἀνομογένεια. Seeing that just below they are divided between ὁμογενῆ 
and ὁμογένειαν, 1t seems safe to restore the natural adjectival form here. 
By ὁμογενὴς αἴσθησις he means e.g. two acts of sight, by dvopoydvea 


COMMENTARY. § 31-33 4τ8 


e.g. sight and hearing: cf Lucr. iv. 486 ‘an poterunt oculos aures 
reprehendere, an auris tactus?’ 

4. ἤρτηται is a considerable change from the MS. εἴρηται, but seems 
required to make sense. 

5. τὰ ἀπαισθήματα, ‘the apperceptions’, e.g. the understanding in 
addition to the hearing of what is said by some one else. So ἐπαίσθησις 
is used in Ep. ad Hat. §§ 52. 10, 53. 2 in the sense of ‘ comprehen- 
sion’, The fact that we do so understand confirms the truth or 
necessity of what we hear. 

6. ὑφέστηκε, ‘18 ἃ fact’, 1s part of our experience. 

4. ὅθεν καὶ... σημειοῦσθαι : this is of course the regular Epicurean 
rule of procedure with regard to things of which we cannot have 
immediate perception. 

9 ἐπίνοιαι, ‘ideas’, framed by the mind and based ultimately on 
sensation: e g the Epicurean conception of infinite space 1s formed 
by the combination of προλήψεις of space, themselves based on 
sensation. 

κατά τε περίπτωσιν 15 not easy. I take it to mean ‘by comeidence’, 
by the fittung in of one experience with another. This 1s I take it 
what Bignone means by ‘ secondo I’incidenza’ Kochalsky appears to 
take it to mean ‘by throwing themselves on such perceptions’, but 
that does not suit well with the rest of the sentence. 

10. ἀναλογίαν, the conscious ‘comparison’ of one experience with 
another, ὁμοιότητα, the ‘resemblance’ that 1s noticed between them, 
σύνθεσιν, the ‘combination’ of experiences into a new idea. 

11. συμβαλλομένου τι καὶ τοῦ λογισμοῦ: Epicurus would have to 
admit that here reasoning played some part. 

τά τε... οὐ κινεῖ : a characteristic Epicurean doctrine. The vision 
seen in dreams or by madmen must be real, 1.e. must be caused 
by actual εἴδωλα inasmuch as they do ‘ move’ the mind, but they need 
not be evidence of an external reality, for they may be caused, e.g. by 
εἴδωλα from thmgs which meet and combine in the air: cf Lucer. 
tv. 732 ff. 

8 838. τ thy... πρόληψιν: the ‘general concept’ formed in the 
mind by repeated sense-perceptions, and therefore acting as an ‘ antici- 
pation’ by which fresh perceptions are identified: see Ep. ad Μάϊ. 
§ 72. 

κατάληψιῦ, ‘apprehension ’ by the mind. Kochalsky appears to take 
ὀρθὴν with this word as well as with δόξαν, but not rightly, ὀρθὴ δόξα 
being so well-recognized a philosophical! term. 

3. οἷον 73... ἄνθρωπος - the πρόληψις gives us the conception of 
‘man’ as such and such 1n form and behaviour and enables us thus to 
recognize a man. Kochalsky wrongly wntes: οἷον τὸ τοιοῦτον ἔστιν 
“AvOpunros, ‘such for instance, as “ Man”’, a very unnatural form of 
expression. 

5. προηγουμένων τῶν αἰσθήσεων : the αἰσθήσεις ‘lead the way’ inas- 
much as they have formed the πρόληψις. 


416 VI. VITA EPICURI 


6. τὸ πρώτως ὑποτεταγμένον, ‘the first significance’, that which the 
word immediately suggests apart from metaphorical and other exten- 
sions. The participle is Gassendi’s necessary correction for ércrera- 
γμένον of the MSS. 

, ‘clear evidence’ of truth, a favourite word of Epicurus 
usually used of the ‘clear vision ’ of an object close at hand: cf. 
ἐνάργημα, Ep. ad Hat. ὃ 72. 4, and ἐνάργεια, ibid. § 48. το. 

12. καὶ τὸ δοξαστὸν... : for the Epicurean view of opinion see 
Ep. ad Hdt. δὲ 50-52 and K. A. xxiv. Opinion 1s an inference made 
by the mind, but based, as is said here, on sense-perception. In the 
case of terrestrial phenomena, we can approach and get the ‘clear 
vision ’ (ἐνάργημα)) which will confirm or contradict it: 1n the case of 
the distant phenomena of the sky we cannot have confirmation, the 
utmost is non-contradiction. 

13. οἷον Πόθεν.,. Here the ἐναργές on which our answer will 
depend is the πρόληψις of ‘man’. 

84. 4. (τὸν προσμένον .. .,» ‘the problem awaiting solution’: the 
distant view of any object should be so regarded until we can get near 
and reach a decision by means of the near mew: οἷ, 27. ad Hd. 
§§ 38, 50and K. A. xxiv. The article 1s a necessary addition. 

5. ἐγγὺς γενέσθαι τῷ πύργῳ : the square tower which in the distance 
looks round was a favourite Epicurean example of the προσμένον : cf. 
Lucr. iv. 353 ff., 501 ff. 

4. πάθη. the criterion of the moral field, the ‘ feelings’ or ‘internal 
sensations: cf. 29. ad Hdt ὃ 38, &c.; Ep. ad Men. § 129. 

To. τὰς δὲ περὶ ψιλὴν τὴν deriv: unless we Keep to τὸ πρώτως 
ὑποτεταγμένον τοῖς φθόγγοις OUT ses oe aie will be into mere words: cf. 
Ep. ad Hadt. § 37. 7 ὅπως ἂν... μὴ ἄκριτα πάντα ἡμῖν 7... ἢ κενοὺς 
φθόγγους ἔχωμεν. 

§ 83. Between the first and second letters there is only this brief 
sentence. 

§ 116. Between the second and third letters there 1s a longer 
discusston, which has the appearance of being foisted in. 

§ 117. 1. περὶ δὲ τῶν βιωτικῶν, ‘concerning matters touching different 
kinds of hyes’, practically ‘concernmg morals’ or ‘ethics’: cf. βίοι, 
as a tile of ἃ work of Epicurus, in δ 119 

8. πρότερον δέ: it looks almost as if the third létter originally 
followed here, but the discussion of the ‘ wise man” was put in subse- 
quently. The section is rather difficult and loose in its construction. 

& τε αὐτῷ : Usener justly observes that one would expect ἃ αὐτῷ re: 
itis a very loose piece of writing as 1t stands. 

4. wept τοῦ σόφου : the Stoics spoke particularly of the σοφός or 
sapiens, and a good deal in the section has the appearance of polemic 
against the Stoics. 

βλάβας ἐξ ἀνθρώπων... γίνεσθαι : the sentence has the appearance 
of a philosophic commonplace: hatred is between equals, envy for 
superiors, and contempt for inferiors: ef Quintilian σι. 8 ‘nam pluri- 


COMMENTARY. §§ 33-118 411] 


mum refert, invidia reus an odio an contemptu laboret, quorum fere 
pars prima superores, proxima pares, tertia humiliores premit’. 

8. πάθεσι μᾶλλον. , πρὸς τὴν σοφίαν: a difficult passage, which has 
been very vanously treated and understood. Usener would prefer to 
read μὴν for μᾶλλον (p. xxvin) and suggests (p. 334) that before οὐκ ἂν 
ἐμποδίσαι something hike ras rod βίου περιστάσεις has fallen out: ‘It 18 
true that he will be constrained by passions, but the circumstances of 
life would be no impediment to wisdom’. This is a little inconsequent. 
Kochalsky, following Usener’s hint, reads u(y ds) ἄλλον συσχεθήσεσθαι, 
(8) οὐκ ἂν ἐμποδίσαι. .., ‘He will be subject to emotions, like any 
other man, but this would be no obstacle’. Bignone points out that the 
Epicurean sage will not let himself be carried away by intense passions, 
but that there are certam affections, such as firendship and the gnef 
for departed friends, to which he 1s peculiarly hable, and would there- 
fore read πάθεσί (riot) μᾶλλον Τὶ is difficult to be certaum, but I am 
inclined to think πάθεσι is used here in the technical Epicurean sense: 
‘the wise man will feel pleasure and pain more acutely’, because of his 
education and consequent susceptibility. In that case the MS. text may 
be kept, but Kochalsky’s connecting (6) seems necessary to give the 
passage some kind of coherence 

$118 τ. κἂν στρεβλωθῇ . . εὐδαίμονα. Bignone notices that this 
paradox was common to the Stoics and Epicureans Usener has 
collected evidence for it among the latter (p. 338). 

3: διατελεῖν εὐλογοῦντα, the emendation of Kochalsky, seems to me 
to get nearest to the required sense. But 1 1s not palaeographically 
a satisfactory correction of διά re 58° οὐχ, which with variauons in the 
division of the words 1s the MS. text. Usener proposed διά re λόγον 
(nai διὰ πράξεως ἰέναι, apparently meaning ‘he will act similarly both 
in word and deed towards frends present or absent’: but it 18 a very 
Strange expression, and is not, I think, improved by Bignone’s 
suggestion εἶναι or γίνεσθαι for ἰέναι The true solution has not yet 
been found and it looks as if the corruption were extensive. 

ὅτε μέντοι... . οἰμώξει a return to the subject of the first sentence 
of the section: the ariangement all through this passage is very scrappy 
and incoherent. 

4. μύξει καὶ οἰμώξει : as the MSS. are fairly evenly divided between 
μύζει and pigee but show a great preponderance for οἰμώξει over the 
present, it soems better to read the future in both cases. Present and 
future are used indifferently all through this section. 

δ. Διογένης : sc. of Tarsus: cf. ὃ 26. 1. 

4. τῶν σπουδαίων must be nght as against τὸν σπουδαῖον of the 
majority of MSS., but the expression 1s not natural. 

9. οὐδὲ θέῤπεμπτον εἶναι τὸν ἔρωτα : οἵ. Lucr. iv. 1278. 

nec divinitus interdum Venerisque sagittis 
deteniore fit ut forma mulhiercula ametur. 

ἐν τῷ... Aldobrandinus supplies the number ‘ the twelfth book ’, but 
on what authority is not known. 

seve pd 


418 ΨΙ. VITA EPICURI 


Io, οὐδὲ ῥητορεύσειν καλῶς: Epicurus had a strong dislike for 
rhetoric, which he no doubt thought tended to deal with φωναὶ κεναί. 

ovvovgin .. . ὥνησε ( 7. 5) with φασιν parenthetical, seems to’ be 
indicated by the MS. text. Usener having introduced συνουσίην then 
reports that the MSS. unanimously read ὥνησε, ‘ solita negligentia ’, for 
ὀνῆσαι : this is surely uncritical. 

§ 119. 4. διατραπήσεσθαί τινας, ‘will fee] shame in the presence of 
some’, 1.e. the respect due to distinguighed persons. 

οὐδὲ μὴν ἐπηρεάσειν, ‘ and certainly will not insult them in his cups’. 
The MSS. have τηρήσειν, which Usener retains and Bignone translates 
‘ will not continue in drunkenness’, but he admits in his note that there 
is no evidence for such a meaning of τηρήσειν. Hermann suggested 
ληρήσειν, ‘he will not talk nonsense in hrs cups’, which is poor sense. 
Kochalsky’s amplification is not convincing, τήρησιν κοσμίου being 
ἃ Most unnatural expression. I incline to connect the clause with the 
preceding and to read ἐπηρεάσειν, a rather unusual word which might 
be corrupted to τηρήσειν : the verb is constructed with acc. in Arist. 
Pol. v. το. 15. 

6. οὐδὲ πολιτεύσεται : Epicurus both recommended and practised 
abstention from public hfe on the ground that it was destructive 
of ἀταραξία. 

8. (0d) μεταλλάξει αὐτὸν τὸν βίον, ‘he will not put an end to his hfe 
altogether ’. This 15. perhaps a rather hazardous conjecture for μετάξει 
αὐτὸν rod βίον, but the corruption is deep-seated For the expression 
cf. Isocr. 110 B, 192 a. Usener reads καταξιοῖ αὑτὸν τοῦ βίου, ‘he sull 
thinks himself fit to live’, Bignone prefers the text of f μεθέξειν αὐτὸν 
τοῦ βίον, ‘he will retain a part in life’, which presumably carries with 
it the change of πηρωθείς to πηρωθέντα. Kochalsky has a characteristic 
amplification per’ ἀταραξίας ἐξάξει αὑτὸν τοῦ βίου, ‘he will qutetly 
remove himself from life’, but this is surely the opposite of the sense 
required - the true Epicurean wil] endure, though biinded. 

δ 120°. 2. οὐ πανηγυριεῖν δέ : another instance of Epicurus’ distrust 
of rhetonc: see ὃ 118. 

καὶ κτήσεως. . . rod μέλλοντος : the Epicurean sage must be a 
practical man. Cf. Sens. Vas. x) ἅμα δεῖν καὶ φιλοσοφεῖν καὶ οἰκονομεῖν 
καὶ τοῖς λοιποῖς οἰκειώμασι χρῆσθαι : 

4. Φιλαγρήσειν : a pleasant and rather modern touch in the sage. 

4. φίλον τε οὐδένα προήσεσθαι ts Bignone’s correction *for the MS. 
κτήσεσθαι : cf. § 118. 2. Usener made the violent change φίλην yap 
οὐδένα κτήσεσθαι, ‘for no one will find fortune a constant friend’. 
Kochalsky reads ἀποκτήσεσθαι in the same sense as Bignone’s text, but 
the word is unnatural and apparently otherwise unknown except in 
ecclesiastical Greek. 

εὐδοξίας... καταφρονήσεσθαι : for the Epicurean view of worldly 
reputation see K. A. vii. 

6. ἐν ταῖς θεωρίαις, ‘at public festivals’, and especially religious 
ceremonies, That this is the meaning Bignone has shown by reference 


COMMENTARY. § 118-121 419 


to Plut. contr. Epic. Beat. 13. 1095 ¢, where it is said that the sage 
will take special pleasure in recitanons and the Dionysiac festivals : 
we may compare what is said of Epicurus’ own ‘devotion to the gods’ 
in § τὸ  Kochalsky perversely translates, ‘he will specially have 
friends in his philosophical speculations ’. 

§ 181°. Bignone has, I think, quite conclusively shown that this 
passage and that which precedes it in the MSS. ἁμαρτήματα... ἐπὶ 
τὴν ἐπιστολήν should be transposed. As the section stands in the 
MSS, a passage on the general moral tenets of the Epicureans is 
interposed without introduction between two passages descriptive of the 
‘wise men’. By the transposition the sequence 1s restored. This 13 
strongly confirmed by the words which come at the end of the two 
passages respectively. (1) μετιτέον δὲ ἐπὶ τὴν ἐπιστολήν in the MSS. 
is out of place and 1s followed by the further description of the codds, 
εἰκόνας τε ἀναθήσειν κτλ. with the transposition it 1s brought to us 
natural place just before the third letter. (2) τὸ ἑξῆς" δοκεῖ δ᾽ αὐτοῖς is 
almost meaningless as it stands: with the transposition τὸ ἑξῆς 1s the 
direction to the scribe to include the passage about the moral tenets, 
which, as Bignone supposes, was written, probably by Laertus himself, 
as an adscript, δοκεῖ δ᾽ αὐτοῖς are the fist words of the passage which 
give both meaning and construction to ἁμαρτήματα ἄνισα εἶναι. 

Usener perceived that there was dislocation but wrongly teferred the 
note τὸ ἑξῆς" δοκεῖ δ᾽ αὐτοῖς to the third letter, which followed, and 
regarded ithe second passage on the σοφός, εἰκόνας τε ἀναθήσειν, as the 
adscript ; he then had to suppose a lengthy lacuna before ἁμαρτήματα 
containing a summary of the whole Epicurean position. 

I, εἰ ἔχοι, ἀδιαφόρως ἂν σχοίη the MSS. have σχοίης, of which 
Kithn’s σχοίη 1s a certain correction. Bignone has shown that no 
further correciion 15 necessary ; ‘he will set up statues (of others), but 
whether he has one himself, he will be indifferent’, This 1s confirmed 
by the scholium to K. A. xxix, when in giving examples of the division 
of pleasures it 1s Said οὔτε δὲ φυσικὰς οὔτ᾽ ἀναγκαίας, ὡς στεφάνους καὶ 
ἀνδριάντων ἀναθέσεις. Usener taking the words to refer to some other 
trait of the σοφός, supposed something lost before ei ἔχοι and suggested 
πλοῦτον or τέκνα : Kochalsky would prefer οἴκησιν. But no addition 18 
necessary. 

2. διαλέξασθαι : as the aonst infinitive is read by three of the MSS., 
there seem$ no need with Usener to accept the solecism ὀρθῶς dv... 
διαλέξεσθαι : Cobet bracketed dy, but τὸ seems simpler to read the 
aorist. 

3. ἐνεργείᾳ is Usener’s correction of the MS. ἐνεργεῖν : he will not 
‘in practice’ make poems. We ought perhaps to accept Kochalsky’s 
δὲ for re, as a contrast with the previous clause is wanted. 

οὐκ εἶναι τε ἕτερον ἑτέρου σοφώτερον. Bignone explains that, as the 
aim of Epicureamism was purely practical and the doctrine was laid 
down once for all by the founder, any idea of progress or superiority 
of one Epicurean thinker over another is impossible. οὐκ εἶναι was 

pd2z 


420 VI. VITA EPICURI 


accepted by the old editors from the οὐκ éwa τε of B. The majority 
of the MSS. have οὐ κινεῖται, whence Usener reads οὐ κινεῖσθαι, of 
sie I cannot make any satisfactory sense. 

9. καὶ καθ᾽ ὕπνους δὲ ὅμοιον ἔσεσθαι: cf. Ep. ad Men. 8 138. 5 ταῦτα 
οὖν καὶ τὰ τούτοις συγγενῆ μελέτα πρὸς σεαυτὸν nes καὶ νυκτὸς πρός τε 
τὸν ὅμοιον σεαυτῷ, καὶ οὐδέποτε οὔθ᾽ ὕ vrap οὔτ᾽ ὄναρ ὃ ἱαταραχ' 

11. τὸ ἑξῆς, on Bignone’s theory, which I follow is a direction to 
the scribe, to add in the text the section r20. 5-10 which was 
originally wntten in the margin, and was wrongly inserted above. 

δοκεῖ δ᾽ αὐτοῖς are similarly the opening words of this short section 
on Epicurean tenets and are to be read continuously with ἁμαρτή- 
ματα κτλ 

§ 120°. 1, ἁμαρτήματα ἄνισα εἶναι if δοκεῖ δ' αὐτοῖς be read in 
connexion with these words it 1s not necessary to suppose any loss, 
though the transition is a httle abrupt. Editors before Bignone taking 
them in their place in the MSS. after ἐν ταῖς θεωρίαις were compelled 
to think that something had dropped out. Cobet read (ra) ἁμαρτήματα 
and Usener would supply (τὰ κατορθώματα καὶ τὰ) ἁμαρτήματα which 
Kochalsky adopts in his translation. But Bignone has shown (r) that 
the article 1s not required, because the Epicureans did not maintain 
that αἰ faults were unequal : some may be equal; (2) that the addition 
of τὰ κατορθώματα 18 unnecessary, as in other passages(e.g D. L vu. 
120; Hor. Sav. 1. 3 98) it is the equality or mequalty of sins alone 
which 1s in question, and indeed Epicurus, holding that no sage could 
be wiser than another, would not mind recognizing equality in good 
deeds. The argument ts of course directed against the Stoic doctrine 
of the equality of all ἁμαρτήματα 

5. συνίστασθαι .. ἐκπεπληρωμένοις the words in the MSS.are clearly 
corrupt, but it is unnecessary to do more than emend ἐκπεπλήρων with 
Bignone to ἐκπεπληρωμένος Those who are ‘complete in their 
pleasures’ are the wise, and they alone, according to Epicurus (§ 118, 
cf, K. Δ. xl), are capable of having the fullest friendship. Usener 
unnecessarily read συνίστασθαι δὲ αὐτὴν κατὰ κοινωνίαν μεγίσταις 
ἡδοναῖς ἐκπεπληρωμένην, “τῇ a community of interests which 1s made 
complete by the greatest pleasures ’. 

§ 121%. 1. τὴν εὐδαιμονίαν... ἀφαίρεσιν ἡδονῶν one would naturally 
lake this contrast to be between the perfect happiness of the gods 
which knows no increase or diminution and human happinéss, which 1s 
a balance between pleasures added and lost. This was the view of 
Meibom who emended καὶ τὴν ζἀνθρωπίνην), ἔχουσαν προσθήκην 
But this 15 not good Epicureanism: for Epicurus the perfect human 
happiness, the complete removal of pain, was equal to that of the 
gods (cf. e g. Lucr. in. 322 ‘ut mi impediat dignam dis degere vitam ). 
Bignone is therefore mght im supposing the contrast to be between the 
Epicurean ideal of happiness and that commonly held by men. 

4. μετιτέον δὲ ἐπὶ τὴν ἐπιστολήν : these words now fall into their 
natural place. 


COMMENTARY. § § 121-137 421 


§ 135. 7. ἐν τῇ μικρᾷ ἐπιτομῇ : the ‘Lesser Summary’ is usually 
taken to be the letter to Herodotus in which there is no reference to 
prophecy or divination, Gassendi therefore proposed to emend to 
μακρᾷ, but it is possible either that a passage on the subject has 
dropped out of the letter, or that the compilers have here given 
a wrong reference 

8. μαντικὴ. . γινόμενα (7 3)" the phrase 1s difficult and in any 
case very compendious. The thought appears to be: since events 
are regulated by natural laws there can be no supernatural revelation ; 
even if there were, the events which occur do not concern the true 
Epicurean, for he has the regulation of his hfe in his own hands: cf. 
Ep. ad Men. § 133 τὸ παρ᾽ ἡμᾶς ἀδέσποτον. 

9. οὐδὲν παρ᾽ ἡμᾶς, ‘nothing to us’ appears to be the sense. But 
this 1s a very unusual meaning of παρά, which after οὐδέν, &c , usually 
means ‘in comparison with’, Meibom accordingly read πρός, which 
would be normal. Bignone, comparing τὸ παρ᾽ ἡμᾶς ἀδέσποτον, cited 
above, would read οὐδὲν παρὰ τὸ παρ᾽ ἡμᾶς, ‘nothing m comparison 
with that which 1s in our control’, which is attractive, but probably 
unnecessary 

§ 186. 1 διαφέρεται Se... . ἡδονῆς The Cyrenaics, hke Epicurus, 
selected pleasure as the ‘end’, but attached a quite different meaning. 
Epicurus held that there were two kinds of pleasures, the ‘static’ 
(καταστηματική), Which consisted in the calm resulting from the com- 
plete removal of pam, and the ‘kmetic’, which could not increase 
pleasure but only give it variation. The Cyrenaics, on the other 
hand, regarded ‘static’ pleasure as purely indifferent, and ‘kimetic’ 
pleasure was their aim: thus they approached more nearly to the 
popular conception of Epicureanism. 

3. ἀμφότερα cannot be right by itself: the older editors altered it 
so as to refer to the two ἧδοναί mentioned above, Meibom to ἀμῴο- 
τέραν and Gassendi to ἀμφοτέρας. Usener suggested more probably 
that a neuter word had been lost, and Bignone’s supplement γένη 1s 
more hkely than Kochalsky’s σχήματα. 

5. φίλους : there seems no reason to take Gassendi’s correction 
φιλοσόφους 

8. δέ again Usener’s suggestion διχῶς is gratuitous. 

11. edpppovrvn must here denote some violent form of pleasurable 
experience, and Bignone may be right in supposing a reference to its 
use of the feelings of banqueters in Hom. Od. 1x 5 ff : 

οὐ yap ἐγώ γέ τί φημι τέλος χαριέστερον εἶναι 
ἢ ὅτ᾽ ἂν ἐυφροσύνη μὲν ἔχῃ κατὰ δῆμον ἅπαντα, 
ϑαιτυμόνες δ᾽ ἀνὰ δώματ᾽... κτλ. 

8 187. 4. τὴν δὲ ψυχὴν. . . τὸ μέλλον " for this idea that pleasures 
can be varied, though not increased, by duration, compare K. A. ix and 
the opening (§ 122) of the letter to Menoeceus. The Cyrenaics did not 
“look before and after’, but regarded only the intensity of the pleasure 
at the moment of its occurrence (μονόχρονος ἡδονή). 


422 VI. VITA EPICURI 


5. τῆς ψυχῆς : Casaubon’s insertion of τὰς is not necessary in the 
very loose writing of these notes. 

6. τῷ τὰ Loa... χωρὶς λόγου : an interesting appeal to experience to 
support the central moral doctrine of Epicureanism. 

9. ἵνα καὶ ὁ Ἡρακλῆς... : the reference is to Soph. Zrach, 787, 788 : 


Body, Wlov ἀμφὶ δ᾽ ἐκτύπουν πέτραι, 
Λοκρῶν τ᾽ ὄρειοι πρῶνες Εὐβοίας τ᾽ ἄκρα. 


10. χιτῶνος must be right, and the χειμῶνος of P! a mere error. 
Diogenes is clearly making the quotation from memory, and having 
used βοᾷ as the introductory verb, substitutes something for the 
participle βοῶν at the beginning of the line. But the MS. δάκνων can 
hardly be nght, nor are the older conjectures δεινῶς and λάσκων 
probable. Kochalsky would read δάκεων, going after ὑπό, ‘when he 
is being devoured by the biting of the shirt’, Bog then being part of 
the quotation: but the arrangement of the words 15 very awkward, and 
δάκεων in this sense improbable. Casaubon’s δακρύων seems an obvious 
and simple correction. 

11, ἔστενον : again by memory for Sophocles’ ἐκτύπουν. 

§ 188. 1. οὐ δι᾽ αὐτάς must be the right reading, though it has been 
corrupted in some of the MSS. 

3. διαγωγὴν. - . ἀγωγήν, ‘education 1s a way of life’, a means διάγειν 
τὸν βίον, a process that must be continued from age to youth, So 
Kochalsky, who translates ‘education continues over the whole of Itfe’. 
This 1s the natural meaning derived fiom the ordinary sense of διάγειν 
Bignone, connecting it apparently with a transitive sense of the verb, 
translates ‘ direction ’. 

4. ἀχώριστον. .. μόνην " cf, Κ΄ Δι v and £p. ad Men. ὃ 132. 

5. βρωτά, ‘things to eat’, 1s the reading of the majority of the 
MSS. and might well be taken as a typical example of χωριστὰ ἀγαθά : 
food is a necessity to life, but Bpwrd, particular foods, may be done 
without. Usener suggests βρωτά τινα, but in the very rough style of 
Diogenes’ notes this is hardly necessary. B'F read Bpord, ‘ mortal 
things‘, which Bignone prefers, pointing out that these two MSS. are 
the chief representatives of the two classes. He translates ‘mortal 
goods’, and for the :dea refers to K, A. v and EY. ad Aten. § 134 and 
§ 135: but the support 1s slight and, in spite of Bignones argument 
that in his maxims Epicurus is apt to use words of poetic colouring, 
the expression would be very strange. 

6—10 are an introduction to the Kvpia: Δόξαι, which Diogenes 
regards ag the ‘ crown’ of all Epicurus’ work. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


(This Hist does not pretend to be complete, but contains the main works, 
which deal directly with the constitution or interpretahon of the text, 
published in the last fifty years ) 


I. Eprtrons ΑΝ TRANSLATIONS * 


Η. Usener, Zpicurea, 1887 (Teubner). 

O. Tescari (translation of letter to Herodotus in Latin, with brief 
critical notes), 1907 (in Stud: Ltaham d: Filologia Classica). 

A. Kochalsky (translauon m German and critical notes), 1914 
(Teubner). 

E. Bignone (translation in Italian, with cntical and explanatory 
notes and appendices), 1920 (Laterza, Ban). 

P. von der Muehll (text and apparatus criticus), 1922 (Teubner), 

Δ. Ernout (translauon in French in ed. of Lucr. I, 1) 1925 (Société 
d’Eduion—Les Belles-Letires). 

R. D. Hicks (translation and brief notes) 1925 (Heinemann, Loeb 
Senes, Diogenes Laertius). 


II Booxs anp PamPHLETs;: 


T. Tohte, Epikurs Kriterien der Wahrheit, 1874 (Clausthal), 

}. Woltjer, Zucreh philosophia cum fontbus comparata, 1877 
Groningen), 

A. Brnieger, Epskurs Brief an Herodot, 1882 (Halle), and £prkurs Lehre 
von der Seele, 1893 (Halle). 

W. Scott, Kragmenia Herculanensta, 1885 (Oxford). 

P.-F. Thomas, De Z£picur: Canonica, 1889 (Alcan, Paris). 

C. Giussapi, Stud: Lucres:ant (vol. 1 of edition of Lucretius), 1896 
(Turin). 

C. Pascal, Stud: crtticr sul poema di Lucresto, 1903. 

W. Cronert, Kolofes und Menedemos, 1906 (Leipzig). 

F, Merbach, De Epicurt Canomca, 1909 (Weida). 

R.D. Hicks, Store and Epicurean, 1910 (Longmans). 

W. Arndt, Lmendationes Epicureae, 1913 (Berlin). 


III. Articres ΙΝ PERIODICALS: 


I. Bywater, Classical Review, ii, 1888. 
F, Lortzing, Beriin. Philolog. Wochenschrift, 1888. 


424 BIBLIOGRAPHY 


H. Weil, Journal des Savants, 1888. 

C. Wotke (Gnomologium Vaticanum), Wiener Studien, 1888 (with 
notes by Usener and Gomperz). 

J. sek Arnim, A/manach der kon, Akad. der Wessenschafien zu Wren, 

vii. 1907. 

E. Bignone, Rendiconti del R. Istel. Lombard. delle Sciense e Lettere, 
1908, 1017. 

— Alt della R. Accad. delle Scienze dt Torino, 1910, 1912. 

— Ruvesta dt Frlologea, 1915, 1917. 

—~ Nuova Rrvesta Storica, 1917. 

R. Ὁ. Hicks, Proceedings of Cambridge Phrl. Soctely, τοῖο; Classtcal 
Review, xxxvii_ 1923. 

R. ἘΟΣΊΡΡέροι Archi fur Gesch. der Philosophee, χχίνιτοιο; Hermes, 
li, 1918. 

H. Leopold, Afnemosyne, xliii. 1915. 


INDEX OF THE PRINCIPAL TERMS 


ἀβέβαιος Ep. IIT. 1.34. 

ἀβληχρός Fr. ιν. 

ἀδέσποτος Ep. 111. 133. 

ἄδηλον Ep. 1. 38, 39, 8ο. Vit. 32. 
ἀδιάλυτος Ep. 1, 54. Fr. 56 
ἀδιανόητος Ep. 1. 47 Ὁ; II. 97. 
ἀδιάφορος Vit. 120}. 


ἀδικία K, Δ. χχχιν, Fr, 60. 
ἀδιόριστος Fr. ᾿χχχὶ. 

ἁδρότης E I. 83. 

ἀθανασία Ep. 111 124. 
ἀθορύβως Ep. 11. 87}. Fr. 77. 


ἄθροισμα Ep. 1 62, 63, 64, 65, 69; 
Il. 100, 108, K. Δ. Ιχ, Fr, 6, 

ἀθροισμός Ep. II. go. 

ἄθμοος Ep 1 56. 

ἀθροότης Ep If. τοῦ. 

aixia Fr 24 

αἵρεσις Ep, 111. 128, 129,132. Vit. 
27, 30, 34, 136. 

aiperés Ep. 111. 129. 
Vit, 30, 


αἴσθησις Ep. I. 38, 39, 48, 55, 58, 


Fr. xxus 


59, 62, 63, 64, 65, 68, 825 11. 90, 
XXIV. 


ΟἹ; IN.124. K. A. xxin, 
Fr. 43, 49,60. Vit 31, 32, 33. 
αἰσθητήμιο, Ep. 1 50, 53. 
αἰσθητικός Ep. 1, 64. 
αἰτιολογεῖν Ep. 1. 80, 82. 
αἰτιολογία Ep. II 97. 
ἀκατάπληκτος Vit. 23. 
ἀκέραιος K. Δ. x11. 


ἀκοή Ep. 1. 53. 
ἀκουστικός ΚΕΝ I. 52, 53 
ἀκρίβεια Ep. 1. 78, 80, 83 


ἀκρίβωμα Ep. 1. 36, 83. 
ἀκρισία Κα Δ. xxi! 
ἀκρόαμα Ἐτ. το. 
ἄκρον ἘΡ. 
ἀλγηδών Ep. Il]. 129. ΚΕ. A. x, xi. 
τι iv, xxxvit, lxxi, 36, 62, Vit. 
34, 137. 
«croupynres Ep. 11. 97, 
ἀλληλοῦχος Ep. 11. 99. 
ἀλλοφυλία ES Il. τοῦ. 


41,57; Il. 107. K.A.1v. 


ἀλλόφυλος K. Δ. xxxix, 

ἀλογία Ep If. 8). Fr. ixn. 

ἀλογίστως Ep. IIE. 134. 

ἀλυπέα Fr. 85, 

ἅλως Ep 11, rio. 

ἀμετάβλητος Ep I. 41. 

ἀμετάβολος Ep. 1. 59. 

ἀμέτοχος Frei 

ἀμιγής Ep. 1. 59. 

ἀμύθητος Ep Il. 115. 

ἀμφισβήτησις K. Δ. xxiv 

ae Ep. Ll. 74, 77, Ul. 115. 
]. 


ἄναγω ἡ K. Δ, xxii 

ἀναισθησία Ep. I. 81. 

ἀναισθητεῖν Ep I. 65. 

ἀνακοπή Ep. 1. 42 

ἀναλογία Ep. 1. 58, 59 Fr. 4g. 
Vit. 32. 

ἀναλόγως Ep. I. 40. 

avdravots Ep, 111. 125. 

ἀνατολή Ep. I. 76, 79; H. 92. 

ἀναφής ae I. 40; 11. 86. Fr. τό. 

ἀναφορά Fr, 59. 

ἄναψις Ep. 11. 92. 

ἀνείλησις Ep. 11, 100. 

ἀνεπιλόγιστος Fr, Ix. 

ἀνεπίμικτος K. A, xxxIXx. 

ἀνομογένειος Vit. 32. 

ἀνταναπλήρωσις Ep. I. 48. 

ἀνταπόδοσις Ep. Tf. 105, 

ἀντέξωσις Ep. II. 93. 

ἀντικοπή Ep. I. δι, 47 Ὁ. 

ἀντικόπτειν Ep, 1. 47 ἧς 61, 46 Ὁ, 62. 

ἀντικοπτός Ep. I. 47 Ὁ 

ἀντιμαρτυρεῖν ἘΡ. 1. 47 a, 48, 50, 51, 
55; 11. 88, 92. Vit. 34. 

ἀντιμαρτύρησις Fr. 49. 

ἀντροειδὴς Ep. If. 105. 

avimaperos Ἐτ.3 Vit. 135. 

ἀνυπέρβλητος Ep. 1. 47 a. 

ἀνυπεύθυνος Ep. ΕΠ. 133. 

ἀνωμαλής Ep. 11. 113. 

ἀνωμαλία Ep. 11. 113. , 

ἀξίωμα Ep. [1. 86, 


Κ, Δ. κ"". 


426 


ἀραχησία Ep. ΠῚ, 
ἀοχλησία ἘΡ. 127. 
dex porees τὸς Fr. Ixxix. 
άθεια FE 3. 
aay ‘i 46b. 
ἀπειρία Ep ree I. 116. Fr. x. 
ὅπὸ mar Ep. I. 60, 47b, 73, 753 
K, Δ. xii. 
eahe K, Δ. xxvi. 
ἡπτὸς Ep, I. 42. 
τ μην βὰς Ep. I. 46b. 
na ἐννησις mat 11. τος. 
ἀπόδοσις Ep. 94. 
ἀποκατάστασις Ep. I. 44. 
ἀπόλαυσις Ep. 111. 131, 132. Fr. 
xxvii, xlu. 
ἀπολαυστός Ep. 111. 124. 
ἀπόληψις Ep. II. τος. 
drrovia Fy. 1. ve 136. 
ἀποπαλμός Ep. I. 44. 
ἀπόπαλσις Ep 11. 108. 
ἀπόρροια Ep. I. 46a. 
ἁπορροῦς Ep. 1. 47 4. 
ἀπόστασις Ep. I. 468. 
ἀπόστημα Ep. I. 80; II. οἱ, 103. 
ἁποτέλεσις Ep, 11, 108, 
ἀποτελεστικός Ep. L 53; 11. 
102, 108, 115. 
ἀποτομή Ep. II. 88. 
ἀπόφασις Ep. 111. 124. 
ἀραιότης Ep. 11. 107. 
ἀρετή Ep. 111. 132. 
Vit. 28. 
ἀρρωστία K. A. ιν. 
ἀρχή Ep. I. 41, 443 11. 116; 111. 
128, 132, 134. Fr. xxi, §9, 85, 
wh Vit. 30, 138. 
ἀσείστως Ep. 11. 87. 
ἀσθένεια Ep. 1. 77. 
ἄστατος Ep. III. 133. 
ἀστραπή Ep. II. rot, loz, 114. 
ἀστρολογία ἘΠΡ.11, 113. 
ἀστρόλογος Ep. IT. 93. 
ἀσύμβλητος Ep I. 83. 
ἀσφάλεια K. Δ. vil, xni, xiv, xxvni. 
Fr. xxxi. 
do, ολία joo II. 85. 
do: p. 1. 67, 69, 70. 
ἄσωτος E Ep. I]. 131. K. 4.x. 
ἁταρακτεῖν YP: I. 80. 


1or, 


Fr, 12, 23. 


canary K. A. xvii- 
ἀταραξία Ep. 1. 82; ἘΣ 83,96; IIL. 
128 Fr. 1, 80. Vit. 136. 
ἀτάραχος Ep. I. 80. Fr. Ixxix.. 


INDEX OF THE PRINCIPAL TERMS 


ἄτομον Ep. I. 41, 48, 503 11, 86, 99, 
102, 110, Fr. 16. Vit. 4, 27. 
Gropos Ep. I. 41, 42, 43) 44, 45, 54, 

1 56; 58 » 59, 61, 62, 65. τ 7. 


αὔξησις ἘῸΝ Il. 

αὐτάρκεια ΠΝ 130. Fr. xxxvi, 
xliv, xxvii, 29, 44, 70. 

αὐτάρκης Fr. xlv, 45. 

αὐτοτελῶς Ep. I]. ὃς. 

ἀφαίρεσις Vit. 120b. 

ἀφανής Ep. 11. 104. 

ἀφάνισις Ep. 11. 111. 

ἀφθαρσία Ep. I. 76; 111. 123. 

ἄφθαρτος ἘΝ 1, 54, 98, 8r3 Ill. 123. 
K. A. i. τ. 

ἀφοβία ἘΡ. 1 as 

doses Ep. 1. 54. 

ἀφυσιολόγητος Fr. 31, 44. 

ἀχάριστος Fr. Ἰχιχ, Ixxv. 


βάρος Ep. I. 54, 61, 68. 

βάσις Ep. I. 46. 

Bios Ep 11. 86. Vat. 28, 30, 136. 
βιωτικά Vit. 117, 135. 

βλέψις Ep. IIL, 130. 

βούλησις Ep. 1. 77, 81. 

βράδος Ep. I. 46b. 

βροντή Ep. 1]. 100, rot, 102, 103. 


γαληνισμός E 
γένεσις Ep. Pe. ΤᾺ ὅπ. 86,92. Fr. 
ex, x Vit. 30. 
Seas Ep. 1. 78, 793 11. 85; I 
123,124. Fr. xxvi. 


δαψίλεια Fr. ixvii. 
δελεάζεσθαι Fr. xvi. 
δήλωσις Ep. 1. 76. 
διάδοσις Ep. 11. τοῦ, τοῦ. 
διάθεσις Vit. 117. 
διαθερμασία Fr. 5. 
διαίρεσις Vit. 34. 
δίαιτα Ep. 111. 131: 
διάκρισις Ep. I. 78. 
διαλαμβάνειν Ep. L 38, 58, 67; 
85; 111. 123, 133. 
διάλειμμα Ep. ae 13}: 


διαληπτός Ep. 

διάληψιες re wt "18, 69 

διαλάγισμα ἘΣ ΓΝ 

διαλογισμός IL. tie τ, χ, 40, 
49. Vit. on 


διαλύειν Ep. 1. 41, 42. 


INDEX OF THE PRINCIPAL TERMS 


διάλυσις Ep. 1. 41, 54. 

διαμονή Ep. 11. 89. 

διανοεῖσθαι Ep. 1. 49. 

διανόησις Ep. I. 63. 

διάνοια Ep, I. 38, 49, 50, 51, 62, 78. 
Κ. Δ. x, xviil, xx, xxIV. Vit. 31. 

διαπίπτειν Ep, II. 98 

διαπορία Vit. 27, 119. 

διάρθρωσις Ep. 11. 89. 

διάρρηξις Ep. 11. τοῦ. 

διάστασις Ep. II. 100. 

διάστημα Ep. 11. 89, 110. 

διαφορά Ep. I. 42, 55, 56. 

διαχεῖν K. Δ. xxx. 

διήθησις Ep. UL. ror, 

δικαιοπραγία Vit. 28, 

δίκαιος K. Δ. XVI, XXX1, XXX, XXXVI, 
xxxvil, xxxvin ΕἾΤ xlin, 57. 

δικαιοσύνη K. A. xxxiu. = Fr. 80. 
Vit. 28. 

δίνη Ep. 11 92, 93, 112, 113, 114. 

δίνησις Ep. II. go. 

δῖνος Ep. 11. 90, 105. 

δόξα Ep. I. 35, 37, 52, 77, 81; If 
87; ILI. 123,132. K.A.xv, xxiv, 

Fr. xxix, lix, 45, 57,5 

60, 68,75. Vit. 27, 28, 31. 

δοξαζόμενον (rd) Ep. 1. 37, 38, II. 
go Κ. A, xxn, xxiv, 

δοξαστικός K. A. xxiv, 

δρόσος Ep. 11. 108, 109. 

δυσελπιστεῖν Fr. xvii. 

δύσις Ep. I. 76, 79; 11. 92. 

δυσπόριστος Ep. [1{. 130. 
xxvi. Fr. 67. 

ὀυσφορία Fr. 63. 

δυσχερές (τό) Ep. 111. 129. 


Fr. 15. 


K. Δ. 


ἐγγαληνίζειν Ep 1. 37. 

ἐγκατάλειμμα Ep. 1. 50. 

ἐγκύκλιος Ep. 11. ὃς. Fr. Ivin. 

εἴδωλον Bp a6 a, 47 a, 48, 50. Fr. 
xxiv. τ, 28. 

εἰκών Ep. I. 51. 

εἴλικρινῆς Ep, 11. 89. Κ. Δ. xiv. 

«“ἱμαρμένη Ep. 111. (133), 134. Vit. 
26. 


ἔκθλεψις Ipp. 1. 533 11, 109. 
ἔκλειψις Ep. I. 76, 79; 11. 96. 
ἐκλόγισις Κι. A, xvii. 

ἐκπιασμάς Ep. 11. 101. 
ἐκπνευματοῦν Ep. 11 105. 
ἐκπνευμάτωσις Ep. 11. 114. 
ἔκπτωσις Ep, 11. 102, 103, 114. 


427 


exrrupeats EP. II, tor, 103, 135. 

ἐκριπισμός Ep, IL. 101. 

ἔκστασις Fr, 21. 

ἐκφάνεια Ep. 11. 92. 

ἐκχώρησις Κ΄. Δ. xiv. 

ἐλάχιστον (τό) Ep. 1. 58. 
evOepia Fr. ἸΙχχντ!. 

ἕλιξ Ep. 11. 93. 

ἐμπεριλαμβάνειν Ep, I1. 90, 105. 

ἐμπερίληψις Ep. II. τοῦ. 

ἐμποδοστατεῖν Ep. II 95. 

ἔμπτωσις Fr. xxiv. 

ἔμφασις Ep. 11. 95. 

ἐναπόληψις Ep. 1. 77. 

ἐναποσφραγίζεσθαι Ep. 1. 49. 

ἐνάργεια Ep. 1. 48, 52, 71, 82. 
XX11. 

ἐνάργημα Ep. 1. 723 11 οἵ, 93, 96. 

ἐναργής Ep. 111, 123. Vit. 33. 

ἐναργῶς Ep. 1. 67. 

ἔνδεια Ep, III. 130. 
Fr 18. 

ἐνδέχεσθαι Ep. 1. 78, 80; II. 87, 88, 
90, 93, 94, 97, 103, 104, 105, 107, 
108, 113. 

ἔνδοξος K. Δ. νι, Fr. 9. 

ἐνεργεία Ετ. τ. Vit. 121 b. 

ἐνέργημα Ep. 1. 37. 

ἐννόημα Ep. I. 38. 

ἔννοια Ep I. 69. 


3. 
ida Ep I, 52. 
ἐνοχλεῖν Κα. A XL, 
ἔνστημα Ep II. οἱ. 
ἐξαγωγή K A xx. Fr. xxxvill. 
ἐξαιτιολογεῖν Ep. 1. 82. 


᾿ξακριβοὺν Ep. I. 35, 36, 68, 75, 78, 


3 
ἕξις Vit 147. 
ἐξορίζεσθαι Κι. A, χχχιχ. 
ἐξοριστικύς Κι. Δ. χιν. 
ἐπαίσθημα Vit. 32. 
ἐπαίσθησις Ep. 1. 52, 53. 
ἐπάρδευσις ἘΡ. 11. 89, τοο. 
ἐπέκρηξις Ep. 11. 115. 
ἐπερεισμύς Ep, I. 50. 
ἐπίβλεψις Ep. 1. 35. 
ἐπιβλητικῶς Ep. 1. 50. 
ἐπιβολή Ep. 1. 35, 36, 38, 51, 62; 69, 
70, 83. Κ. Δ. xxiv. Vit. 32. 
ἐπιβολὴ τῆς διανοίας I. 38,51. Κὶ, Δ. 
xxiv. Vit. 31. 
ἐπιεικής Fr, xv, 
ἐπιθύμημα Fr. 31. 


Κι. ἃ, 


Κ, Δ. Χν!21) ΧΧΙ. 


K.A, xxiv. Vit. 


438 


ἐπιθυμία Ep. 111. 127. 
xxvi, xxix, xxx. Fr. xxi, xxxv, 
Ἰχχὶ, ixxx, 28, 46, 66, 68, 74. 

ἐπικρίνειν Ep. I. 37. 

ἐπίληψις Fr. 31. 

ἐπιλογίζεσθαι ἘΡ. 1. 72. 

T. XXXV. 

ἐπιλογισμός Ep. 1.73. K Δ. xx 

ἐπιμαρτυρεῖν Ep. I. 50, 51. KA. 
xxxvii, Vit. 34. 

ἐπιμαρτύρησις K. Δ. xxiv. 

ἐπινέμησις Ep. 1], 93. 

ἐπινοεῖσθαι Ep. 1. 40. 

ἐπίνοια 1. 45. Vit. 32. 

ἐπίπεμψις Ep. 11. τοο. 

ἐπιπολῆς Ep. I, 48. 

ἐπίπονος Fr. 66. 

ἐπιπροσθέτησις Ep. 11. 92. 

ἐπισημασία Ep. 11. 98, 115. 

ἐπιστήμη Fr. 9. 

ἐπισυνωθεῖν Ep. 11. 104. 

ἐπίτασις Vit. 121 a. 

ἐπιτομή Ep. 1. 35, 37, If. 85. 
27, 31, 135. 

ἐργαστικός Fr, xlv 

ἑτεροίωσις Ep. 11. 98, 

ἑτεροφρονεῖν Fr. xvii. 

εὐγνωμονεῖν Fr. [xii 

εὐδαιμονία Ep. 111. 122, 127. 
xxxiil. Vit. 121 a, 

evdidyuros K. Δ. χχνι, 

εὐελπιστία Fr. xxxix 

εὐημέρημα Fr. 76. | 

εὐκαταφρόνητος Fr. iv. 

εὐκινησία Ep. 1. 63. 

etxraios Fr. xxxv. 

eidoyioras Ep. ILI. 134. 

εὐπορία K. Δ. xiv. 

εὐπόριστος Ep. 111. 130, 133. 
XV, xxi. r. 67. 

εὐσταθής Fr. 11. 

εὐσυμπλήρωτος Ep. ITI. 133. 

εὐφροσύνη Fr. 1. 


ἡδονή Ep. 111. 128, 129, 130, 131. 
K. A. in, vill, 1X, X, XVII, XIX, XxX. 
Fr. xxxvil, 10, 12, 23, 37, 59, 60, 
62, 79. Vit. 4, 6, II, 34, 1218, 
136, 137, 138. 

ἡμερότης Fr. xxxvi. 

ἡσυχία K, Δ. xiv. 


K. Δ. x, xi, 


K. A, xxi. 


Vit. 


Fr. 


Κ, Δ. 


θάνατος Ep. III. 124, 125, 133. Κ. Δ. 
ii, x, xi. © Vit. 23. 


INDEX OF THE PRINCIPAL TERMS 


θαρρεῖν K. A. vi, xxviii, xxxix, xl. 
Fr. 29, 48. 

θερμαντικός Fr. 5, 6, 7. 

θερμασία Ep. 11. 93, 111. 

ry dod is ae 

éois Ep. I. 46a, 48, 75. 

θεωρητός Ep. 1. 57, 62, 47 Ὁ. 

θεωρία Ep. I. 35, το; II. 86; UI. 
128. Vit. 30, 1208. 

Onreia Fr. Ixvil. 

θλίψις ΕἸ: II. τοῦ, 107. 

θόρυβος Ep. III. 132. 

θυμοκατοχεῖν Fr. Ixu. 


ἰατρεία Fr, Ixiv. 

ἰατρική Vit. 138. 

ἐδιότης Ep. I 58, 71. 
idtérporos Ep. I. 52. 
ἰδίωμα Ep. 1. 725 11. 109. 
Ἶρις Ep. 11. 109. 
ἰσοσθένεια Vit 32. 
ἰσοταχής Ep. I. 61, 62. 
ἱστορία Ep. [. 79. 


καθαρός Ep. I. 83. 

κάθαρσις Ep. 1]. 86. 

κάθεσις Ep 11. 104. 

κανονικόν Vit, 30. 

κανών Ep. IIT. 129. 

κατάληψις Vit. 33. 

καταμέρισις Ep. 11. τοῦ. 

καταμετρεῖν K, Δ. ΧΙΧ. 

καταμέτρημα Ep. I. §9. 

κάταξις Ep. 11. 100. 

καταπνυκνοῦσθαι K. A. 1x. 

κατάρρηξις Ep. 11. 103. 

κατάστημα Fr. τὶ. 

καταστηματικός Fr. 1. 

καταστοιχειοῦν Ep. I. 35. 

καταστρέφειν Ep. 111,126. K. A. xx. 

καταστροφή K. Δ. xxxv. 

καταφορά Ep. 11. too.* 

xatefAnotw Ep. 11. tot, 163, 115. 

κατεργασία Ep. I. 46a. 

κατηγόρημα Fr. 2. 

κατηγορία Ep. 1. 69; 11. 86. 

κενοδοξία K. Δ. xxx. 

κενόν 3) Ep. I. 40, 41, 4), 44, 46 Ὁ, 
67; 11. 89,90. Fr. 13, 16. Vit. 
27. 

κένωσις Ep. II. 94. 

κεραυνός Ep. 11. 103, 104. 

κίνημα Fr. 27. 

κίνησις Ep. I. 51, 59, 64, 66, 67, 73, 


Fr. 19, 24. 


Vit. 27, 30, 31. 


Vit. 136. 


INDEX OF THE PRINCIPAL TERMS 


77; IL. 92, 98, 101, 105, ἘΝ 111, 
112,115. vr. li, 1,10 Vit. 136. 

κοίλωμα Ep. 1. 468, II. 100, 106. 

κοινωνία K, A, XXxV1, XXXVI, XXXViII. 
Vit. 120b. 

κομήτης Ep. II. 111. 

κόσμος Ep. 1. 45, 73, 74,773 11. 88, 
89, 90, 112 

κράδανσις Ep. II. 105. 

κρίσις K. Δ xxiv, 

κριτήριον Ep. I. 38, 51, 52, 82; II. 
116. K.A, xxiv. 


34. 

κροτοθόρυβος Fr. 32. Vit. 5. 

Kpovois Ep. 1. 61. 

κρυσταλλοειδής Ep. II. 100. 

κρύσταλλος Ep ἐξ 109. 

κυριώτατος Ep I. 35, 36, 78, 79, 81, 
82, 83. K. Δ. 1x, xi, xvi. 


λαμπηδών Ep. II. rot 

λειτουργεῖν Ep. 1 76. 

λειτουργία Ep 11.113. 

λεπτομέρεια ἘΡ 1. 63. 

λεπτομερής Ep. I. 63, II. 90, ΙΟΙ. 

λεπτότης Ep I 46a, 478 

λιτότης Fr. 1xi1. 

λογισμός Ep I, 39, 75, 76; III. 132. 
K. ἃ. xvi, xix. Ετ. 74. Vit. 32, 
117, 120}. 

λόξωσις Ep. II 93. 

λύσις Ep. 1 79. 

μακάριον (τό) Ep. I. 78, 79,80 Κ. Δ. 
1.) Fr, 85. 

μακαριότης Ep. 1. 76, 77; II. 97; 
71. 123. Καὶ Δ. xxvii. 

μακαρισμός Fr. In. 

μακαριστός Fr χν!!. 

μαντική Fr. xxiv, 3. Vit. 135 

μέγεθος Ep. I. 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 
68; 11. 91» K. Δ. m1. Fr. 64. 
Vit. 22. 

μεστός Ep. I. 42. 

μετάβασις Ep. I. 56, 58 

peraBards Ep. I. 58. 

a a Ep. I. 3: 54: 11.98 Fr. 


μετάθεσις Ep. I. 54. 

μετακόσμιον Ep. II. 89. 

μετάρσιος Vit, 29. 

μετάστασις Ep. II. 89. Fr. 7. 
μετασχηματίζειν Ep. I. 55. 

μετέωρα Ep, 1. 78, 80, 82; IL. 84, 


Vit. 27, 30, 31, 


429 


85, 86, 87, 95, 96, 97, 98, 111. 
K.4 χ, χι. Vit. 83, 117. 
μῆκος Ep. II. 98. 


μνήμη Ep. I. 82, 83; II. 85, 95. 
Fr. 30. Vit 22, 31, 33. 

μοναχῇ Ep. II 94. 

povanée EP il, τῷ 95. 

μοναχῶς 

μονοειδῶς "Ep. tk II. 109 

ae ae . 49,50. Fr.to Vit. 

aaee Ep. I. 81, 11. 87, 104, 116; 
III 134. Κι Δ χιι. Fr. xxxvi. 


νεφοειδής Ep. IL. 110. 

νέφος Ep. II 99, 100, 101, 102, 104, 
107, 108, Σ1Ο, 

νόημα Ep. i. 48, 61, 83 

νόησις Ep. 1Π1,123 Vit 33. 

νομοθεσία Ep. 11. 86. 

νύμος K A. xxxvin = Fr hy, 2, 57, 81. 

ὄγκος Ep. I. 52, 53) 54, 56, 57, 69; 
11. 105. Fr 7, 85. 

οἰκειότης K. Δ xl. 

οἰκείωμα Fr xh 

οἰκονομεῖν Fr, xl. 

οἰκονομία Ep. I. 79. 

ὁλοσχερής ΕΡ I. 35, 36. 

ὁμαλός Ep. II. 113. 

ὁμαλῶς Ep. 11 r10. Fr. xivii. 

ὁμιχλοειδῆς Ep Il. 155 

dpoyerns Ep. 1 53 
Vit. 32 

ὁμοιομερής Ep 1.52. 

ὁμοιόμορφος Ep. I. 49. 

ὁμοιοσχήμων Ep I 46a, 

ὁμοιότης Vit. 32. 

ὁμοίωμα Ep. I 46b 

ὁμούρησις Ep. I. 64. 

ὁμόφυλος Κ. A, ΧΧΧΙΧ. 

ὁμόχροος ἘΡ 1 49. 

ὀξυγώνιος Ep. 11. 109 

ὁπηλίκος Ep I. 56, 57. 

ὄρεξις K. Δ. χχνὶ Ετ 45. 60 

ὁρίζειν Κ. A. xv, xxvil. Fr. x 

ὁρμή Ep. IT τας 

ὅρος K. A τι, x1. 

ὀσμὴ Ep 1. 53 

ia Ep. I. oe IT. 86. 

ὄχλησις K.A. vin. Vit. 23. 


K. A xviii, 


πάθος Ep. 1. 38, 52, 53, 55, 63, 68, 
73, 75, 82; Ji 116; IIL. 129, 


430 
K. Δ. xxiv. Fr, 54, 85. Vit. 28, 
41, 34, 117. 

παιδεία Ἐτ. 33: Vit. 6 

παλμός Ep, I. 43. 


πάλσις Ep. 1, 50. 

παντελής K, A. xXx, xxi 

παράθεσις Ep. Il. 105. 

sia ah p. 1. 3 63; 11. 95; 


ΕΗ ΑΒΕ Ep. II. 


ταρύστασις Ep. I. 81. Fr. 30. Vit. 


frend ΑΝ Ep. 1]. 100, ol, 114. 


παρέκτασις Ep, 11. 113. 
Shon Ep: Ἢ τ. 16. 
πάχνη E 


maxupe Ἢ Ep. Te 110 


πέρας I. 41, 593 11. 88; 111. 
133. x A. X, XVI, XIX, XX, ΧΧΙ. 
Fr. xivin. 


περιαίρεσις Ep. I. 55. 
περιβλεπτός Κ. A, vil. 
περίβλεψις Fr. Ixxxi. 
περιγραφή Ep. II. 88. 
περίεχον (τό) Ep. I. 46a, 48 
ηπτικῶς Ep, I. 40. 

περιληπτός Aa 1. 
weedy © p- 1, 56. 
περιόδεια Ep. ‘L ee 


περιοδεύειν " I. 8 
περίοδος Ep. I 72 83; 11. 97. 
περιοχή Ep. 


περιπλοκή Ep. i ais II. 99. 

περιπολεῖν Ep. 11. 112. 

περίπτωσις Vit. 32. 

περίστασις Ep. II. 92, 102, 104, 106, 
107, 109, 111. Fr. xivir. = Vit. 
119. 

περιφέρεια Ep. 11. 107, 110. 

περιφερής Ep. 11. 109. 

πηλίκος Ep. I. 57. 

πῆξις Ep. II. 100, 106, 107, 108, 109. 

πίλησις Ep. 11. 99, 103, 104. 

πίστωμα K. A. xi, 

πλανᾶσθαι Ep. 11. 112. 

πλεκτικός Ep. I. 43. 

πλεοναχός Ep. 1], 86, 87, 9 

πλεοναχῶς Ep. I. 78, 80; ἯΙ 8γ, 88, 
100, 113. 

πλεύμων Fr. 22. Vit. 8. 

πλήρωμα Fr. lix. 

πλήρωσις EP Il. 94. 

πνεῦμα Ep. I. 63; II. 100, ΙΟΙ, 102, 
103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 115. 


INDEX OF THE PRINCIPAL TERMS 


πνευματικός Ep. 1]. 90 
πνευματοῦσθαι Ep. ir τοῦ, 103. 
πνευματωδής Ep. I. 53; 1Π.1 
ποιητικός K. Δ. viii, x. 

ποικίλλειν K. Δ. xvii. 

ποίκιλμα Fr, Ixix. 

ποιότης a So I. 54, 55, 56. 
πολιτικός Fr. lvin. 

πολύκενος Ep. 11. 89. 

πολυτέλεια Ep. III. 120. Fr. 37. 
πόρος Ep. 1. 47a, 61; [I.107, 111. 


, 107. 


πραγμάτεια Ep I. 35, 83. Vit. 30. 
aaa = Ep. ΠΙ. 335. K. A. xxv. 
r. 


πρηστὴρ Ep. II. 104, 105. 
προαίρεσις Fr li. 
πρόβλημα Ep. 11. 86. 
πρόεσις Ep. II. 107. 
προκαταστρέφειν K. A, xxv, 
προκαταστροφὴή Κ. A. xl. 
πρόληψις Ep. 1. 72; Ill. 124. K.A. 
XXXVI, XXXVIN. Vit. 31, 33. 
προσδοξαζόμενον Ep. I. 50, 62. 
προσδοχή Ep II. 89. 
πρόσθεσις Ep. 11. 89. 
προσθέτησις Ep. 11. 94, 
προσθήκη Vit. 1218. 
προσκαταρόησις Ep 1. 79. 
πρόσκρισις E p: II. 90, 109. 
πρόσλαμψις Ep. 11 109. 
προσμένον (τύ) Ep. I. 38, 50. 
xxiv. Vit i* 
πρόσοδος Ep. 1 54. 
πύκνωμα Ep. I. 36, 50; II. 


K. Δ. 


105, 


115. 
mupoadns Ep 11. go. 
πύρωσις Fr. 7. 


ῥεῦμα Ep. I. 49 52, 53; 11.111. 
ῥεῦσις Ep. 1.4 

ῥῆξις Ερ. Il. i 102, 103, 106. 
ῥητορική Ετ.9. Vit.%3. 

ῥύσις Ep, II. 104 « 


σάρξ K. Δ. iv, xviii, xx. Fr. iv, 
XXX11, lt, 11, 44,63. Vit. 137. 
σβέσις Ep. 11]. 92, 96. 
σέβασις Fr. 31. 
σεβασμός Fr. xxxit, 
σεισμός Ep. II. 105. 
σέμνωμα Ep. I. 77. 
σημεῖον Ep. 11. 87,97. Fr. 40. 
σημειοῦσθαι Ep. 1 38; 1]. 104. 
σκαληνός Ep. II, 109. 


INDEX OF THE PRINCIPAL TERMS 


σοβαρός Fr. xlv. 

σπέρμα ae 38, 74; 11. 89. 

στάσις Ep, 733 II. 92. 

στεγάζειν fpf | 43; 64, 65, 66. 

στερέμνιον Ep, τ. 468, 48, 50. 

στερεότης Ep. 1. 

στοιχεῖον Ep. 1. 470; 11. 86; 11]. 
123. Vit. 30. 

στοιχείωμα Ep I. 36. 

στοιχείωσις Ep. 1. 37. 

στρόβιλος Ep. il. 105. 

στροφή Ep IT. 94. 

στυλοειδῶς Ep 11 104. 

συγγενικός Ep. 111 129. 

σύγκρισις Ep. I. 40, 41, 42, 54, 55, 
(62, 73; 11. 110. 

σύγκρουσις Ep I 44; Il. 101, 

συγκύρημα Ep 11.115. 

συγκύρησις Ep, ee τῷ 98. 

ovyxvats Ep. 11. 8 

συλλογή Ep II be 103, 106, [15. 

συζήτησις Fr Lxxiv. 

συμβεβηκός Ep. 1 40, ξο, 68, 71. 

σύμβολον Κ Δ χχχι. 

συμμέτρησις Ep. IIT. 130. 

συμμετρία Ep 1] 107. 

σύμμετρος Ep. 1. 47a, 50, 53, 61. 
Fr 15. 

συμμέτρως Ep. 11.110 

συμπάθεια Ep ᾿ δι 50, 52, 53, 64. 

συμπαθής Ep. 1 63. 

σνυμπλήρωμα Ep I. 48. 

συμπληρωτικός Ep. 11] 131 

ne Ep. I 40, 64, 67, 70, 71, 


jeer Ι3 I. 60. 

συμφόρησις Ep 1. 50. 

συμφυλία Ep 11 115. 

συμφωνία Ep II. 86. Fr. 49. 

συμφώνως Ep. IT 98. 

συναναστροφή Fr. xvii. 

συναφή Ep bi. ὃς. 

συνήθεια Fg. xlvi, 9. 

σύνθεσις Vit. 32. 

συνθεωρεῖν Ep. 11. 96, 102, 116. 

nay Κ΄. Δ. xxxut, xxxiii, 

σύ Ep. 11. τοϑ, 115. 

συντίθεσθαι Κ. Δ. χχχν. 

σύντομος Fr. iv. 

συντονία Ep. 11. 101. 

σύντονος Ep. I. 102. 
Fr. tv. 

σύνωσις Ep. 11. 99, 106, 107, 109, 
110. 


Κ. A xxx. 


431 


σύστασις Ep. 1. 48; 11. 99, 107. 
σύστημα te 66 


ay hs 
73> 77> Κ, ἃ, 


σχῆμα Ep. 1. a 54, 55, 68. 

σχηματίζειν Ep. 1. 53. 

σχημάτισις a I. 42. 

σχηματισμός Ep. 1. $4, 743 11 94, 
ΤΟΙ, 102, 109, 

σῶμα Ep. 1. 39, 40, 41, 42, 55,56. 

σωτηρία Fr, ixxx, 


τάγμα Ep 1.71. 

τάξις Ep 1. ὅδ: 1]. 97. 

ταραχή Ep I . 81. KA. VIL, ΧΧΊΊ. 
Fr ἰχχχι. 

τάραχος Ep I 78, 81, 82. 

ταραχώδης Fr. 23, 66 

τάχος Ep I 47 a, 46b. 

τεκμαίρεσθαι Ep I 39 

τελείωσις Ep. II 89 

τελεσιουργεῖν Ep. 1. 36. 

τέλος Κι. Δ. xx, xxv, xxv. Fr 68, 
83, 87. Vit. 6,11, 27, 30, 136, 
137. 

τερατεύεσθαι Ep. II. 114. 

τεχνιτεία Ep II 93. 

τομὴ Ep. I. 56. 


τόπος (Ep. ft 39); 11. 98, 103, τοῦ, 


108, 111, 112, 113, 115. K. Δ. 
Xsxil. Fr. 14. 
τριβὴ Fr 9. 


τρῖψις Ep, 11. 108. 
τύπος Ep. 1 45, 46a, 49, 68. Vit. 33. 
τύχη Ep Wi. 131,133,134. Fr.77. 


ὑγιαίνειν Fr. ἢν. 
eee Ep. ἘΠ᾿ 128, 131. Vit. 120b, 


pacia Ep. 11. 108. 
ὙΠῸ Ep. ue saad 107, 109. 
ὑπεναντίος ye 
ὑπεναντιότης Ep. I. 77. 
ὑπεξαίρεσις K. Δ. ni. 
ὑπερεί ev Ep. 1. 42. 
ὑπέρεισις Ep. 1. 44. 
ὑπόθεσιξ Ep. 11. 95. 
ὑπόληψις Ep. Ill. 124. Vit. 34. 


φαινόμενα (τά) Ep. 1. 468, 54, 55; 
II. 86, 87, 88, 90, Ε" 93, 95: 97, 
98, 100, 102,104. Fr.49. Vit. 32. 

φαντασία Ep. 1. 50, 80. Vit. 28. 


433 


φάντασμα Ep. I. 75; If. 88, 102, 
Ilo. Vit. 32. 

φαντασμός Ep. I. 51. 

peor (Ep. 1. 51.) K. Δ, xxiv. 

at. 31. 

φευκτός Ep. 111. 129. Vit. 30. 

φθόγγος Ep. I. 37, 38,76, 83. _ Vit. 31. 

φιλία Κ΄. Δ. xxvii, xxv. Fr. xxui, 
xxviii, ΠῚ, Ixxvini. Vit. 120 Ὁ. 

φιλοσοφία Ep. 111. 132. Fr. xxvii, 
xli, 24, 30, 54, 66. Vit. 17, 22. 

φιλοσοφεῖν Fr. xh, liv. 

φορά Ep. I. 49, 60, 61, 62, 47 Ὁ, 70 
(= ‘usage’), 76; II fof, 107, 
108, ne 

φρόνησις Ep. 111. 132 

φυγή Ep. ILI 128, 129, 132. 
xxv. Vit. 27, 30, 34, 136 

φυσικός Ep. 11. 86, 90; III. 127, 
130, 134. K. Δ. xxix, xxx Fr. 
xxi, Vit. 27, 2% 30. 

φυσικῶς Fr. 57. It. 137. 

φυσιολογεῖν Ep. 11 86. Fr xxix 

φυσιολόγημα Ep 11 87 

φυσιολογία Ep. I. 37, 78, II. 85. 
Κ. Δ, χι, x. Fr. xiv. 

φύσις Ep. I. 35, 40, 41, 449 45, 49, 
65, 68, 69, 71, 75, 78, 79, 82, 83; 
11, 86, 91, 97; III. 129. K.A. 
vi, vil, xii, xv, XXV, XXX, XXX], 
xxxvul, Fr. xxi, 6, 13, 14, τό, 44, 


K. A. 


INDEX OF THE PRINCIPAL TERMS 


45, 46, 60, 61, 67, 68, 77, 85, 87. 
peed ; 27, 30, 219, 120 Ὁ. 

νή Ep. I. 36, 45, 53. Κ. Δ. 

χχχν!. Fr χχχῖϊ, xl, xlv, ἰχχν, 

44. Vit. 26, 34. 


χάλαζα Ep. II. 106, to7. 
χαρά Fr. 1,1, 11,20. Vit. 136. 
χάρις Ep. 111, 122, K. Δ. 1. Fr, 
xvi, xxxix, lv, 67. Vit. 28, 118. 
χιών Ep. 11. 107, 108, 
χρείᾳ Ep. 1. 80; 11. 87; III. 128. 
K.A xxxvii. Fr χχχιν, xxxtx, 60. 
Vit. 120 b. 
χρῆσις Ep. 111 131. 
α Fr, 15. 
χρόνος Ep. 1. 72. 
χρῶμα Ep. 1. 49,68; Il τορ. Fr.4. 
χρῶσις Ep. 11 rog. 
χυλός Ep. LIT 130. Vit. 6. 
χώρα Ep I. qo. 


ψυκτικός Fr. 6, 7. 
Ψυχή Ep_ 1. 63, 64, 65, 67, 68, 77, 
81, 11]. 122, 128, 131, 132. Fr. 
Ixxx1, 30, 44, 54, 68, 76, 85. Vit. 
22, 136, 137. 
Ψψυχικός Vit. 137. 
Wuxpacia Ep 11. 107. 


Fr.to 


Fr. 6 


ὠφέλεια Fr xxni. 





