


EPICTETUS 


THE DISCOURSES AS REPORTED 
BY ARRIAN, THE MANUAL, 
AND FRAGMENTS 


WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY 
W. A. OLDFATHER 


UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 


IN TWO VOLUMES 
VOL. II 


DISCOURSES, BOOKS IIT AND IV, 
THE MANUAL, AND FRAGMENTS 





LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN 


NEW YORK : G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS 
MOMXXVIII 





Printed in Great Britain 


CONTENTS 


DISCOURSES, BOOK ΤΙΣ ° 


DISCOURSES, BOOK IV 


INDEX 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES 
OF EPICTETUS 


VOL. Il. 


APPIANOY 
TON EMIKTHTOY AIATPIBON 
ΑΒΓΔ 


— 


Γ 


ΚΕΦΑΛΑΙ͂Α TOY Γ BIBAIOY 


a’, Περὶ καλλωπισμοῦ. 

β΄. Περὶ τίνα ἀσκεῖσθαι δεῖ τὸν προκόψοντα καὶ bri τῶν κυριωτά- 
τῶν ἀμελοῦμεν. 

γ΄. Τίς ὕλη τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ καὶ πρὸς τί μάλιστα ἀσκητέον. 

δ΄, Πρὺς τὸν ἀκόσμως ἐν θεάτρῳ σπουδάσαντα, 

ε΄, Πρὸς τοὺς διὰ νόσον ἀπαλλαττομένου ς.ἷ 

ς΄. Σποράδην τινά, 

, Πρὸς τὸν διορθωτὴν τῶν ἐλευθέρων πόλεων, ᾿Ἐπικούρειον 

ὄντα. 

η΄. Tlas πρὸς τὰς φαντασίας γυμναστέον ; 

θ΄. ΤΙιρός τινὰ ῥήτορα ἀνιόντα els Ῥώμην ἐπὶ δίκῃ. 

“, Ἰπῶς φέρειν δεῖ τὰς νόσους ; 3 

ια΄, Σποράδην τινά. 

ιβ΄, Tlep) ἀσκήσεως. 

ιγ΄. Τί ἐρημία καὶ ποῖος ἔρημος. 

ιδ΄, Σποράδην τινά, 


1 9: πλαττομένους 5. 


* The entire title supplied from Ch. X. by 9. 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES 
OF EPICTETUS 


IN FOUR BOOKS 


BOOK {ΠΙ 


Chapters of the Third Boos: 


I. Of personal adornment. 

II. The fields of study in which the man who expects 
to make progress will have to go into training ; 
and that we neglect what is most important. 

Itt. What is the subject-matter with which the good 
man has to deal; and what should be the chief 
object of our training? 

IV. To the man who took sides, in an undignified 
manner, while in a theatre. 

V. To those who leave school because of illness. 

VI. Some scattered sayings. 

VIL <A conversation with the Imperial Bailiff of the 
_ Free Cities, who was an Epicurean. 
VIII. How ought we to exercise ourselves to deal with 
the impressions of our senses ? 

IX. To a certain rhetorician who was going to Rome 
for a law-suit. 

X. How ought we to bear our illnesses ? 

XI. Some scattered sayings. 

XII, Of training. 
XIII.. The meaning of a forlorn state, and the kind of 
person a forlorn man is. 
XIV. Some scattered sayings. 


B 2 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ιε΄, Ὅτι δεῖ περιεσκεμμένως ἔρχεσθαι ἐφ᾽ ἕκαστα. 
is’, “Ort εὐλαβῶς δεῖ συγκαθιέναι εἰς συμπεριφοράν, 
ιζ΄. Περὶ προνοίας. 
ιη΄. Ὅτι οὐ δεῖ πρὸς τὰς ἀγγελίας ταράσσεσθαι. 
10’. τίς στάσις ἰδιώτον καὶ φιλοσόφον ; 
κ΄, Ὅτι ἀπὸ πάντων τῶν ἐκτὸς ἔστιν ὠφελεῖσθαι. 
xa’, Πρὸς τοὺς εὐκόλως ἐπὶ τὸ σοφιστεύειν ἐρχομένους, 
κβ΄, Περὶ Κυνισμοῦ, ᾿ 
κγ΄. Πρὸς τοὺς ἀναγγινώσκοντας καὶ διαλεγομένους ἐπιδεικτικῶς. 
KO’. Περὶ τοῦ μὴ δεῖν προσπάσχειν τοῖς οὐκ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν. 
κε’, Πρὸς τοὺς ἀποπίπτοντας ὧν προέθεντο, 
κε΄, Ἰπρὸς τοὺς τὴν ἀπορίαν δεδοικότας, 


Γ 
α΄. Περὶ καλλωπισμοῦ. 


1. Εἰσιόντος τινὸς πρὸς αὐτὸν νεανίσκον ῥητορικοῦ 
περιεργότερον ἡρμοσμένου τὴν κόμην καὶ τὴν 
ἄλλην περιβολὴν κατακοσμοῦντος Εἰὐπέ μοι, ἔφη, 
εἰ οὐ δοκοῦσίν σοι κύνες T εἶναι καλοί τίνες καὶ 
ἵπποι καὶ οὕτως τῶν ἄλλων ζῴων ἕκαστον ;— 

2 Δοκοῦσιν, ἔφη.---Οὐκοῦν καὶ ἄνθρωποι οἱ μὲν 
καλοί, οἱ δ᾽ αἰσχροί ;---[ΠΤῶς yap οὔ ;---Πότερον 
οὖν κατὰ τὸ αὐτὸ ἕκαστα τούτων ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ. 
γένει καλὰ προσαγορεύομεν ἢ ἰδίως ἕκαστον ; 

8 οὕτως δ᾽ ὄψει αὐτό. ἐπειδὴ πρὸς ἄλλο μὲν ὁρῶ- 
μὲν κύνα πεφυκότα, πρὸς ἄλλο δ᾽ ἵππον, πρὸς 


4 


BOOK III. 1. 1~3 


XV. That we ought to approach each separate thing 
with circumspection. 
XVI. That ‘one should enter cautiously into social inter- 
course. 
XVII. Of Providence. 
XVIII. That we ought not to allow any news to disturb us. 
XIX. What is the position of the layman, and what that 
of the philosopher ? 
XX. That it is possible to derive advantage from every- 
thing external. 
XXI. To those who enter light-heartedly upon the 
profession of lecturing. 
XXII. On the calling of a Cynic. 
XXIII. To those who read and discuss for the purpose of 
display. 
XXIV. That we ought not to yearn for the things which 
are not under our control. 
XXV. To those who fail to achieve their purposes. 
XXVI. To those who fear want. 


CHAPTER I 


Of personal adornment 


Once, when he was visited by a young student of 
rhetoric whose hair was somewhat too elaborately 
dressed, and whose attire in general was highly em- 
bellished, Epictetus said : Tell meif you do not think | 
that some dogs are beautiful, and some horses, and so 
every other creature.—I do, said the young man.—Is 
not the same true also of men, some of them are 
handsome, and some ugly?—-Of course.—Do we, 
then, on the same grounds, pronounce each of these 
creatures in its own kind beautiful, or do we pro- 
nounce each beautiful on special grounds? I shall 
show you what I mean. Since we see that a dog is 
born to do one thing, and a horse another, and, if 


5 


5 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


/ 
ἄλλο δ᾽ εἰ οὕτως τύχοι ἀηδόνα, καθόλου μὲν οὐκ 
ἀτόπως ἀποφήναιτ᾽ ἄν τις ἕκαστον τηνικαῦτα 
n ; 

καλὸν εἶναι, ὁπότε KATA THY αὑτοῦ φύσιν κράτιστ᾽ 
bd 3 Α 3 € , € / f f 3 

ἔχοι: ἐπεὶ δ᾽ ἡ φύσις ἑκάστου διάφορός ἐστιν, 
διαφόρως εἶναί μοι δοκεῖ ἕκαστον αὐτῶν καλόν' 
ἢ γὰρ ov ;--:Ὡ μολόγει.---ΟΟὐὐκ οὖν ὅπερ κύνα 
ποιεῖ καλόν, τοῦτο ἵππον αἰσχρόν, ὅπερ δ᾽ ἵππον 
καλόν, τοῦτο κύνα αἰσχρόν, εἴ γε διάφοροι αἱ 
φύσεις εἰσὶν αὐτῶν ;— ἼἜοικεν.--- αἱ γὰρ τὸ 
παγκρατιαστὴν οἶμαι ποιοῦν καλὸν τοῦτο παλαι- 
στὴν οὐκ ἀγαθὸν ποιεῖ, δρομέα δὲ καὶ γελοιότα- 
τον" καὶ ὁ πρὸς πενταθλίαν καλὸς ὁ αὐτὸς οὗτος 

\ , ? ; Ψ y , 5 
πρὸς πάλην αἰσχίστος ;---Οὕτως, ἔφη.----Γί οὖν 
ποιεῖ ἄνθρωπον καλὸν ἢ ὅπερ τῷ γένει καὶ κύνα καὶ 
γ ” td oy ἊᾺ ᾽ f £ 
ἵππον ;——Tovro, é6n.— Ti οὖν ποιεῖ κύνα καλόν; ἡ 
ἀρετὴ ἡ κυνὸς παροῦσα. τί ἵππον ; ἡ ἀρετὴ ἡ ὃ 
ca) ? 

ἵππου παροῦσα. τί οὖν ἄνθρωπον ; μή ποθ᾽ ἡ 
ἢ 1 ¢ 2 7 A 4 ,‘ ὦ 3 2) 

ἀρετὴ ἡ ἀνθρώπου παροῦσα; καὶ σὺ οὖν εἰ θέλεις 

/ as 
καλὸς εἶναι, νεανίσκε, τοῦτο ἐκπόνει, THY ἀρετὴν 
\ 3 θ / , δ᾽ 3 \ 7 (7 [4 
τὴν ἀνθρωπικήν.---- ὶς δ᾽ ἐστὶν αὕτη ;— Opa, τίνας 
αὐτὸς ἐπαινεῖς, ὅταν δίχα πάθους τινὰς ἐπαινῇς" 
3 
πότερα τοὺς δικαίους ἢ τοὺς ἀδίκους ;—Tods 
7 ῃ 
δικαίους.---[ΤΠότερον τοὺς σώφρονας ἢ τοὺς ἀκο- 
, ”“ 
λάστους ;—Tovs σώφρονας.----[-}οὺς ἐγκρατεῖς δ᾽ 
ἢ τοὺς ἀκρατεῖς ;---οὺς ἐγκρατεῖς.--- Οὐκοῦν» 
τοιοῦτόν τινα ποίῶν σαυτὸν ἴσθι ὅτι καλὸν 
1 ἡ added by 8, 





1 One who specialized in the pancratium, a combination of 
boxing, wrestling, and plain “ fighting.” 
6 


BOOK 11]. τ. 3-9 


you will, a nightingale for something else, in general 
it would not be unreasonable for one to declare that 
each of them. was beautiful precisely when it 
achieved ssupréme excellence in terms of its own 
nature ; and, since each has a different nature, each 
one of them, IT think, is beautiful in a different 
fashion. Is that_not sot—-He agreed.— Does it not 
follow, then, that: precisely what makes a dog 
beautiful, makes ἃ horse ugly, and precisely what 
makes a horse beautiful, makes a dog ugly, if, that 
is, their natures are different ?—So it appears. —Yes, 
for, to my way of thinking, what makes a pancratiast 1 
beautiful does not make a wrestler good, and, more 
than that, makes a runner quite absurd: and the 
same man who is beautiful for the pentathlon ® is 
very ugly for wrestling ?—-That is so, said he.—What, 
then, makes a man beautiful other than just that 
which makes a dog or a horse beautiful in its 
kind ?—Just that, said he.—What is it, then, that 
makes a dog beautiful? The presence of a dog’s 
excellence. What makes a horse beautiful? The 
presence of a horse’s excellence. What, then, makes 
aman beautiful? Is it not the presence of a man’s 
excellence? Very well, then, young man, do you 
too, if you wish to be beautiful, labour to achieve this, 
the excellence that characterizes a man.—And what 
is that >—Observe who they are whom you yourself 
praise, when you praise people dispassionately ; ; is it 
the just, or the unjust ?—The just—lIs it the self- 
controlled, or the uncontrolled?—The self-con- 
trolled.—In making yourself that kind of a person, 
therefore, rest assured that you will be making your- 


2 An all-round competition in running, jumping, wrestling, 
and hurling the discus and the javelin. 


7 


10 


11 


18 


14 


15 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


/ ? » ἡ / bj Ὁ 3 f 
ποιήσεις" μέχρις δ᾽ ἂν τούτων ἀμελῇς, αἰσχρόν 
σ᾽ εἶναι 18} δὴ; κἂν πάντα μηχανᾷ ὑπὲρ τοῦ 
φαίνεσθαί σε} καλόν. 

᾿Εντεῦθεν οὐκέτι ἔχω σοί πῶς εἴπω" ἄν ΤΕ yap 
λέγω ἃ φρονῶ, ἀνιάσω σε καὶ ἐξελθὼν τάχα οὐδ᾽ 
εἰσελεύσῃ": ἄν τε μὴ λέγω, ὅρα οἷον ποιήσω, εἰ 

Ν \ AY ‘ » \ 3 θ t b] \. 9 δ᾽ 
σὺ μὲν ἔρχη πρὸς ἐμὲ ὠφεληθησόμενος, ἐγὼ 

3 9 ΄ 3 3 / \ \ ἈΝ δ ἈΝ 
οὐκ ὠφελήσω σ᾽ οὐδέν, καὶ σὺ μὲν ὡς πρὸς 
φιλόσοφον, ἐγὼ δ᾽ οὐδὲν ἐρῶ σοι ὡς φιλόσοφος. 
πῶς δὲ καὶ οὐκὃ ὠμόν ἐστι πρὸς αὐτόν σε τὸ 
περιιδεῖν ἀνεπανόρθωτον; ἄν mo? ὕστερον 

f nf 3 f 3 f qc? “ 
φρένας σχῇς, εὐλόγως μοι ἐγκαλέσεις" “TL εἶδεν 
ἐν éuol ὁ ᾿ΕΠπίκτητος, ἵνα βλέπων με τοιοῦτον 

f Ν a 
εἰσερχόμενον πρὸς αὐτὸν οὕτως αἰσχρῶς ἔχοντα 
περιίδῃ καὶ 4 μηδέποτε μηδὲ ῥῆμα εἴπῃ; οὕτως 
μου ἀπέγνω ; νέος οὐκ ἤμην ; οὐκ ἤμην λόγου 
ἀκουστικός ; πόσοι δ᾽ ἄλλοι νέοι ἐφ᾽ ἡλικίας πολ.- 
λὰ τοιαῦτα διαμαρτάνουσιν; τινά ποτ᾽ ἀκούω 
Πολέμωνα ἐξ ἀκολαστοτάτου νεανίσκου τοσαύ- 
τὴν μεταβολὴν μεταβαλεῖν. ἔστω, οὐκ Beto με 
Πολέμωνα ἔσεσθαι" τὴν μὲν κόμην ἠδύνατό μου 
διορθῶσαι, τὰ μὲν περιάμματά μου περιελεῖν, 

ΓΑ ? ἴω 3 “ 3 \ / 
ψιλούμενόν με παῦσαι ἠδύνατο, ἀλλὰ βλέπων 
με---τίνος εἴπω ;---σχῆμα ἔχοντα ἐσιώπα. ἐγὼ 
ov λέγω, τίνος ἐστὶ τὸ σχῆμα te σὺ δ᾽ αὐτὸ 


1 Or perhaps γε, Oldfather. : ἔργωι 5. 
5. οὐκ added by_Koraes. 4 καί ἘΝ ΔΑΒῈ by 5. 


ποσὶ 


1 Once when drunk he burst in upon Xenocrates, but was 
converted by him and eventually succeeded him in the head- 


8 





BOOK III. τι 9-15 


self beautiful; but so long as you neglect all this, 
you must needs be ugly, no matter if you employ 
every artifice to make yourself look beautiful. 
Beyond that I know not what more I can say to 
you; for if I say what I have in mind, I shall hurt 
your feelings, and you will leave, perhaps never to 
return; but if I do not say it, consider the sort of 
thing I shall be doing. Here you are coming to me 
to get some benefit, and I shall be bestowing no 
benefit at all; and you are coming to me as to a 
philosopher, and I shall be saying nothing to you as 
a philosopher. Besides, is it anything but cruel for 
me to leave you unreformed? If some time in the 
future you come to your senses, you will have good 
reason to blame me: “ What did Epictetus observe 
in me,” you will say to yourself, “that, although he 
saw me in such a condition and coming to him in so 
disgraceful a state, he should let me be so and say 
never a word tome? Did he so completely despair 
of me? WasI not young? Was I not ready to listen 
to reason? And how many other young fellows make 
any number of mistakes of the same kind in their 
youth? I am told that once there was a certain 
Polemo! who from being a very dissolute young man 
underwent such an astonishing transformation. Well, 
suppose he did not think that I should be another 
Polemo ; he could at least have set my hair right, he 
could have stripped me of my ornaments, he could 
have made me stop plucking my hairs ; but although 
he saw me looking like—what shall I say ?>—he held 
his peace.” As for me, I do not say what it is you look 


ship of the Academy. See below IV. 11. 30; Diogenes 
Laertius, 4, 16; and Horace, Sat. ΤΙ, 3, 253-7. 


9 


16 


17 


18 


19 


20 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ἐρεῖς τόθ᾽, ὅταν εἰς σαυτὸν ἔλθῃς, καὶ γνώσει, 
οἷόν ἐστι καὶ τίνες αὐτὸ ἐπιτηδεύουσι. 

Τοῦτό μοι ὕστερον. ἂν ἐγκαλῆῇς, τί [ ἕξω ἀπολογή- 
σασθαι; ναί: ἀλλ᾽ ἐρῶ καὶ οὐ πεισθήσεται. 
τῷ γὰρ ᾿Απόλχωνι ἐπείσθη ὁ Adios ; οὐκ ἀπελ- 
θὼν καὶ μεθυσθεὶς χαίρειν εἶπεν τῷ χρησμῷ; τί 
ow ; Tapa τοῦτο οὐκ εἶπεν αὐτῷ ὄ ᾿Απόλλων τὰς 
ἀληθείας ; καίτοι ἐγὼ μὲν οὐκ οἶδα οὔτ᾽ εἰ πει- 
σθήσῃ μοι οὔτ᾽ εἰ μή" ἐκεῖνος δ᾽ ἀκριβέστατα ἤδει, 
ὅτι οὐ πεισθήσεται, καὶ ὅμως εἶπεν.---Διὰ τί δ᾽ 
εἶπεν ;---Διὰ ἘΞ τί δὲ ᾿Απόλλων ἐστίν ; διὰ τί δὲ 
χρησμῳδεῖ; διὰ τί δ᾽ εἰς ταύτην τὴν χώραν 
ἑαυτὸν κατατέταχεν, ὥστε μάντις εἶναι καὶ πηγὴ 
τῆς ἀληθείας καὶ πρὸς αὐτὸν ἔρχεσθαι τοὺς ἐκ 
τῆς οἰκουμένης ; ; διὰ τί δὲ  προγέγραπται τὸ γνῶθι 
σαυτὸν μηδενὸς αὐτὸ νοοῦντος ; 

Σωκράτης πάντας ἔπειθε. τοὺς προσιόντας * 
ἐπιμελεῖσθαι ἑαυτῶν ; οὐδὲ τὸ χιλιοστὸν μέρος. 
GAN ὅμως ἐπειδὴ εἰς ταύτην τὴν τάξιν ὑπὸ τοῦ 
δαιμονίου, ὥς φησιν αὐτός, κατετάχθη, μηκέτι 
ἐξέλιπεν. ἀλλὰ καὶ πρὸς τοὺς δικαστὰς τί 
λέγει ; “ ἄν μ᾽ ἀφῆτε," φησίν, “ ἐπὶ τούτοις, ἵνα 
μηκέτι ταῦτα πράσσω ἃ νῦν, οὐκ ἀνέξομαι οὐδ᾽ 
ἀνήσω" ἀλλὰ καὶ νέῳ καὶ πρεσβυτέρῳ καὶ ἁπλῶς 
ἀεὶ τῷ ἐντυγχάνοντι προσελθὼν πεύσομαι ταῦτα 
ἃ καὶ νῦν πυνθάνομαι, πολὺ δὲ μάλιστα ὑμῶν, 


: διά supplied by s. 


3. δ: προσίοτας or προσανότας S. 





1 Who warned him not to beget a son, the ill-starred 
Oedipus. 


Io 


BOOK III. 1. rs—20- 


like, but you will say it, when.you come to yourself, 
and will realize what it is and the kind of people those 
are who act this way. 

If you bring this charge against me some day, 
what shall I be able to say in my own defence? 
Yes; but suppose I speak and he not obey. And 
did Laius obey Apollo?! Did he not go away and 
get drunk and say good-bye to the oracle? What 
then? Did that keep Apollo from telling him the 
truth? Whereas I do not know whether he will 
obey me or not. Apollo knew perfectly well that 
Laius would not obey, and yet he spoke.—But why 
did he speak >—And why is he Apollo? And why 
does he give out oracles? And why has he placed 
himself in this position,” to be a prophet and a 
fountain ‘of truth, and for the inhabitants of the 
civilized world to come to him? And why are the 
words “ Know thyself” carved on the front of his 
temple, although no one pays attention to them? 

Did Socrates succeed in prevailing upon all his 
visitors to keep watch over their own characters? 
No, not one in a thousand. Nevertheless, once he 
had been assigned this post, as he himself says, by 
the ordinance of the Deity,? he never abandoned it. 
Nay, what does he say even to his judges? “If you 
acquit me,” he says, “ on these conditions, namely, | 
that I no longer engage in my present practices, I 
will not accept your offer, neither will I give up my 
practices, but I will go up to young and old, and, in 
a word, to everyone that ὦ meet, and put to ‘him the 
same question that I put now, and beyond all others 
I will especially interrogate you,” he says, “ who are 


2 For the expression compare IT. 4, 3; IV. 10, 16. 
% Based upon the Apology, 28 EB. 


If 


al 


23 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


φησί, τῶν πολιτῶν, ὅτε ἐγγυτέρω μου γένει ἐστέ." 
οὕτως περίεργος εἶ, ὦ Σώκρατες, καὶ πολυπράγ- 
pov; τί δέ σοι μέλει, τί ποιοῦμεν ; = olov καὶ 
λέγεις ; κοινωνός μου ὧν καὶ σνγγενὴς ἀμελεῖς 
σεαυτοῦ καὶ τῇ πόλει παρέχεις πολίτην κακὸν 
καὶ τοῖς συγγενέσι συγγενῆ καὶ τοῖς γείτοσι 
γείτονα." “σὺ οὖν τίς εἶ; ἐνταῦθα μέγα 
ἐστὶ τὸ εἰπεῖν ὅτι “οὗτός εἶμι, ᾧ δεῖ μέλειν 
ἀνθρώπων." οὐδὲ γὰρ λέοντι τὸ τυχὸν βοΐδιον 
τολμᾷ ἀντιστῆναι αὐτῷ: ἂν δ᾽ ὁ ταῦρος " προ- 
σελθὼν ἀνθίστηται, λέγε αὐτῷ, ἄν σοι δόξῃ, 
“σὺ δὲ τίς εἶ; καὶ “τί σοὶ μέλει; ἄνθρωπε, 
ἐν παντὶ γένει φύεταϊ τι ἐξαίρετον. ἐν βουσίν, 
ἐν κυσίν, ἐν μελίσσαις, ἐν ἵπποις. μὴ δὴ λέγε 


a 3 / \ = a aa 3 \ / » ἡ 
τῷ ἐξαιρέτῳ “σὺ οὖν τί εἶ; ἡ εἰ δὲ μή, ἐρεῖ 


24 


3 “ 


σοι φωνήν ποθεν λαβὸν “ ἐγώ εἰμι τοιοῦτον οἷον 
ἐν ἱματίῳ πορφύρα' μή μ᾽ ἀξίου ὅμοιον εἶναι τοῖς 
ἄλλοις ἢ τῇ φύσει μου + μέμφου, ὅτι με διαφέροντα 
παρὰ τοὺς ἄλλους ἐποίησεν. 

Ti οὖν; ἐγὼ τοιοῦτος; πόθεν; σὺ yap 
τοιοῦτος οἷος ἀκούειν τἀληθῆ ; ὥφελεν. ἀλλ᾽ ὅμως 
ἐπεί πως κατεκρίθην πώγωνα ἔχειν πολιὸν καὶ 
τρίβωνα καὶ σὺ εἰσέρχῃ πρὸς ἐμὲ ὡς πρὸς φιλόσο- 
pov, οὐ χρήσομαΐ σοι ὠμῶς οὐδ᾽ ἀπογνωστικῶς, 


1 Deleted by Kronenberg, and ‘‘nature’” rather than 
‘‘my nature” would seem to be more logical here (cf. Grant’s . 
note on Aristotle’s Hihics, 2.1.3). But μου is supported by 
the precisely similar σου of ὃ 30, which is if anything even 
more illogical. In the original remark of Diogenes, whom 
Epictetus is clearly quoting in § 30 (see the note at that 
point), ἐγκαλεῖν τῇ φύσει is used as it is normally in Greek. 
Apparently we haye in these two locutions a form of 
expression peculiar to Epictetus, 


12 


BOOK III. 1. 20~24 


my fellow-citizens, inasmuch as you are nearer akin 
to me.” + Are you so inquisitive, O Socrates, and 
meddlesome? And why do you care what we are 
about? “Why, what is that you are saying? You 
are my partner and kinsman, and yet you neglect 
yourself and provide the State with a bad citizen, 
and your kin with a bad kinsman, and your neigh- 
bours with a bad neighbour.” “ Well, who are you?” 
Here it is a bold thing to say, “I am he who must 
needs take interest in men,” For no ordinary ox 
dares to withstand the lion himself;? but if the bull 
comes up and withstands him, say to the bull, if you 
think fit, “ But who are you?” and “ What do you 
care?’’ Man, in every species nature produces some 
superior individual, among cattle, dogs, bees, horses. 
Pray do not say to the superior individual, ‘“ Well, 
then, who are you?” Or if you do, it will get a 
voice from somewhere and reply to you, “I am the 
same sort of thing as red in a mantle ;° do not expect 
me to resemble the rest, and do not blame my nature 4 
because it has made me different from the rest.” 
What follows? Am I that kind of person? Im- 
possible. Are you, indeed, the kind of person to 
listen to the truth? I would that you were! But 
nevertheless, since somehow or other I have been 
condemned to wear a grey beard and a rough cloak,® 
and you are coming to me as to a philosopher, I shall 
not treat you cruelly, nor as though I despaired of 


.} A free paraphrase of the Apology, 29 C, E, and 30 A. 
Compare also I. 9, 23. 

* Compare I. 2, 30. 

3 Compare I. 2, 17 (and note, where read “ bright red”) 
and 22; the reference is to the stripe in the toga praetexia, 

4 See critical note. 

5 [ixternal symbols of a philosopher. 


13 


25 


26 


27 


28 


30 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ἀλλ᾽ ἐρῶ' νεανίσκε, τίνα θέλεις καλὸν ποιεῖν ; 
m a , 
γνῶθι πρῶτον τίς εἶ καὶ οὕτως κόσμει σεαυτόν. 
3 Φ a’ 2 3 Ν Ν fal 
ἄνθρωπος εἶ" τοῦτο δ᾽ ἐστὲ θνητὸν ζῷον 
Ξ “ \ \ nw 
χρηστικὸν φαντασίαις λογικῶς. τὸ δὲ λογικῶς 
“ 3 ᾽ 7 € f \ / 
τί ἐστὶν; φύσει ομολογουμένως καὶ τελέως. 
, S 5 f ¥ \ [ο ᾿ of Ν θ 
τί οὖν ἐξαίρετον ἔχεις ; τὸ ζῷον ; ov. τὸ θνη- 
/ 
Tov; οὔ. τὸ χρηστικὸν φαντασίαις; ov. τὸ 
λογικὸν ἔχεις ἐξαίρετον᾽' τοῦτο κόσμει καὶ 
3 ~ 
καλλώπιζε' τὴν κόμην & ἄφες τῷ πλάσαντι 
ὡς αὐτὸς ἠθέλησεν. ἄγε, τίνας ἄλλας ἔχεις 
/ >| AN 9 XN “ 3 rd ¥ 
προσηγορίας ; ἀνὴρ εἶ ἢ γυνὴ ;— Avip.— Avipa 
οὖν καλλώπιζε, μὴ γυναῖκα. ἐκείνη φύσει λεία 
, \ 7,  Ἃ " ᾿ ; , 
γέγονε Kal τρυφερά" Kav ἔχη τρίχας πολλάς, 
ia 2 
τέρας ἐστὶ καὶ ἐν τοῖς τέρασιν ἐν Ῥώμῃ δείκνυται. 
sro δ᾽ ἐγ ἀνδρός é ΝΌΟΝ 9 Ἃ \ 
ταὐτὸ ἐπ᾽ ἀνδρός ἐστι τὸ μὴ ἔχειν' κἂν μὲν 
φύσει μὴ ἔχῃ, τέρας ἐστίν, ἂν δ᾽ αὐτὸς ἑαυτοῦ 
‘4 
ἐκκόπτῃ καὶ ἀποτίλλῃ, τί αὐτὸν ποιήσωμεν ; ποῦ 
αὐτὸν δείξωμεν καὶ τί προγράψωμεν ; “δείξω 
ὑμῖν ἄνδρα, ὃς θέλει μᾶλλον γυνὴ εἶναι ἢ ἀνήρ. 
ἰὴ “. / 3 Ν > ON / Ά 
ὦ δεινοῦ θεάματος" οὐδεὶς οὐχὶ θαυμάσει τὴν 
/ A Ν / 3 ve 3 \ € 
προγραφήν' vy τὸν Ata, οἴμαι OTL αὐτοὶ οἱ TLA- 
λόμενοι οὐ παρακολουθοῦντες, STL τοῦτ᾽ αὐτό 
ἐστιν, ὃ ποιοῦσιν, ποιοῦσιν. ἄνθρωπε, τί ἔχεις 
ἫΝ ἝΝ a , ῳ δ >of ° 
ἐγκαλέσαι cov τῇ φύσει; ὅτι σε ἄνδρα éyevyn- 
σεν ; τί οὖν ; πάσας ἔδει γυναῖκας γεννῆσαι ; καὶ 


1 Wolf and Blass: τοῦτο 5. 
4 


BOOK III, 1. 24-30 


you, but I shall say: Young man, whom do you wish 
to make beautiful? First learn who you are, and 
then, in the light of that knowledge, adorn yourself. 
You are a human being; that is, a mortal animal 
gifted with the ability to use impressions rationally. 
And what is “rationally”? In accordance with 
nature and perfectly. What element of superiority, 
then, do you possess? The animal in you? No. 
Your mortality? No. Your ability to use impres- 
sions? No, Your reason is the element of superiority 
which you possess; adorn and beautify that; but 
leave your hair to Him who fashioned it as He 
willed. Come, what other designations apply to 
you? Are you a man or a woman ?—A man.— Very 
well then, adorn a man, not a woman. Woman is 
born smooth and dainty by nature, and if she is 
very hairy she is a prodigy, and is exhibited at Rome 
among the prodigies. But for a man not to be hairy 
is the same thing, and if by nature he has no hair he 
is a prodigy, but if he cuts it out and plucks it out of 
himself, what shall we make of him? Where shall 
we exhibit him and what notice shall we post? “I 
will show you,” we say to the audience, “a man who 
wishes to be a woman rather than a man.” What a 
dreadful spectacle! No one but will be amazed at 
the notice; by Zeus, I fancy that even the men who 
pluck out their own hairs do what they do without 
realizing what it means. Man, what reason have 
you to complain against your nature?+ Because it 
brought you into the world asa man?2 What then? 
Ought it to have brought all persons into the world 


1 Compare the critical note on § 23. 
2 An almost verbatim quotation from Diogenes the Cynic. 
See Athenaeus, XIII. 565 C. 


15 


31 


32 


33 


34 


35 


36 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


τί ἂν ὄφελος ἦν σοι τοῦ κοσμεῖσθαι ; τίνι ἂν 
“ ~ 3 
ἐκοσμοῦ, εἰ πάντες ἦσαν γυναῖκες ; GAN οὐκ 
> ἡ x / xd ὃ > of 3. Ν 
ἀρέσκει σοὶ TO πραγμάτιον ; ὅλον OL ὅλων AUTO 
ποίησον' ἂρον---τί ποτ᾽ ἐκεῖνο ;---τὸ αἴτεον τῶν 
τριχῶν" ποίησον εἰς ἅπαντα σαυτὸν γυναῖκα, ἵνα 
AY / Ἁ Ν \ ef 3 ἤ ‘\ 3 
μὴ πλανώμεθα, μὴ τὸ μὲν ἥμισυ ἀνδρός, τὸ ὃ 
ἥμισυ γυναικός. τίνι θέλεις ἀρέσαι ; τοῖς γυναι- 
, - 4 2.4 3 om of ce a) \ 
καρίοις ; ὡς ἀνὴρ αὐτοῖς ἄρεσον. “vai ἀλλὰ 
τοῖς λείοις χαίρουσιν." οὐκ ἀπάγξῃ ; καὶ εἰ τοῖς 
κιναίδοις ἔχαιρον, ἐγένου ἂν κίναιδος ; τοῦτό σοι 
τὸ ἔργον ἐστίν, ἐπὶ τοῦτο ἐγεννήθης, ἵνα σοι αἱ 
γυναῖκες αἱ ἀκόλαστοι χαίρωσιν ; τοιοῦτόν σε 
“ / 
θῶμεν πολίτην Κορινθίων, κἂν οὕτως τύχῃ, ἀστυ- 
f Ἃ / By \ 
νόμον ἢ. ἐφήβαρχον ἢ στρατηγὸν ἢ ἀγωνοθέτην ; 
at \ 7 / , ? \ 
ἄγε καὶ yapynoas τίλλεσθαι μέλλεις ; τίνι καὶ 
ἐπὶ τί; καὶ παιδία ποιήσας εἶτα κἀκεῖνα τιλλόμενα 
δ΄ ὦ Φ / 9 Ἁ 7 Ν ᾽ 
ἡμῖν εἰσάξεις εἰς τὸ πολίτευμα ; καλὸς πολίτης 
\ 
καὶ βουλευτὴς καὶ ῥήτωρ. τοιούτους δεῖ νέους 
¥ e¢ on 4 \ 3 id 
εὔχεσθαι ἡμῖν φύεσθαι καὶ ἀνατρέφεσθαι ; 
f 

Μή, τοὺς θεούς σοι, veavioxes ἀλλ᾿ ἅπα 
ἀκούσας τῶν λόγων τούτων ἀπελθὼν σαυτῷ εἰπέ' 
“ταῦτά μοι ᾿Επίκτητος οὐκ εἴρηκεν" πτόθεν γὰρ 
δου 6 > ‘ / , " > ‘ 7 9 / 
ἐκείνῳ; ἀλλὰ θεὸς Tis ToT εὐμενὴς δι ἐκείνου. 
> μι δ᾿ 
οὐδὲ γὰρ ἂν ἐπῆλθεν ᾿Επικτήτῳ ταῦτα εἰπεῖν 


1 δ; ὦ 8. 





+ Compare I. 29, 16 together with note on that passage, 
and for a more extended discussion Z'rans. of the Amer. 
Philol, Assoc., 52 (1921), 46. 

* The interlocutor must have been a Corinthian. 


16 


BOOK III, 1. 30-36 


as women? And if that had been the case, what 
good would you be getting of your self-adornment? 
For whom would you be adorning yourself, if all 
were women? Your paltry body! doesn’t please 
you, eh? Make a clean sweep of the whole matter ; 
eradicate your—whatshall I call it?—the cause of your 
hairiness ; make yourself a woman all over, so as not 
to deceive us, not half-man and half-woman. Whom 
do you wish to please? Frail womankind? Please 
them asaman. “Yes, but they like smooth men.” 
Oh, go hang! And if they liked sexual perverts, 
would you have become such a pervert? Is this 
your business in life, is this what you were born for, 
that licentious women should take pleasure in you? 
Shall we make a man like you a citizen of Corinth,? 
and perchance a warden of the city, or superinten- 
dent of ephebi,? or general, or superintendent of the 
games? Well, and when you have married are you 
going to pluck out your hairs? For whom and to 
what end? And when you have begotten boys, are 
you going to introduce them into the body of 
citizens as plucked creatures too? A fine citizen 
and senator and orator! Is this the kind of young 
men we ought to pray to have born and brought up 
for us? 

By the gods, young man, may such not be your fate! 
But once you have heard these words go away and say 
to yourself, “It was not Epictetus who said these 
things to me; why, how could they have occurred to 
him? but it was some kindly god or other speaking 
through him. For it would not have occurred to 
Epictetus to say these things, because he is not in 


8. Young men completing their education and serving their 
term in the army. 


17 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


\ f "ἢ ΓῚ “ fot 
37 οὐκ εἰωθότι λέγειν πρὸς οὐδένα. ἄγε οὖν TO θεῷ 


38 


99 


40 


4] 


πεισθῶμεν, ἵνα μὴ θεοχόλωτοι ὦμεν." OU" ἀλλ᾽ 
ἂν μὲν κόραξ κραυγάζων σημαίνῃ cot τι, οὐχ ὃ 
κόραξ ἐστὶν ὁ σημαίνων, ἀλλ᾽ ὁ θεὸς δι’ αὐτοῦ" 
ἂν δὲ δι’ ἀνθρωπίνης φωνῆς σημαίνῃ τι, τὸν 
ἄνθρωπον προσποιήσῃ λέγειν σοὶ ταῦτα, ἵν᾽ 
ayvons 2 τὴν δύναμιν τοῦ δαιμονίου, ὅτε τοῖς μὲν 
οὕτως, τοῖς δ᾽ ἐκείνως σημαίνει, περὶ δὲ τῶν 
μεγίστων καὶ κυριωτάτων διὰ καλλίστου ay- 
ψχέλου σημαίνει ; τί ἐστὶν ἄλλο, ὃ λέγει ὁ ποιη- 
τής ; 
ἐπεὶ πρό οἱ εἴπομεν * ἡμεῖς, 

“Ἑρμείαν πέμψαντε διάκτορον ὅ ἀργειφόντην, 

μήτ᾽ αὐτὸν κτείνειν μήτε μνάασθαι ἄκοιτιν. 
ὁ "Ερμῆς καταβὰς ἔμελλεν Αὐἰγέίσθῳ 5 λέγειν ταῦτα 
καὶ σοὶ νῦν λέγουσιν οἱ θεοὶ ταῦτα, 


Ἑρμείαν πέμψαντε Ἶ διάκτορον ἀργειφόντην, 
μὴ ἐκστρέφειν τὰ καλῶς ἔχοντα μηδὲ περιεργάξε- 
σθαι, ἀλλ᾽ ἀφεῖναι τὸν ἄνδρα ἄνδρα, τὴν γυναῖκα 
γυναῖκα, τὸν καλὸν ὡς ἄνθρωπον καλόν, τὸν 
αἰσχρὸν ὡς ἄνθρωπον αἰσχρόν. ὅτι οὐκ εἶ κρέας 
οὐδὲ τρίχες, ἀλλὰ προαίρεσις" ταύτην ἂν σχῆς 
καλήν, TOT ἔσει καλός. μέχρι δὲ νῦν οὐ τολμῶ 


1 Blass: ποιήσει 8. 2 Blass: ἵνα γνοίηις 5. 

8. διά supplied by SB, 

4 Upton from Homer: ἐπεί of προείπομεν 9. 

5. Oldfather: πέμψαντες ἐύσκοπον S. The reading restored 
is that of Zenodotus and Aristophanes, which has left some 
traces in two MSS., one scholium, and a papyrus of the 3rd 
cent. after Christ, and especially in § 39 below. See my note 
in Class. Philol., vol. 22, for a full discussion of this passage. 

ὁ Bentley: αὐτῷ S. For arguments in favour of Bentley's 
emendation see Trans. Am. Phitlol. Ass. 52 (1921) 49, 

18 


BOOK III. 1, 36-41 


the habit of speaking to anyone. Come then, let us 
obey God, that we rest not under His wrath.” Nay, 
but if a raven gives you a sign by his croaking, it is 
not the raven that gives the sign, but God through 
the raven ; whereas if He gives you a sign through a 
human voice, will you pretend that it is the man who 
is saying these things to you, so that you may remain 
ignorant of the power of the divinity, that He gives 
signs to some men in this way, and to others in that, 
but that in the greatest and most sovereign matters 
He gives His sign through His noblest messenger? 
What else does the poet mean when he says: 


Since ourselves we did warn him, 
Sending down Hermes, the messenger god, the 
slayer of Argus, 
Neither to murder the husband himself, nor make 
love to his consort ? 4 


As Hermes descended to tell Aegisthus that, so now 
the gods tell you the same thing, 


Sending down ‘Hermes, the messenger god, the 
slayer of Argus, 


not to distort utterly nor to take useless pains about 
that which is already right, but to leave the man a 
man, and the woman a woman, the beautiful person 
beautiful as a human being, the ugly ugly as a 
human being. Because you are not flesh, nor hair, 
but moral purpose; if you get that beautiful, then 
you .will be beautiful. So far I do not have the 


1 Homer, Odyssey, a, 37-9. 





1 πέμψαντες S; see note 5 above. 
8 Oldfather : τὸν καλὸν ἄνθρωπον ὡς καλὸν ἄνθρωπον Κ. 


42 


43 


4.5 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


a 5 a fa ? 

σοι λέγειν, OTL αἰσχρὸς εἶ" δοκεῖς yap μοι πάντα 
δὶ n ? cf / / 

θέλειν ἀκοῦσαι ἢ τοῦτο. GAN ὅρα, TL λέγει 
nn / \ / 

Σωκράτης τῷ καλλίστῳ πάντων Kal ὡραιοτάτῳ 

ral \ 3 35 é 3 ΝᾺ 

᾿Αλκιβιάδῃ" “ πειρῶ οὖν καλὸς εἶναι. τὶ αὐτῷ 

\ f 
λέγει; “πλάσσε σου THY κόμην καὶ τίλλε σου 
7 " 

τὰ σκέλη "; μὴ γένοιτο' ἀλλὰ “κόσμει σου τὴν 

Ν δὰ ἤ 3) Ν 

προαίρεσιν, ἔξαιρε τὰ φαῦλα δόγματα. τὸ 
ζω 7 4 

σωμάτιον οὖν TAS; ὡς πέφυκεν. ἄλλῳ τούτων 
> 7 i-2 7 3 / 1 Τί > < 3 10 

ἐμέλησεν" ἐκείνῳ eTitpevrov..—Tt οὖν ; axalap- 
a 4 \ ἢ . 2 5 ἃ ᾶ \ 7 

τον δεῖ εἶναι ;---Μὴ γένοιτο ἀλλ᾽ ὃς εἶ καὶ πέφυ- 


" , + e A / 
Kas, τοῦτον κάθαιρε, ἄνδρα ὡς ἄνδρα καθάριον 


εἶναι, γυναῖκα ὡς γυναῖκα, παιδίον ὡς παιδίον. οὔ' 
ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῦ λέοντος ἐκτίλωμεν τὴν κόμην, ἵνα μὴ 
ἀκάθαρτος ἦ, καὶ τοῦ ἀλεκτρυόνος τὸν λόφον" δεῖ 
γὰρ καὶ τοῦτον καθάριον εἶναι. ἀλλ᾽ ὡς ἀλεκ- 
τρυόνα καὶ ἐκεῖνον ὡς λέοντα καὶ τὸν κυνηγετικὸν 
κύνα ὡς κυνηγετικόν. 


β΄. Περὶ τίνὰ ἀσκεῖσθαι δεῖ τὸν προκόψοντα καὶ 


1 


ὅτι τῶν κυριωτάτων ἀμεχοῦμεν. 
Τρεῖς εἰσὶ τόποι, περὶ οὺς ἀσκηθῆναι δεῖ τὸν 
ς 
ἐσόμενον καλὸν καὶ ἀγαθόν" ὁ περὶ τὰς ὀρέξεις 
ts 4 id 
καὶ TAS ἐκκλίσεις, ἵνα μήτ᾽ ὀρεγόμενος ἁἀποτυγχάνῃ 
᾽ \ 
μήτ᾽ ἐκκλίνων περιπίπτῃ" ὁ περὶ τὰς ὁρμὰς Kal 


1 ἐπίστρεψον S originally, 





ΠΕ An inexact quotation of Plato, Aleib. I. 131 D. 

2 Compare I, 25, 13; 30, 1; II. 5, 22. 

8 The implication is that the interlocutor’s conception of 
“* cleanliness” has to do merely with things external. 

4 Compare IT. 17, 15ff. This triple division of philosophy 
is the one original element in the teaching of Epictetus, and 
even it is rather a pedagogical device than an innovation in 


20 


BOOK III. 1. 41-1. 2 


courage to tell you that you are ugly, for it looks to 
me as though you would’ rather hear ‘anything than 
that. But observe what Socrates says to Alcibiades, 
the most handsome and youthfully beautiful of men: 
“Try, then, to be beautiful.”1 What does he tell 
him? “Dress your locks and pluck the hairs out 
of your legs?” God forbid!. No, he says, “" Make 
beautiful your moral purpose, eradicate your worthless 
opinions.’’ How treat your paltry body,then? As 
its nature is, This is the concern of Another ;2 
leave it to Him.—What then? Does the body have 
to be left unclean ?—God forbid! but the man that 
you are and were born to be, keep that man clean, 
aman to be clean as a man, a woman as a woman, 
a child as a child. No, but let’s -pluck out also the 
lion’s mane, so that he may not fail to be “cleaned 
up,” and the cock’s comb, for he too ought to be 
“cleaned up”!® Clean? Yes, but clean as a 
cock, and the other clean as a lion, and the hunting 
dog clean as a hunting dog! 


CHAPTER II 


The fields of study in which the man who expects to 
make progress will have to go into training ; and that 
we neglect what 1s most wmportant 


Tuer are three fields of study “in which the man 
who is going to be good and excellent must first 
have been trained. The first has to do with desires 
and aversions, that he may never fail to get what he 
desires, nor fall into what-he avoids; the second 


thought. Compare Vol. I. p- xxi, and the literature there 
cited. 
21 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


3 4 \ Ὁ Δ ε \ \ an t/ f 
ἀφορμὰς καὶ ἁπλῶς ὁ περὶ τὸ καθῆκον, ἵνα τάξει, 
ἵνα εὐλογίστως, ἵνα μὴ ἀμελῶς" τρίτος ἐσ τὶν ὁ περὶ 
τὴν ἀνεξαπωτησίαν καὶ ἀνεικαιότητα καὶ ὅλως ὁ 
περὶ τὰς συγκαταθέσεις. τούτων κυριώτατος καὶ 
5 \ 
μάλιστα ἐπεύίγων ἐστὶν ὃ περὶ τὰ πάθη" πάθος 
᾿ Υ ? t > Vv SF > , 
γὰρ ἄλλως οὐ γίνεται εἰ μὴ ὀρέξεως ἀποτυγχανού- 
σης ἢ ἐκκλίσεως περιπιπτούσης. οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ 
ταραχάς, θορύβους, ἀτυχίας, ὁ δυστυχίας ἐπι- 
f ¢€ Pf θ 3 7 θό ς θ ᾽' 1 ¢ 
φέρων, ὁ πένθη, οἰμωγάς, φθόνους, ὁ PUovepods,* ὃ 
ζηλοτύπους ποιῶν, δι’ ὧν οὐδ᾽ ἀκοῦσαι λόγου 
δυνάμεθα. δεύτερός ἐστιν ὁ περὶ τὸ καθῆκον" 
3 “a 7 5 9 ~ ¢ 3 lA 3 Ἀ 
οὐ δεῖ γάρ με εἶναι ἀπαθῆ ὡς ἀνδριάντα, ἀλλὰ 
τὰς σχέσεις τηροῦντα τὰς φυσικὰς καὶ ἐπιθέτους 
e > “ e ef € 3 ἤ ¢ ‘4 ἰῇ 
ὡς εὐσεβῆ, ὡς υἱόν, ὡς ἀδελφόν, ὡς πατέρα, ὡς 
πολίτην. 
Τρίτος ἐστὶν ὁ ἤδη τοῖς προκόπτουσιν ἐπι- 
f ¢ \ \ are) ,΄ ’ ζ΄ 
βάλλων, ὁ περὶ τὴν αὐτῶν τούτων ἀσφάλειαν, 
σ΄ 27 9 ei , 3 f 
iva μηδ᾽ ἐν ὕπνοις λάθῃ τις ἀνεξέταστος παρελ- 
θοῦσα φαντασία μηδ᾽ ἐν οἰνώσει μηδὲ μελαγ- 
χολῶντος.---[οῦτο ὑπὲρ ἡμᾶς, φησίν, ἐστίν..----- 
Οἱ δὲ νῦν φιλόσοφοι ἀφέντες τὸν πρῶτον τόπον 
καὶ τὸν δεύτερον καταγίνονται περὶ τὸν τρίτον’ 
μεταπίπτοντας, τῷ" ἠρωτῆσθαι περαίνοντας, 
1 φόβους (‘ fears”) conjectured by Reiske, very plausibly. 
2 rg.added by Oldfather after the similar correction by,sin 


1. 7, 1. (where the fact that τῷ is due to 5 should have been 
recorded), 


aad 





1 A briefer definition is given in I. 27, 10. 

2 See critical note. | 

3 The expression is not logical, for the field of study 
22 


BOOK III. π΄. 2-6 


with cases of choice and of refusal, and, in general, 
with duty, that he may act in an orderly fashion, upon 
good reasons, and not carelessly; the third with the 
avoidance of error and rashness in judgement, and, in 
general, about cases of assent. Among these the 
most important and especially pressing is that which 
has to do with the stronger emotions; for a strong 
emotion does not arise except a desire fails to 
attain its object, or an aversion falls into what 
it would avoid.t This is the field of study which 
introduces to us confusions, tumults, misfortunes 
and. calamities; and sorrows, lamentations, envies ;? 
and makes? us envious and jealous-—passions which 
make it impossible for us even to listen to reason. 
The second field of study deals with duty; for I 
ought not to be unfeeling like a statue, but should 
maintain my relations, both natural and acquired, as 
a religious man, as a son, a brother, a father, a 
citizen. 

The third belongs only to those who are already 
making progress; it has to do with the element of 
certainty in the matters which have just been men- 
tioned, so that even in dreams, or drunkenness, or a 
state of melancholy-madness, a man may not be 
taken unawares by the appearance of an untested 
sense-impression.—This, says someone, is beyond 
us.—But philosophers nowadays pass by the first and 
second fields of study, and concentrate upon the 
third, ‘upon arguments which involve equivocal 
premisses, which derive syllogisms by the process of 
interrogation, which involve hypothetical premisses,4 


obviously can do nothing of the kind, but the fault is 
probably not in the MS. tradition. 
4 See I. 7, 1, and note for these first three. 


23 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


a td 
7 ὑποθετικούς, Ψευδομένους.1--- Δεῖ yap, φησίν, καὶ 


8 


9 


10 


Il 


12 


ἐν ταῖς ὕλαις ταύταις γενόμενον διαφυλάξαι τὸ 
ἀνεξαπάτητον.---Τίνα ;---τὸν καλὸν καὶ ἀγαθόν.---- 
σοὶ οὖν τοῦτο λείπει; τὰς ἄλλας ἐκπεπόνηκας ; 
περὶ κερμάτιον ἀνεξαπάτητος εἶ; ἐὰν ἴδῃς 
κοράσιον καλόν, ἀντέχεις τῇ φαντασίᾳ; ἂν ὁ 
γείτων σον κληρονομήσῃ, οὐ δάκνῃ; νῦν οὐδὲν 
ἄλλο σοι λείπει ἢ ἀμεταπτωσία ; τάλας, αὐτὰ 
ταῦτα τρέμων μανθάνεις καὶ ἀγωνιῶν, μή τίς σον 
καταφρονήσῃ, καὶ πυνθανόμενος, μή τίς τι περὶ 
σοῦ λέγει. κἂν τις ἐλθὼν εἴπη σοι ὅτι “ λόγου 
γινομένου, τίς ἄριστός “ἐστι τῶν φιλοσόφων, 
παρών τις ἔλεγεν, ὅτι εἷς φιλόσοφος ὁ δεῖνα, 

γέγονέ σου τὸ ψυχάριον ἀντὶ δακτυλιαίου δίπηχυ. 
ἂν δ᾽ ἄλλος παρὼν εἴπῃ “οὐδὲν εἴρηκας, οὐκ 
ἔστιν ἄξιον τοῦ δεῖνος ἀκροᾶσθαι" τί γὰρ older ; 
τὰς πρώτας ἀφορμὰς ἔχει, πλέον δ᾽ οὐδέν," 
ἐξέστηκας, ὠχρίακας, εὐθὺς κέκραγας “ ἐγὼ αὐτῷ 
δείξω, τίς εἰμί, ὅτι μέγας φιλόσοφος. βλέπεται 
ἐξ αὐτῶν τούτων. τί θέλεις ἐξ ἄλλων δεῖξαι; 
οὐκ οἶδας, OTL Διογένης τῶν σοφιστῶν τινὰ οὕτως 
ἔδειξεν ἐκτείνας τὸν μέσον δάκτυλον, εἶτα ἐκμα- 
νέντος αὐτοῦ “Οὗτός ἐστιν, ἔφη, “ὁ Selva: 
ἔδειξα ὑμῖν αὐτόν"; ἄνθρωπος γὰρ δακτύλῳ οὐ 


+ Oldfather: ψευδομένους vulg. See explanatory note. 





1 ὁ, ὁ, ifa man says he is lying, is he really lying, or tellifg 
the truth? See II. 17, 34," and note, vehieo. ig used 
without the article, as in II. 21, 17. 

? Literally, ‘‘ from a finger’s breadth (-7 in.) to two cubits.” 

5. See Diogenes Laertius, 6, 34, who says that, Demosthenes 
was the man thus pointed at. 


24 


BOOK III. πὰ, 6—127 


and sophisms like The Liar.1—Of course, he says, 
- even when a man is engaged in subjects of this kind 
he has to preserve his freedom from deception. —But 
what kind of a man ought to engage in them ?— 
Only the one who is already good and excellent.— 
Do you, then, fall short in this? Have you already 
attained perfection in the other subjects? Are you 
proof against deception in handling small change? 
If you see a pretty wench, do you resist the sense- 
impression? If your neighbour receives an inheri- 
tance, do you not feel a twinge of envy? And is 
security of judgement now the only thing in which 
you fall short? ’ Wretch, even while you are study- 
ing these very topics you tremble and are worried 
for fear someone despises you, and you ask whether 
anybody is saying anything about you. And if 
someone should come and say, “ A discussion arising 
as to who was the best of the philosophers, someone 
who was there said that So-and-so was the only real 
philosopher,’ immediately your poor little one-inch 
soul shoots up a yard high.2 But if another party to 
the discussion says, “ Nonsense, it’s a waste of time 
to listen to So-and-so. Why, what does he know? 
He has the rudiments, but nothing else,’’ you are 
beside yourself, you grow pale, immediately you 
shout, “Ill show him who I am, that I am a great 
philosopher!’ Yet we see what a man is by just 
such conduct. Why do you wish to show it by any- 
thing else? Do you not know that Diogenes? 
shéwed one of the sophists thus, pointing out his 
middle finger at him,* and then when the man was 
furious with rage, remarked, “That's So-and-so; I’ve 
pointed him out to you.” For a man is not some- 


4 Regarded in antiquity as an insulting gesture. 
ya 


13 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


δείκνυται ὡς λίθος ἢ ws ξύλον, GAN ὅταν τις τὰ 
δόγματα αὐτοῦ δείξῃ, τότε αὐτὸν ὡς ἄνθρωπον 
ἔδειξεν. 

Βλέπωμεν καὶ σοῦ τὰ δόγματα. μὴ γὰρ οὐ 
δῆλόν ἐστιν, ὅτι ov τὴν προαίρεσιν τὴν σαυτοῦ 
ἐν οὐδενὶ τίθεσαι, ἔξω δὲ βλέπεις εἰς τὰ ἀπροαί- 
ρετᾶ, τί ἐρεῖ ὁ δεῖνα καὶ τίς εἶναι δόξεις, εἰ 
φιλόλογος, εἰ Χρύσιππον ἀνεγνωκὼς 1 ἢ ᾿Αντίπα- 
Tpov; εἰ μὲν γὰρ καὶ ᾿Αρχέδημον, ἀπέχεις 


14 ἅπαντα. τί ἔτι ἀγωνιᾷς, μὴ οὐ δείξῃς ἡμῖν, τίς 


15 


16 


17 


el; θέλεις σοι εἴπω, τίνα ἡμῖν ἔδειξας ; ἄνθρωπον 
παριόντα " ταπεινόν, μεμψίέμοιρον, ὀξύθυμον, 
δειλόν, πάντα μεμφόμευον, πᾶσιν ἐγκαλοῦντα, 
μηδέποτε ἡσυχίαν ἄγοντα, πέρπερον" ταῦτα 
ἡμῖν ἔδειξας. ἄπελθε pov καὶ ἀναγίγνωσκε 
᾿Αρχέδημον" εἶτα μῦς ἂν καταπέσῃ καὶ ψοφήσῃ, 
ἀπέθανες. τοιοῦτος γάρ σε μένει θάνατος, οἷος ὃ 
καὶ τὸν---τίνα ποτ᾽ ἐκεῖνον j—Tov Kpivv* καὶ 
ἐκεῖνος μέγα ἐφρόνει, ὅ ὅτι ἐνόει Apyédnpov. τάλας 
οὐ θέλεις ἀφεῖναι ταῦτα τὰ μηδὲν πρὸς σέ; 
πρέπει ταῦτα τοῖς δυναμένοις δίχα ταραχῆς αὐτὰ 
μανθάνειν, οἷς ἔξεστιν εἰπεῖν “οὐκ ὀργίζομαι, οὐ 
λυποῦμαι, οὐ φθονῷ, οὐ κωλύομαι, οὐκ ἄναγ- 
κάξομαι. τί μοι λοιπόν ; ᾿εὐσχολῷ, ἡσυχίαν 
ἄγω. ἴδωμεν, πῶς περὶ τὰς μεταπτώσεις τῶν 

: Kronenberg : ἀνέγνως 8. 

ἢ ἀνθρωπάριον (‘fa mean little person”) very plausibly 


suggested by Reiske. 
5 Menage : οἷον 8. * Reiske: κρίνειν 8. 





1 See critical note. 
? A Stoic philosopher of no great prominence, who must be 
supposed to have died from an apoplectic stroke occasioned by 


26 


BOOK III, mu. 12-17 


thing like a stone or a stick of wood to be pointe 
out with a finger, but when one shows a man 
judgements, then one shows him as a man. 

Let us take a look at your judgements too. Is | 
not evident that you set no value on your own more 
purpose, but look beyond to the things that lie out 
side the province of the moral purpose, namely, wha 
So-and-so will say, and what impression you wi. 
make, whether men will think you a scholar, o 
that you have read Chrysippus or Antipater? Why 
if you have read them and Archedemus too, yo 
have everything! Why are you any longer worriec 
for fear you will not show us who you are? Do yor 
wish me to tell you what kind of a man you hav 
shown us that you are? A person who comes int 
our presence! mean, hypercritical, quick-tempered 
cowardly, finding fault with everything, blaming 
everybody, never quiet, vain-glorious; these are the 
qualities which you have exhibited to us. Go away 
now and read Archedemus; then if a mouse fall: 
down and makes a noise, you are dead with fright 
For the same kind of death awaits you that carriec 
off—what’s his name ?—oh, yes, Crinus.2 He, too 
was proud of himself because he could understanc 
Archedemus. Wretch, are you not willing to le 
alone those things that do not concern you? They 
are appropriate for those who can study them with. 
out disturbance of spirit, who have the right to say 
“I do not yield to anger, or sorrow, or envy; I ar 
not subject to restraint, or to compulsion. What dc 
I yet lack? I enjoy leisure, I have peace of mind 
Let us see how we ought to deal with equivoca 


fright at a mouse falling down from the wall. See Von Arnin 
in the Real-EHncyclopddie,* 800, | 
2 


18 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


Ὁ n ‘ 
λόγων δεῖ ἀναστρέφεσθαι" ἴδωμεν, πῶς ὑπόθεσίν 
3 
Tis λαβὼν εἰς οὐδὲν ἄτοπον ἀπαχθήσεται. 
a al “ / 
ἐκείνων ἐστὶ ταῦτα. τοῖς εὖ παθοῦσι πρέπει 
ras nm 3 7 \ 
πῦρ καίειν, ἀριστᾶν, ἂν οὕτως τύχῃ, καὶ ἄδειν 
\ 3 “ ‘ f δὲ [οὶ ’ , 
καὶ ὀρχεῖσθαι' βυθιζομένου δὲ τοῦ πλοίου σύ μοι 
‘ 7 
παρελθὼν ἐπαΐρεις τοὺς σιφάρους. 


ἴω ~ \ 
γ΄. Tis ὕλη τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ καὶ πρὸς τί μάλιστ᾽ 
ἀσκητέον. 


Ὕλη τοῦ καλοῦ καὶ ἀγαθοῦ τὸ ἴδιον ἧγεμο- 
νικόν, τὸ σῶμα δ᾽ ἰατροῦ καὶ ἰατραλείπτου, ὁ 
> A A fy, δὲ A ἘΠ; 
ἄγρος γεωργοῦ ὕλη" ἔργον O€ καλοῦ καὶ ἀγαθοῦ 
τὸ χρῆσθαι ταῖς φαντασίαις κατὰ φύσιν. πέφυ- 

\ a \ ee A % a 9 / 
κεν δὲ πᾶσα ψυχὴ ὥσπερ TH ἀληθεῖ ἐπινεύειν, 

‘ \ ἴω 3 / Ν Ν δ, 
πρὸς τὸ ψεῦδος ἀνανεύειν, πρὸς τὸ ἄδηλον 

Ν “ 
ἐπέχειν, οὕτως πρὸς μὲν TO ἀγαθὸν ὀρεκτικῶς 
κινεῖσθαι, πρὸς δὲ τὸ κακὸν ἐκκλιτικῶς, πρὸς 
δὲ τὸ μήτε κακὸν μήτ᾽ ἀγαθὸν οὐδετέρως. ὡς 
γὰρ τὸ τοῦ Καίσαρος νόμισμα οὐκ ἔξεστιν ἀπο- 

Ν »" 7 
δοκιμάσαι τῷ τραπεζίτῃ οὐδὲ τῷ λαχανοπώλῃ, 

+ ? f 
ἀλλ᾽ ἂν devEns, θέλει ov θέλει, προέσθαι αὐτὸν 
δεῖ τὸ ἀντ᾽ αὐτοῦ πωλούμενον, οὕτως ἔχει καὶ ἐπὶ 
τῆς ψυχῆς. τὸ ἀγαθὸν φανὲν εὐθὺς ἐκίνησεν ἐφ᾽ 

ξ , \ ‘ > 3 t - > ? 3 3 ἴω 
αὑτό, τὸ κακὸν ἀφ᾽ αὑτοῦ. οὐδέποτε δ᾽ ἀγαθοῦ 
φαντασίαν ἐναργῆ ἀποδοκιμάσει ψυχή, οὐ μᾶλ- 


1 Schweighauser : ἀπαλείπτου 8, 


28 


ΕΣ πον, 


a 


BOOK III. π΄ 17-111. 4 


premisses in arguments; let us see how a perso 
may adopt an hypothesis and yet not be led to δι 
absurd conclusion.” These things belong to men o 
that type. When men are prospering it is appropriat 
to light a fire, to take luncheon, and, if you will, ever 
to sing and dance; but when the ship is alread; 
sinking you come up to me and start to hoist th 
topsails ! 


CHAPTER III 


What is the subject-matter with which the good man ha 
to deal ; and what should be the chief object of ou 


training ? 


Tue subject-matter with which the good anc 
excellent man has to deal is his own governing 
principle, that of a physician and the masseur i 
the body, of a farmer is his farm; but the functior 
of the good and excellent man is to deal with hi: 
impressions in accordance with nature. Now just a: 
it is the nature of every soul to assent to the true 
dissent from the false, and to withhold judgemen 
in a matter of uncertainty, so it is its nature to be 
moved with desire toward the good, with aversior 
toward the evil, and feel neutral toward what i 
neither evil nor good. For just as neither the 
banker nor the greengrocer may legally refuse the 
coinage of Caesar, but if you present it, whether he 
will or no, he must turn over to you what you are 
purchasing with it, so it is also with the soul. The 
instant the good appears it attracts the soul to itself 
while the evil repels the soul from itself. A sou 
will never refuse a clear sense-impression of good 


al 


10 


11 


12 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


λον ἢ τὸ Καίσαρος νόμισμα. ἔνθεν ἐξήρτηται 
πᾶσα κίνησις καὶ ἀνθρώπου καὶ θεοῦ. 

Διὰ τοῦτο πάσης οἰκειότητος προκρίνεται TO 
ἀγαθόν. οὐδὲν ἐμοὶ καὶ τῷ πατρί, ἀλλὰ τῷ 
ἀγαθῷ. “οὕτως εἶ σκληρός ;" οὕτως γὰρ 
πέφυκα" τοῦτό μοι τὸ νόμισμα δέδωκεν ὁ θεός. 
διὰ τοῦτο, εἰ τοῦ καλοῦ καὶ δικαίου τὸ ἀγαθὸν 
ἕτερόν ἐστιν, οἴχεται καὶ πατὴρ καὶ ἀδελφὸς καὶ 
πατρὶς καὶ. πάντα τὰ πράγματα. ON ἐγὼ τὸ 
ἐμὸν ἀγαθὸν ὑπερίδω, ἵνα σὺ σχῇς, καὶ παρα- 
γωρήσω σοι; ἀντὶ τίνος; “πατήρ σου εἰμί." 
ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ἀγαθόν. “ἀδελῴός σου εἰμί. ἀλλ᾽ 
οὐκ ἀγαθόν. ἐὰν δ᾽ ἐν ὀρθῇ προαιρέσει θῶμεν, 
αὐτὸ τὸ τηρεῖν τὰς σχέσεις. ἀγαθὸν γίνεται καὶ 
λοιπὸν ὁ τῶν ἐκτός τινων ἐκχωρῶν, οὗτος τοῦ 
ἀγαθοῦ τυγχάνει. “αἴρει τὰ χρήματα ὁ πατήρ." 
ἀλλ᾽ οὐ βλάπτει. “ἕξει τὸ πλέον τοῦ ἀγροῦ ὁ 
ἀδελφός. 2 ὅσον καὶ θέλει. μή τι οὖν τοῦ 
αἰδήμονος, μή TL τοῦ πιστοῦ, μή τι τοῦ φίλα- 
δέλφου ; ἐκ ταύτης γὰρ τῆς οὐσίας τίς δύναται 
ἐκβαλεῖν ; οὐδ᾽ ὁ Ζεύς. οὐδὲ γὰρ ἠθέλησεν, GAN 
ἐπ᾿ ἐμοὶ αὐτὸ ἐποίησεν καὶ ἔδωκεν οἷον εἶχεν 
αὐτός, ἀκώλυτον, ἀνανάγκαστον, ἀπαραπό- 
διστον. 

Ὅταν οὖν ἄλλῳ ἄλλο τὸ νόμισμα ἢ, ἐκεῖνό 
τις ὃ δείξας ἔχει τὸ ἀντ᾽ αὐτοῦ πιπρασκόμενον. 
ἐλήλυθεν εἰς τὴν ἐπαρχίαν κλέπτης ἀνθύπατος. 
τίνι νομίσματι χρῆται; ἀργυρίῳ. δεῖξον καὶ 
ἀπὄφερε ὃ θέλεις. ἐλήλυθεν μοιχός. τίνι νομίσ- 

1 τὸ added by Reiske. 


* ὃ ἀδελφός added by Schweighduser. 
8 80 (or Sa): ἐκεῖνος 8, 


30 


BOOK III. un 4-12 


any more than a man will refuse the coinage of 
Caesar. On this concept of the good hangs every 
impulse to act both of man and of God. 

That is why the good is preferred above every 
form of kinship. My father is nothing to me, but 
only the good. “Are you so hard-hearted?”’ Yes, 
that is my nature. This is the coinage which God 
has given me. For that reason, if the good is some- 
thing different from the noble and the just, then 
father and brother and country and all relationships 
simply disappear. But shall I neglect my good, so 
that you may have it, and shall I make way for you? 
What for? “Iam your father.” But not a good. 
“Yam your brother.” But not a good. If, how- 
ever, we define the good as consisting in a right 
moral purpose, then the mere preservation of the 
relationships of life becomes a good; and further- 
more, hé who gives up some of the externals achieves 
the good. “My father is taking away my money.” 
But he is doing you no harm, “ My brother is going 
to get the larger part of the farm.”” Let him have 
all he wants. That does not help him at all to get 
a part of your modesty, does it, or of your fidelity, or 
of your brotherly love? Why, from a possession of 
this kind who can eject you? Not even Zeus. Nay, 
nor did He even wish to, but this matter He put 
under my control, and He gave it to me even as 
He had it Himself, free from hindrance, compulsion, 
restraint, 

When, therefore, different persons have different 
pieces of coinage, a man offers the coin and gets what 
is bought by it. A thief has come to the province 
as Proconsul. What coinage does he use? Silver. 
Offer it and carry away what you wish. An adulterer 


321 


13 


14 


15 


16 


17 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ματι χρῆται ; κορασιδίοις. “λάβε, φησίν, “ τὸ 
νόμισμα καὶ πώλησόν μοι τὸ πραγμάτιον." δὸς 
καὶ ἀγόραζε. ἄλλος περὶ παιδάρια ἐσπούδακεν. 
δὸς αὐτῷ τὸ νόμισμα καὶ λάβε ὃ θέλεις. ἄλλος 
φιλόθηρος. δὸς ἱππάριον καλὸν ἢ “υνάριον' 
οἰμώζων καὶ στένων πωλήσει ἀντ᾽ αὐτοῦ ὃ θέλεις. 
ἄλλος γὰρ αὐτὸν ἀναγκάζει ἔσωθεν, ὁ τὸ νόμισμα 
τοῦτο τεταχώς. 

Πρὸς τοῦτο μάλιστα τὸ εἶδος αὑτὸν γυμνα- 
στέον. εὐθὺς ὄρθρου προελθὼν ὃ ὃν ἂν ἴδῃς, ὃν ἂν 
ἀκούσῃς, ἐξέταξε, ἀποκρίνου ὡς πρὸς ἐρώτημο.. 
τί εἶδες ; ; καλὸν ἢ καλήν ; ; ἔπαγε τὸν κανόνα. 
ἀπροαίρετον ἢ προαιρετικὸν ; ἀπροαίρετον' αἷρε 
ἔξω. τί, εἶδες ; ; πενθοῦντ᾽ 1 ἐπὶ τέκνου τελευτῇ ; 
ἔπαγε τὸν κανόνα. ὸ ) θάνατός ἐ ἐστιν ἀπροαίρετον' 
αἶρε ἐκ τοῦ μέσου. ἀπήντησέ σοι ὕπατος ; ἔπαγε 
τὸν κανόνα. ὑπατεία ποῖόν τί ἐστιν ; ; am poatpe- 
τον ἢ προαιρετικόν ; ; ἀπροαίρετον' aipe καὶ 
τοῦτο, οὐκ ἔστι δόκιμον" ἀπόβαλε, οὐδὲν πρὸς 
σέ. καὶ τοῦτο εἰ ἐποιοῦμεν καὶ πρὸς τοῦτο 
ἠσκούμεθα καθ᾽ ἡμέραν ἐξ ἄρθρου μέχρι νυκτός, 
ἐγίνετο ἄν τι, νὴ τοὺς θεούς. νῦν δ᾽ εὐθὺς ὑπὸ 
πάσης φαντασίας κεχηνὄτες λαμβανόμεθα καὶ 
μόνον, εἴπερ ἄρα, ἐν TH σχολῇ μικρόν TL διεγει- 
ρόμεθα' εἶτ᾽ ἐξελθόντες ἂν ἴδωμεν. “πενθοῦντα, 
λέγομεν “ἀπώλετο᾽" ἂν ὕπατον, “ μακάριος." 


1 φ: πενθοῦν S, . 





ἃ The reference is to God, who has ordained that every 
man should prefer what he regards as ‘‘ good” to everything 
else. See §Sabove. The fault consists in making ὃ; wrong 


32 


BOOK III. τπ| 12-17 _ 


has come. What coinage does he use? Frail wenches. 
“Take,” says one, “the coin and sell me the little 
baggage.” Give,and buy. Another is interested in 
boys. Give him the coin and take what you wish. 
Another is fond of hunting. Give him a fine horse 
or dog; with sighs and groans he will sell for it what 
you wish; for Another constrains him from within, 
the one who has established this currency.? 

It is chiefly with this principle in mind that a man 
must exercise himself. Go out of the house at early 
dawn, and no matter whom you see or whom you 
hear, examine him and then answer as you would to 
a question. What did you see? A handsome man 
ora handsome woman? Apply your rule. [5 it out- 
side the province of the moral purpose, or inside? 
Outside. Away with it. What did you see? A 
man in grief over the death of his child?: Apply 
your rule. Death lies outside the province of the 
moral purpose. Out of the way with it. Did a 
Consul meet you? Apply your rule. What sort of 
thing is a consulship? Outside the province of the 
moral purpose, or inside? Outside. Away with it, too, 
it does not meet the test; throw it away, it does not 
concern you. If we had kept doing this and had exer- 
cised ourselves from dawn till dark with this principle 
in mind,—by the gods, something would have been 
achieved! Butas it is, we are caught gaping straight- 
way at every external impression that comes along, and 
we wake up a little only during the lecture, if indeed 
weedo so even then. After that is over we go out, 
and if we see a man in grief, we say, “It is all over’ 
with him”; if we see a Consul, we say, “ Happy 
choice of what is to be considered ‘‘good.” For ‘* Another” 
as ἃ reverent form of reference to Zeus, see 1, 25, 13 and note. 


33 
VOL. Tt. 


18 


19 


20 


21 


22 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


nN 4 ἤ ee A 33, Δ f 
ἂν ἐξωρισμένον, “ ταλαίπωρος ° ἂν πένητα, 
3 ἴω 
“ἄθλιος, οὐκ ἔχει πόθεν φάγῃ. ταῦτ᾽ οὖν 
a 4 “~ 
ἐκκόπτειν δεῖ τὰ πονηρὰ δόγματα, περὶ τοῦτο 
’ ? / > ἯΝ / \ 3 ’ 
συντετάσθαι. τί γάρ ἐστι τὸ κλαίειν καὶ οἰμώ- 
᾿ , , t , ΄ὕ 
few; δόγμα. τί δυστυχία ; δόγμα. τί στάσις, 
, f i / f / (aed / 
τί διχόνοια, τί μέμψις, τί κατηγορία, τί ἀσέβεια, 
/ ? “” 7 7 3 \ 
τί φλναρία; ταῦτα πάντα δόγματά ἐστι καὶ 
“ ral 
ἄλλο οὐδὲν καὶ δόγματα περὶ τῶν ἀπροαιρέτων 
[ af 3 Ἂ \ ἊΝ ~ , 2 oN \ 
ὡς ὄντων ἀγαθῶν Kal κακῶν. ταῦτά τις ἐπὶ τὰ 
7 Fal 
προαιρετικὰ μεταθέτω, κἀγὼ αὐτὸν ἐγγυῶμαι ὅτι 
> 7 φ x ἐς Ἁ \ 3 ὔ 
εὐσταθήσει, ὡς ἂν ἔχῃ τὰ περὶ αὐτόν. 
Οἷόν ἐστιν ἡ λεκάνη τοῦ ὕδατος, τοιοῦτον ἢ 
7 δ΄ > \ e 4 δ᾿ “ὃ 
ψυχή, οἷον ἣ αὐγὴ ἣ προσπίπτουσα τῷ ὕδατι, 
»» € f [τὲ =» \ ἫΝ An 
τοιοῦτον ai φαντασίαι. ὅταν οὖν τὸ ὕδωρ κινηθῇ, 
δοκεῖ μὲν καὶ ἡ αὐγὴ κινεῖσθαι, οὐ μέντοι κινεῖται. 
καὶ ὅταν τοίνυν σκοτωθῇ τις, οὐχ αἱ τέχναι καὶ 
αἱ ἀρεταὶ συγχέονται, ἀλλὰ τὸ πνεῦμα, ἐφ᾽ οὗ 
εἰσίν" καταστάντος δὲ καθίσταται κἀκεῖνα. 


5’. Πρὸς τὸν ἀκόσμως ἐν θεάτρῳ σπουδάσαντα. 
Ὁ f ms 
Τοῦ δ᾽ ἐπιτρόπου τῆς Ἤπείρου ἀκοσμότερον 
ὁπουδάσαντος κωμῳδῷ τινὶ καὶ ἐπὶ τούτῳ δημο- 
7 \ ὃ θέν 9 C San 3 AN Ἀ 
cia λοιδορηθέντος, εἶτα ἑξῆς ἀπαγγείλαντος πρὸς 
34 


BOOK III. mt. 17-1v. 1 


man’; if we see an exile, “Poor fellow”; or a 
poverty-stricken person, “Wretched man, he has 
nothing with which to get a bite to eat.” These, 
then, are the vicious judgements which we ought to 
eradicate; this is the subject upon which we ought 
to concentrate our efforts. Why, what is weeping 
and sighing? A judgement. What is misfortune? 
A judgement. What are strife, disagreement, fault- 
finding, accusing, impiety, foolishness? They are all 
judgements, and that, too, judgements about things 
that lie outside the province of moral purpose, 
assumed to be good or evil. Leét a man but transfer 
his judgements to matters that lie within the 
province of the moral purpose, and I guarantee that 
he will be steadfast, whatever be the state of things 
about him. 

The soul is something like a bowl of water, and 
the external impressions something like the ray of 
light that falls upon the water. Now when the 
water is disturbed, it looks as though the ray of 
light is disturbed too, but it is not disturbed. And 
so, therefore, when a man has an attack of vertigo, 
it is not the arts and the virtues that are thrown 
into confusion, but the spirit in which they exist; 
and when this grows steady again, so do they too. 


CHAPTER IV 


70 the man who took sides, in an undignified manner, 
while in a theatre 


Tue Procurator of Epirus took the side of a comic 
actor in a somewhat undignified manner and was 
reviled by the people for doing so. Thereupon he 
brought word to Epictetus that he had been reviled, 

35 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


b ? ev 3 / Ν 3 ~ \ 
αὐτόν, ὅτε ἐχοιδορήθη, καὶ ἀγανακτοῦντος πρὸς 
‘ / % f / 2 3 , 
τοὺς λοιδορήσαντας Kal τί κακόν, ἔφη, ἐποίουν ; 
5 7 \ Ὁ e \ 4 > , » 
ἐσπούδαζον καὶ οὗτοι ὡς καὶ σύ. εἰπόντος ὃ 

Ky / 7 
ἐκείνον Οὕτως οὖν τις σπουδάξει; Σέ, ἔφη, 
Ἀ a“ Η 
βλέποντες τὸν αὐτῶν ἄρχοντα, τοῦ Καίσαρος 
’ Ν > 7? A / 3 
φίλον καὶ ἐπίτροπον, οὕτως σπουδάξοντα οὐκ 


8 ἔμελλον καὶ αὐτοὶ οὕτως σπουδάξειν ; εἰ γὰρ μὴ δεῖ 


οὕτως σπουδάζειν, μηδὲ σὺ σπούδαζε" εἰ δὲ δεῖ, τί 
χαλεπαίνεις, εἴ σε ἐμιμήσαντο ; τίνας γὰρ ἔχου- 
σιν μιμήσασθαι οἱ πολλοὶ ἢ τοὺς ὑπερέχοντας 
t ἴω b] ? 3 [ὃ 3 ? 3 \ f 
ὑμᾶς ; eis τίνας ἀπίδωσιν ἐλθόντες εἰς τὰ θέατρα. 
~ ‘4 “ ς-.5» / nr 
ἡ ὑμᾶς ; “dpa πῶς ὁ ἐπίτροπος τοῦ Καίσαρος 
3 
θεωρεῖ" κέκραγεν" κἀγὼ τοίνυν κραυγάσω. ἀνα- 
Ὁ Ἵ \ 3 , ξ fa ᾿ n 
πηδᾷ Kayo ἀναπηδήσω. οἱ δοῦλοι αὐτοῦ δια- 
, , 3 ‘ Ἵ > 7 , 
κάθηνται κραυγώξοντες" ἐγὼ δ᾽ οὐκ ἔχω δούλους" 
ἀντὶ πάντων αὐτὸς ὅσον δύναμαι κραυγάσω." 
"Ὁ 7 μὰ a ψΨ, > » 3 4 , 
εἰδέναι σε οὖν δεῖ, ὅταν εἰσέρχη εἰς τὸ θέατρον, 
Ἄ \ , a 
ὅτι κανὼν εἰσέρχῃ καὶ παράδειγμα τοῖς ἄλλοις, 
πῶς αὐτοὺς δεῖ θεωρεῖν. τί οὖν σε ἐλοιδόρουν ; 
Δ “ \ nw 
ὅτι was ἄνθρωπος μισεῖ τὸ ἐμπόδιζον. ἐκεῖνοι 
nm \ 
στεφανωθῆναι ἤθελον τὸν δεῖνα, σὺ ἕτερον' 
Δ ‘ f ; 
ἐκεῖνοι σοὶ ἐνεπόδιξον καὶ σὺ ἐκεΐνοις. σὺ 
e καὶ > f . 3 ~ a 9 [4 3 f 
εὑρίσκουν ἰσχυρότερος" ἐκεῖνοι ὃ ἐδύναντο ἐποίουν, 
7 \ ? φ' 
ἐλοιδόρουν τὸ ἐμποδιξζον. τί οὖν θέλεις ; ἵνα σὺ 
a ᾿ al ᾿ 
μὲν ποιῇς ὃ θέλεις, ἐκεῖνοι δὲ μηδ᾽ εἴπωσιν ἃ 


ls: θέλωσιν S. 


36 


BOOK III. iv. 1-7 


and gave expression to his indignation at the men 
who had so reviled him. Why, what wrong were 
they doing? said Epictetus. They too were taking 
sides, just as you yourself were, But when the 
other asked, Is that the way, then, in which a man 
takes sides? he replied, Yes, they saw you, their 
Governor, the friend and Procurator of Caesar, 
taking sides in this way, and weren't they likely to 
take sides themselves in the same way? Why, if 
people should not take sides in this way, you had 
better not do so yourself; but if they should, why 
are you angry if they imitated you? For whom have 
the people to imitate but you, their superior? 
Whom do they look to but you, when they go to the 
theatres? “See,” says one of them, “how the 
Procurator of Caesar acts in the theatre; he 
shouts ; very well, 111 shout too. He jumps up and 
down; 1] jump up and down too. His claque of 
slaves sit in different parts of the house and shout, 
whereas I haven’t any slaves; very well, 1] shout 
as loud as I can to make up for all of them.” You 
ought to know, then, that when you enter the 
theatre, you enter as a standard of behaviour and as 
an example to the rest, showing them how they 
ought to act in the theatre. Why, then, did they 
revile you? Because every man hates what stands 
in his way. They wanted So-and-so to get the 
crown, while you wanted the other man to get it. 
They were standing in your way, and you in theirs. 
You turned out to be the stronger; they did what 
they could, and reviled what was standing in their 
way. What, then, do you wish? That you should 
be able to do what you wish, but that they should 
not even say what they wish? And what is there 


37 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


; t 
θέλουσιν; καὶ τί θαυμαστόν; οἱ γεωργοὶ τὸν 
ΓᾺ ἢ 
Δία οὐ λοιδοροῦσιν, ὅταν ἐμποδίζωνται ὑπ᾽ 
ἴω a , a 
αὐτοῦ; οἱ ναῦται ov λοιδοροῦσι; τὸν Καίσαρα 
παύονται λοιδοροῦντες ; τί οὖν; οὐ γιγνώσκει ὁ 
» 3 
Ζεύς ; τῷ Καίσαρι οὐκ ἀπαγγέλλονται τὰ λεγό- 
μενα; τί οὖν ποιεῖ; οἷδεν ὅτι, ἂν πάντας τοὺς 
λοιδοροῦντας κολάξῃ, οὐχ ἕξει τίνων ἄρξει. τί 
a Ἵ f 3 \ “~ 
οὖν ; eee εἰσερχόμενον eis τὸ θέατρον τοῦτο 
> A Gg ¥ “ , σι 32 » ,\? 
εἰπεῖν “dye ἵνα Σώφρων στεφανωθῇ"; ἀλλ 
aA i ‘ io 
ἐκεῖνο “ ἄγε ἵνα τηρήσω τὴν ἐμαυτοῦ προαίρεσιν 
” ἢ 
ἐπὶ ταύτης τῆς ὕλης κατὰ φύσιν ἔχουσαν." 
3 4 3 3 4 ir 7) - ὲ ~ ΠῚ tf 3 
10 ἐμοὺ map ἐμὲ pirtepos οὐδεῖς'" γελοῖον οὖν, ἵν 
~ > \ 
11 ἄλλος νικήσῃ κωμῳδῶν, ἐμὲ βλάπτεσθαι.----Τίνα 
ol \ 
οὖν θέλω νικῆσαι ;—Tov νικῶντα" καὶ οὕτως ἀεὶ 
ὰ ? 2 ‘\ / : ” 
νικήσει, ὃν θέλω.----Αλλὰ θέλω στεφανωθῆναι 
- 7) ayy δ va θ ? 3 “ of 
Σώφρονα.---- Ev οἴκῳ ὅσους θέλεις ἀγῶνας ἄγων 
͵ Ἀ ? f 
ἀνακήρυξον αὐτὸν Νέμεα, Πύθια, Ἴσθμια, Ολύμ- 
[οἱ \ " 
mia’ ἐν φανερῷ δὲ μὴ πλεονέκτει μηδ᾽ ὑφάρπαξε 
12 τὸ κοινόν. εἰ δὲ μή, ἀνέχου λοιδορούμενος" ὡς, 
ὅταν ταὐτὰ ποιῇς τοῖς πολλοῖς, εἰς ἴσον ἐκείνοις 
ΜᾺ 7 
καθιστᾷς σαντὸν. 


roe 


8 


a> 


ε΄. Πρὸς τοὺς διὰ νόσον ἀπαλλαττομένους.1 


1 Νοσῷῶῷ, φησίν, ἐνθάδε καὶ βούλομαι ἀπιέναι 
? \ 
2 εἰς otxov.—Ev οἴκῳ yap ἄνοσος ἧς σύ; ov 
σκοπεῖς, εἴ τι ποιεῖς ἐνθάδε τῶν πρὸς τὴν 
φ 


ly: πλαττομένους S. 





1 The word ‘‘school” does not, of course, appear in the 
Greek. but such was the nature of the educational institution 
which Epictetus conducted, and that is clearly what is meant 
here. See in particular Ivo Bruns: De Schola Eyicteti (1897), 


38 


BOOK III. tv. 7—v. 2 


surprising in all that? Don’t the farmers revile 
Zeus, when he stands in their way? Don’t the 
sailors revile Zeus? Do men ever stop reviling 
Caesar? What then? Doesn’t Zeus know about 
it? Isn’t Caesar informed of what is said? What, 
then, does he do? He knows that if he punishes 
all who revile him he will have no one left to rule 
over. What then? Ought’ you upon entering the 
theatre to say, “Come, let’s see that Sophron gets 
the crown’’? and not rather, “ Come, let me in this 
subject-matter maintain my moral purpose in accord 
with nature’? No one is dearer to me than my- 
self; it is absurd, therefore, for me to let myself be 
hurt in order that another man may win a victory as a 
comic actor.—Whom, then, do I wish to win the 
victory? The victor; and so the one whom I wish 
to win the victory will always win it.—But I wish 
Sophron to get the crown.—Stage as many contests 
as you will in your own house, and proclaim him 
victor in the Nemean, Pythian, Isthmian, and 
Olympic games; but out in public do not arrogate 
to yourself more than your due, and do not filch 
away a public privilege. Otherwise you must 
put up with being reviled; because, when you do 
the same things that the people do, you are putting 
yourself on their level. 


CHAPTER V 
To those who leave school! because of illness 


I am ill here, says one of the students, and want 
to go back home.—What, were you free from illness 


_and the studies by Colardeau, Halbauer, and Hartmann, listed 
in Vol. I, Zntroduction. 
39 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


προαίρεσιν THY σαυτοῦ φερόντων, tv’ ἐπανορ- 
θωθῇ; εἰ μὲν γὰρ μηδὲν ἀνύεις, περισσῶς καὶ 

3 ἦλθες. ἄπιθι, ἐπιμελοῦ τῶν ἐν οἴκῳ. εἰ γὰρ 
μὴ δύναταί σου τὸ ἡγεμονικὸν σχεῖν κατὰ φύσιν, 
τό γ᾽ ἀγρίδιον δυνήσεται" τό γε κερμάτιον 
αὐξήσεις, τὸν πτατέρα γηροκομήσεις, ἐν τῇ ἀγορᾷ 
ἀναστραφήσῃ, ἄρξεις" κακὸς κακῶς τί ποτε 

4 ποιήσεις τῶν ἑξῆς. εἰ δὲ παρακολουθεῖς σαυτῷ, 
ὅτε ἀποβάλλεις τινὰ δόγματα φαῦλα καὶ ἄλλ᾽ 
ἀντ αὐτῶν ἀναλαμβάνεις καὶ τὴν σαυτοῦ 
στάσιν μετατέθεικας ἀπὸ τῶν ἀπροαιρέτων ἐπὶ 
τὰ προαιρετικά, κἄν ποτ᾽ εἴπῃς “οἴμοι, οὐ 
λέγεις διὰ τὸν πατέρα, τὸν ἀδελφόν, ἀλλὰ 

δ “δι’ éué,” ἔτει ὑπολογίζῃ νόσον ; οὐκ οἶδας, 
ὅτι καὶ νόσος καὶ θάνατος καταλαβεῖν ἡμᾶς 
ὀφείλουσίν τί ποτε ποιοῦντας; τὸν γεωργὸν 
γεωργοῦντα καταλαμβάνουσι, τὸν ναυτικὸν 

8 πλέοντα. σὺ τί θέλεις ποιῶν καταληφθῆναι; 
τί ποτε μὲν γὰρ ποιοῦντά σε δεῖ καταληφθῆναι. 
εἴ TL ἔχεις τούτου κρεῖσσον ποιῶν καταληφθῆς- 
ναί, Tote. ἐκεῖνο, 

1 Ἐμοὶ μὲν γὰρ καταληφθῆναι γένοιτο μηδενὸς 
ἄλλου ἐπιμελουμένῳ ἢ τῆς προαιρέσεως τῆς 
ἐμῆς, ἵν᾽ ἀπαθής, ἵν᾽ ἀκώλυτος, ἵν᾽ ἀνανάγκαστος, 

8 ἵν ἐλεύθερος. ταῦτα ἐπιτηδεύων θέλω εὑρε- 


1 εὐθενήσεται (will prosper) Elter rather plausibly. 





1 See the critical note. 
40 | 


BOOK III. v. 2-8 


at home? Do you not raise the question whether 
you are doing here any of the things that have a 
bearing upon your moral purpose, so that it shall be 
improved? For if you are not accomplishing any- 
thing, it was no use for you to have come in the first 
place. Go back and tend to your affairs at home. 
For if your governing principle cannot be brought 
into conformity with nature, no doubt your paltry 
piece of land can be made to conform with it* You 
will increase the amount of your small change; you 
will care for your father in his old age, you will walk 
up and down in the market, you will hold office; a 
poor wretch yourself, you will do wretchedly what- 
ever comes next. But if you understand yourself, 
namely, that you are putting away certain bad 
judgements and taking on others in their place, and 
that you have transferred your status from what lies 
outside the province of the moral purpose to what 
lies inside the same, and that if ever you say 
* Alas!” you are speaking, not for your father’s sake, 
or your brother’s sake, but “ for my own sake,” then 
why take account of illness any longer? Do you 
not know that disease and death needs must over- 
take us, no matter what we are doing? They over- 
take the farmer at his work in the fields, the sailor 
on the sea. What do you wish to be doing when it 
overtakes you? For no matter what you do you will 
have to be overtaken by death. If you have any- 
thing better to be doing when you are so overtaken, 
get to work on that. | 
As for me, I would fain that death overtook me 
occupied with nothing but my own moral purpose, 
trying to make it tranquil, unhampered, uncon- 
strained, free. This is what I wish to be engaged in 


Al 


10 


I] 


12 


18 


14 


θῆναι, ἵν᾽ εἰπεῖν δύνωμαι τῷ θεῷ ee “μή͵ TL παρέ- 
βην σου τὰς ἐντολάς ; μή TL πρὸς ἄλλα 
ἐχρησάμην ταῖς ἀφορμαῖς ἃς ἔδωκας ; μή τι 
ταῖς αἰσθήσεσιν ἄλλως, μή τι ταῖς προλήψεσιν ; ; 
μή τί cob ποτ᾽ ἐνεκάλεσα ; Ὶ μή τι ἐμεμψάμην 
σου τὴν διοίκησιν ; : ἐνόσησα, ὅτε ἠθέλησας: κα 
οἱ ἄλλοι, ἀλλ᾽ ἐγὼ ἑκών. πένης ἐγενόμην σου 
θέλοντος, ἀλλὰ χαίρων. οὐκ ἦρξα, ὅτε σὺ οὐκ 
ἠθέλησας" οὐδέποτ᾽ ἐπεθύμησα ἀρχῆς. μή τί 
μὲ τούτου ἕνεκα στυγνότερον εἶδες ; μὴ οὐ 
προσῆλθόν ᾽ σοί ποτε φαιδρῷ τῷ προσώπῳ, 
ἕτοιμος εἴ τί ἐπιτάσσεις, εἴ TL σημαίνεις ; νῦν 
με θέλεις ἀπελθεῖν ἐκ τῆς πανηγύρεως" ἄπειμι, 
χάριν ool ἔχω πᾶσαν, ὅτι ἠξίωσάς με συμπανη- 
γυρίσαι σοι καὶ ἰδεῖν ἔργα τὰ σὰ καὶ τῇ διοικήσει 
σου συμπαρακολουθῆσαι. ταῦτά με ἐνθυμού- 
μενον, ταῦτα γράφοντα, ταῦτα ἀναγιγνώσκοντα 
καταλάβοι 0 θάνατος. 

"ANN ἡ μήτηρ μου τὴν κεφαλὴν νοσοῦντος οὐ 
κρατήσει. ---- ᾿Άπιθι τοίνυν πρὸς τὴν μητέρα" 
ἄξιος γὰρ εἶ τὴν κεφαλὴν κρατούμενος νοσεῖν.---- 
᾿Αλλ᾽ ἐπὶ κλεναρίου κομψοῦ ἐν οἴκῳ κατεκείμην. 

-- Απιθί σου ἐπὶ τὸ κλινάριον" ἢ 3 ὑγιαίνων 
ἄξιος εἶ ἐπὶ τοιούτου κατακεῖσθαι. μὴ τοίνυν 
ἀπόλλυε, ἃ δύνασαι ἐκεῖ “ποιεῖν. 

"ARN ὁ Σωκράτης τί λέγει; “" ᾿ὥσπερ ἄλλος 
τίν, φησίν, “" “χαίρει ὃ τὸν ἀγρὸν τὸν αὑτοῦ 
ποιῶν κρείσσονα, ἄλλος τὸν ἵππον, οὕτως “ἐγὼ 
καθ' ἡμέραν χαίρω παρακολουθῶν ἐμαυτῷ 


1 gol after this word deleted in 5. 
3 Upton: ἤ 8 


42 


BOOK III. v. 8-14 


when death finds me, so that I may be able to say 

God, “Have I in any respect transgressed T 

commands? Have I in any respect misused t 

resources which Thou gavest me, or used my sen: 

to no purpose, or my preconceptions? Have I ev 

found any fault with Thee? Have I blamed Τ' 
governance at all? I fell sick, when it was 1] 
will; so did other men, but I willingly. I becan 
poor, it being Thy will, but with joy. I have he 
no office, because Thou didst not will it, and I nev: 
set my heart upon office. Hast Thou ever seen n 
for that reason greatly dejected? Have I not ev 
come before Thee with a radiant countenance, read 
for any injunctions or orders Thou mightest give 
And now it is Thy will that I leave this festival ; 

go, I am full of gratitude to Thee that Thou has 
deemed me worthy to take part in this festival wit. 
Thee, and to see Thy works, and to understand Th 
governance.” Be this my thought, this my writing 
this my reading, when death comes upon me, 

But my mother will not hold my head in her arm 
when I am ill.—Very well, go back to your mother 
you are just the sort of person that deserves to have 
his head held in somebody’s arms when he is ill! — 
But at home I used to have a nice bed to lie on.— 
Go back to your bed; without doubt you deserve tc 
lie on such a fine bed even when you are well. 
Pray, then, do not lose by staying here what you 
can do there. 

But what does Socrates say? “As one man 
rejoices,” remarks he, “in improviifg his own farm, 
and another his own horse, so I rejoice day by day 








3.5: χαίρειν 5. 
43 


15 


16 


17 


18᾽ 


19 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


f , 33 Ν / / x 
βελτίονι yivouéve.’—ITIpos τί; μὴ τι πρὸς 
3 f Ἀ 
λεξείδια; --- Ἄνθρωπε, εὐφήμει. ---- Μή te πρὸς 
~ \ 
θεωρημάτεα ;—Tt ποιεῖς ;—Kal μὴν ov βλέπω, 
᾿ 3 Ἁ x Δ A 3 ray ¢ , 
τί ἐστὶν ἄλλο, περὶ ὃ ἀσχολοῦνται et φιλόσοφοι. 
-- Οὐδέν σοι δοκεῖ εἶναι τὸ μηδέποτε ἐγκαλέσαι 
/ \ θ " ‘ > θ ’ Ξ \ / al 
τινί, μὴ θεῷ, μὴ avlpoTe@ μὴ μέμψασθαι 
4 ? 
μηδένα" τὸ αὐτὸ πρόσωπον ἀεὶ Kal ἐκφέρειν καὶ 
al iy ray ξ 
εἰσφέρειν; ταῦτα ἦν, ἃ ἤδει ὁ Σωκράτης, καὶ 
ὅμως οὐδέποτε εἶπεν, ὅτι οἷδέν Te ἢ διδάσκει. 
εἰ δέ τις λεξείδια ἥτει ἢ θεωρημάτια, ἀπῆγεν 
’ Ἀ 
πρὸς Πρωταγόραν, πρὸς ‘Immiav. καὶ γὰρ εἰ 
λάχανά τις ζητῶν ἐλήλυθεν, πρὸς τὸν κηπου- 
ρὸν ἂν αὐτὸν ἀπήγαγεν τίς οὖν ὑμῶν ἔχει 
7 3 ? > 
ταύτην τὴν ἐπιβολήν ; ἐπεί τοι εἰ εἴχετε, καὶ 
ἐνοσεῖτε ἂν ἡδέως καὶ ἐπεινᾶτε καὶ ἀπεθνήσκετε.3 
“ 7 “ 
εἴ τις ὑμῶν ἠράσθη κορασίου κομψοῦ, οἷδεν ὅτι 
ἀληθῆ λέγω. 


ς΄, Σποράδην τινά, 


Πυθομένου δέ τινος, πῶς 8 νῦν μᾶλλον ἐκπέ- 
πονημένου τοῦ λόγου πρότερον μείζονες “τρο- 
κοπαὶ ἦσαν, Κατὰ τί, ἔφη, ἐκπεπόνηται καὶ 
κατὰ τί μείζους αἱ προκοπαὶ τότε ἧσαν; καθὸ 


1 ὃς: ἔχετε 5. 2 Sc: πεινᾶτε and ἀποθνήσκετε δ΄. 
8. Schweighauser: τῶν S. . 





1 The closest parallels from Xenophon (Mem. I. 6. 8 and 
14) and Plato (/’ror. 318 A) express the idea so differently 
that we have here probably (through Chrysippus) a fragment 
from one of the lost Socratic dialogues, of which there was a 


large body. 
44 


BOOK III. v. 14~v1. 2 
e 

in following the course of my own improvement.” } 
In what respect; in little philosophic phrases ?— 
Man, hold your tongue.—In little philosophic 
theories, then?—-What are you doing?—Well, I 
don’t see anything else that the philosophers spend 
their time on.—lIs it nothing in your eyes never to 
bring accusation against anyone, be it God or man? 
Never to blame anyone? Always to wear the same 
expression on one’s face, whether one is coming out 
or going in?® These are the things which Socrates 
knew, and yet he never said that he either knew or 
taught anything. But if someone called for little 
philosophic phrases or theories, he used to take him 
over to Protagoras or Hippias. It was just as though 
someone had come to him for fresh vegetables, and 
he would have taken him over to the market 
gardener. Who, then, among you makes this pur- 
pose of Socrates the purpose of his own life? Why, 
if you did, you would have been glad even to be ill, 
and to go hungry, and to die. Ifany one of you was 
ever in love with a pretty wench, he knows that 
what I say is true. 


CHAPTER VI 
Some scattered sayings 


Wuen someone asked how it was that, despite 
the greater amount of work which was done nowa- 
days in logic, there was more progress made in 
former times, Epictetus replied, On what has labour 
been expended in our time, and in what was the 
progress greater in those days? For in that upon 


2 See also about Socrates in Aelian, Var. Hist. 9, 7. 


45 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


yap νῦν ἐκπεπόνηται, κατὰ τοῦτο καὶ προκοπαὶ 

8 νῦν εὑρεθήσονται. καὶ νῦν μὲν ὥστε συλλο- 
γισμοὺς ἀναλύειν ἐκπεπόνηται καὶ προκοπαὶ 
γίνονται" τότε 6 ὥστε τὸ ἡγεμονικὸν κατὰ 
φύσιν ἔχον τηρῆσαι καὶ ἐξεπονεῖτο καὶ προκοπαὶ 
4 ἦσαν. μὴ οὖν ἐνάλλασσε μηδὲ ζήτει, ὃ ὅτων ἄλλο 
ἐκπονῇς, ἐν ἄλλῳ “προκόπτειν. ἀλλ᾽ ide, εἴ τις 
ἡμῶν πρὸς τούτῳ ὦν, ὥστε κατὰ φύσιν ἐ ἔχειν καὶ 
διεξάγειν, οὐ προκόπτει. οὐδένα γὰρ εὑρήσεις. 

5 ‘O σπουδαῖος ἀήττητος" καὶ γὰρ οὐκ ἀγωνί. 

6 ἕεται, ὅπου μὴ κρείσσων 3 ἐστίν. εἰ τὰ ὃ κατὰ 
τὸν ἀγρὸν θέλεις, λάβε" λάβε τοὺς οἰκέτας, 
λάβε τὴν ἀρχήν, λάβε τὸ σωμάτιον. τὴν δ᾽ 
ὄρεξιν οὐ ποιήσεις ἀποτευκτικὴν οὐδὲ τὴν 

7 ἔκκλισιν περιπτωτικήν." εἰς τοῦτον μόνον τὸν 
ἀγῶνα καθίησιν, τὸν περὶ τῶν προαιρετικῶν" TAS 
οὖν οὐ μέλλει ἀήττητος εἶναι; : 

8 Πυθομένου δέ τινος, τί ἐστὶν ὁ κοινὸς νοῦς, 
“Ὥσπερ, φησίν, κοινή τις ἀκοὴ vie ἂν ἡ 
μόνον φωνῶν διακριτική, ἡ δὲ τῶν φθ ϑόγγων 
οὐκέτι κοινή, ἀλλὰ τεχνική, οὕτως ἐστί τινα, 
ἃ of μὴ παντάπασιν διεστραμμένοι͵ τῶν ἀν- 
θρώπων κατὰ τὰς κοινὰς ἀφορμὰς ὁρῶσιν. ἡ 
τοιαύτη κατάστασις κοινὸς νοῦς καλεῖται. 

1 Upton’s “‘codex”: #8. 
2 The words that follow in 8, εἰ μὴ ὅπου κρείσσων, are 


omitted in ¢. 
3 rd added by 52. 4 λάβε added by Upton. 





+ On the use of the term κοινὸς νοῦς in Epictetus one may 
compare Benhéfler, Zptkiet und die Siva, 121 and 224. Τὺ 
means simply the intellectual faculty that any normal man 


possesses, 
46 


BOOK III. vi. 2--8 


which labour has been expended in our time, 
progress also will be found in our time, The fact is 
that in our time labour has been expended upon the 
solution of syllogisms, and there is progress along 
that line; but in the early days not only had labour 
been expended upon maintaining the governing 
principle in a state of accord with nature, but there 
was also progress along that line. Do not, there- 
fore, substitute one thing for the other, and do not 
expect, when you devote labour to one thing, to be 
making progress in another. But see whether any 
one of us who is devoting himself to keeping in a 
state of conformity with nature, and to spending his 
life so, fails to make progress, For you will find 
that there is none of whom that is true. 

The good man is invincible; naturally, for he 
enters no contest where he is not superior. “If you 
want my property in the country,” says he, “take it; 
take my servants, take my office, take my paltry 
body. But you will not make my desire fail to get 
what I will, nor my aversion fall into what I would 
avoid.” Thisis the only contest into which the good 
man enters, one, namely, that is concerned with the 
things which belong in the province of the moral 
purpose; how, then, can he help but be invincible? 

When someone asked him what “general per- 
ception’! was, he replied, Just as a sense of hearing 
which distinguishes merely between sounds would 
be called “general,” but that which distinguishes 
between tones is no longer “ general,” but “ techni- 
cal,’ so there are certain things which those men 
who are not altogether perverted see by virtue of 
their general faculties. Such a mental constitution 
is called “ general perception.”’ 


47 


9 


10 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


Τῶν νέων τοὺς μαλακοὺς οὐκ ἔστι προτρέψαι 
ῥάδιον' οὐδὲ γὰρ τυρὸν ἀγκίστρῳ λαβεῖν" οἱ 
δ᾽ εὐφυεῖς, κἂν ἀποτρέπῃς, ἔτει μᾶλλον ἔχονται 
τοῦ λόγου. διὸ καὶ ὁ “Ῥοῦφος τὰ πολλὰ ἀπέ- 
TPETEY τούτῳ δοκιμαστηρίῳ χρώμενος τῶν εὖ- 
φυῶν καὶ advav. ἔλεγε γὰρ ὅτι “ ὡς ὁ λίθος, κἂν 
ἀναβάλῃς, ἐνεχθήσεται κάτω ἐπὶ γῆν κατὰ " τὴν 
αὑτοῦ κατασκευήν, οὕτως καὶ ὁ εὐφυής, ὅσῳ 
μᾶλλον ἀποκρούεταί τις αὐτόν, τοσούτῳ μᾶλλον 
νεύει ἐφ᾽ ὃ πέφυκεν." 


ζ΄, Πρὸς τὸν διορθωτὴν τῶν ἐλευθέρων 
πόλεων, ᾿πικούρειον ὄντα. 


Τοῦ δὲ διορθωτοῦ εἰσελθόντος πρὸς αὐτὸν 
(ἦν δ᾽ οὗτος ᾿Επικούρειος) "Αξιον, ἔφη, τοὺς 
ἰδιώτας ἡμᾶς παρ᾽ ὑμῶν τῶν φιλοσόφων πυν- 
θάνεσθαι, καθάπερ τοὺς εἰς ξένην πτόλιν ἐλθόντας 
παρὰ τῶν πολιτῶν καὶ εἰδότων, τί κράτιστόν 
ἐστιν ἐν κόσμῳ, ἵνα καὶ αὐτοὶ ἱστορήσαντες 
μετίωμεν, ὡς ἐκεῖνο. τὰ ἐν ταῖς πόλεσι, "καὶ 
θεώμεθα. ὅτι μὲν γὰρ τρία ἐστὶ περὶ τὸν 
ἄνθρωπον, ψυχὴ καὶ σῶμα καὶ τὰ ἐκτός, σχεδὸν 
οὐδεὶς ἀντιλέγει" λοιπὸν ὑμέτερόν ἐστιν ἀπο- 


1 See note to the translation, 
2 γῆν κιτά added by Schweighauser. 





ΤΑ proverb; see Diog, Laert. 4, 47, where the adjective 
ἁπαλός (‘soft’) is used of the cheese. which Wolf and Upton, 


. perhaps with good reason, wanted toadd here. Atall events 


that is the kind of cheese which is meant. 


48 


BOOK III. vi. g—vu. 2 


It is not an easy thing to prevail upon soft young 
men; no, and you can’t catch soft cheese on a fish- 
hook! either—but the gifted young men, even if 
you try to turn them away, take hold of reason all 
the more firmly. And so also Rufus for the most 
part tried to dissuade men, using such efforts to 
dissuade as a means of discriminating between those 
who were gifted and those who were not. For he 
used to say, “Just as a stone, even if you throw it 
upwards, will fall downwards to earth by virtue of 
its very constitution, so is also the gifted man; the 
more one beats him back, the more he inclines 
toward his natural object.” 


CHAPTER VII 


A conversation with the Imperial Bailiff of the Free 
Cities, who was an Epicurean 


Wuen the Imperial Bailiff, who was an Epicurean, 
came to visit him, Epictetus said: [Ὁ is proper for us 
laymen to make inquiry of you philosophers what 
the best thing in the world is—just as those who 
have come to a strange town make inquiry of the 
citizens and people who are familiar with the place 
—so that, having learned what it is, we may go in 
quest of it ourselves and behold it, as do strangers 
with the sights in the cities. Now that three things 
belong to man, soul, and body, and things external, 
hardly anyone denies; all you have to do, then, is to 

* Called by the Romans Corrector, an extraordinary official, 
of senatorial rank, appointed by the Emperor, and charged 
with carrying out administrative reforms in matters which 
lay outside the general competence of the ordinary civil 


authorities. See A. von Premerstein in the Heal-Bucyclopddde,* 
IV. 1646-56. 


| | 49 
VOL. IY. rg 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


κρίνασθαι, τί ἐστὶ τὸ κράτιστον. τέ ἐροῦμεν 
8 τοῖς ἀνθρώποις ; τὴν σάρκα; καὶ διὰ ταύτην 
Μάξιμος ἔπλευσεν μέχρι Κασσιόπης χειμῶνος 
μετὰ τοῦ υἱοῦ προπέμπων, iy’ ἡσθῇ τῇ σαρκί; ; 
4 ἀρνησαμένου δ᾽ ἐκείνου καὶ εἰπόντος Μὴ γέ- 
νοίτο Οὐ προσήκει περὶ τὸ κράτιστον ἐσπου- 
δακέναι »-- Πάντων. μάλιστα προσήκει.---Τί οὖν 
κρεῖσσον ἔχομεν τῆς σαρκός "τ Τὴν ψυχήν, ἔφη. 
-- ᾿Αγαθὰ δὲ τὰ τοῦ κρατίστου κρείττονά ἐστιν ἢ 
5 τὰ τοῦ φαυλοτέρου ; -—Ta τοῦ κρατίστου ..--- 
Ψυχῆς δὲ ἀγαθὰ πότερον προαιρετικά ἐστιν ἢ 
ἀπροαίρετα ; _— ἹΙροαιρετικά.---}} ροαιρετικὸν οὖν 
ἐστὶν ἧ $Sovh ἡ ψυχική as Ἔφη. --Αὕτη δ᾽ ἐπὶ 
6 τίσιν γίνεται ; πότερον ἐφ᾽ αὑτῇ ; ; ἀλλ᾽ ἀδιανόη- 
τὸν ἐστιν" προηγουμένην γάρ τινα ὑφεστάναι 
δεῖ οὐσίαν τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ, ἧς τυγχάνοντες ἡσθησό- 
7 μεθα κατὰ ψυχήν.--- Ὡμολόγει καὶ τοῦτο.--- Ent 
τίνε οὖν ἡσθησόμεθα ταύτην τὴν ψυχικὴν 
ἡδονήν ; εἰ “γὰρ ἐπὶ τοῖς ψυχικοῖς * ἀγαθοῖς, 
εὕρηται. ἡ οὐσία τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ. οὐ γὰρ δύναται 
ἄλλο μὲν εἶναι ἀγαθόν, ἄλλο δ᾽ ἐφ᾽ @ εὐλόγως 
ἐπαιρόμεθα, οὐδὲ τοῦ προηγουμένου μὴ ὄντος 
ἀγαθοῦ τὸ ἐπιγέννημα ἀγαθὸν εἶναι. ἵνα γὰρ 
εὔλογον ἢ τὸ ἐπιγέννημα, τὸ προηγούμενον δεῖ 
8 ἀγαθὸν εἶναι. ἀλλ᾽ οὐ μὴ εἴπητε φρένας ἔ ἔχοντες" 
ἀνακόλουθα γὰρ ἐρεῖτε καὶ ᾿ΕἘπικούρῳ καὶ τοῖς 


1 ψυχικοῖς added by Schenkl (from the scholium}. . 





1 There were at least two distinguished men of the name 
at this time, but it is not clear that either one is meant. 

* More likely the headland and harbour on the northern 
end of Corcyra than the almost wholly unknown town near 
Nicopolis, which some have thought of. 


59 


BOOK III. vir, 2~8 


answer the question, Which is the best? What are 
we going to tell men? The flesh? And was it for 
this that Maximus ! sailed all the way to Cassiope 3 
during the winter with his son, to see him on his 
way? Was it to have pleasure in the flesh? When 
the other had denied that and said “ God forbid!” 
Epictetus continued : Is it not proper to have been 
very zealous for that which is best?’—It is certainly 
most proper.—What have we better, then, than the 
flesh?—The soul, said he.—-Are the goods of the 
best thing better, or those of the inferior >—Those 
of the best thing.—Do goods of the soul belong in 
the sphere of the moral purpose, or do they not ?— 
To the sphere of the moral purpose.—Is the pleasure 
of the soul, therefore, something that belongs in 
this sphere?—He agreed.—At what is this pro- 
duced? Atitself?® But that is inconceivable. For 
we must assume that there is already in existence a 
certain antecedent essence of the good, by partaking of 
which we shal] feel pleasure of soul.—He agreed to 
this also.—At what, then, are we going to feel this 
pleasure of soul? If it is at the goods of the soul, 
the essence of the good has already been discovered. 
For it is impossible that one thing be good, and yet 
that it is justifiable for us to take delight in some- 
thing else; nor again, that when the antecedent is 
not good the consequent be good; because, in order 
to justify the consequent, the antecedent must be 
good. But say not so, you Epicureans, if you are in 
your right mind; for you will be saying what is 
inconsistent both with Epicurus and with the rest of 


3 + 4n ex se ipsa? Id est, an delectamur, quia delectamur ?” 
Schweighduser. | | 


§f 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


a ? = 
9 ἄλλοις ὑμῶν δόγμασιν. ὑπολείπεται λοῦπὸν 
a a \ \ ‘ 
ἐπὶ τοῖς σωματικοῖς ἥδεσθαι τὴν κατὰ ψυχὴν 
Ἂ \ 
ἡδονήν" πάλιν ἐκεῖνα γίνεται προηγούμενα Kal 
οὐσία τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ. 
“a 4 
10 Διὰ τοῦτο ἀφρόνως ἐποίησε Μάξιμος, εἰ δι 
ἄλλο τι ἔπλευσεν ἢ διὰ τὴν σάρκα, τοῦτ᾽ ἔστι 
\ Ἀ f > / \ aA \ 3 
11 διὰ τὸ κράτιστον. ἀφρόνως δὲ ποιεῖ Kal εἰ 
ἀπέχεται τῶν ἀλλοτρίων δικαστὴς ὧν καὶ 
δυνάμενος λαμβάνειν. ἀλλ᾽ ἄν σοι δόξῃ, ἐκεῖνο 
μόνον σκεπτώμεθα, ἵνα κεκρυμμένως, ἵν᾽ ἀσφα- 
12 λῶς, ἵνα μή τις γνῷ. τὸ γὰρ κλέψαι οὐδ᾽ αὐτὸς 
+ ᾽; > ? t 3 Ν \ ᾿) n 
Επίκουρος ἀποφαίνει κακόν, ἀλλὰ τὸ ἐμπεσεῖν" 
καὶ ὅτι πίστιν περὶ τοῦ λαθεῖν λαβεῖν ἀδύνατον, 
18 διὰ τοῦτο λέγει “μὴ κλέπτετε. ἀλλ᾽ ἐγώ σοι 
λέγω, ὅτε ἐὰν κομψῶς καὶ περιεσταλμένως γίνηται, 
λησόμεθα" εἶτα καὶ φίλους ἐν τῇ Ῥώμῃ ἔχομεν 
δυνατοὺς καὶ φίλας καὶ οἱ Ελληνες ἀδρανεῖς 
, ae 5 / 2 δ , ῳ 
εἰσίν" οὐδεὶς τολμήσει ἀναβῆναι τούτου ἕνεκα. 
? 3 , a O07 9 n La 3 \ ” 
14 τί ἀπέχῃ τοῦ ἰδίου ἀγαθοῦ; ἄφρον ἐστὶ τοῦτο, 
ἠλίθιόν ἐστιν. ἀλλ᾽ οὐδ' ἂν λέγῃς μοι, ὅτι 
15 ἀπέχῃ, πιστεύσω σοι. ὡς γὰρ ἀδύνατόν ἐστι 
f 
τῷ ψευδεῖ φαινομένῳ συγκαταθέσθαι καὶ ἀπὸ 
fa) > A 3 as A y ¢ , Md 
τοῦ ἀληθοῦς ἀπονεῦσαι, οὕτως ἀδύνατόν ἐστι 
τοῦ φαινομένου ἀγαθοῦ ἀποστῆναι. ὁ πλοῦτος 
¥ 
δ᾽ ἀγαθὸν καὶ oiovavel® τὸ ποιητικώτατόν γε 
186, τῶν ἡδονῶν. διὰ τί μὴ περιποιήσῃ αὐτόν ; διὰ 


Hd 


a 


τί δὲ μὴ THY τοῦ γείτονος γυναῖκα διαφθείρωμεν, 
1 Wolf: φιλίας 8. 


Ἀ 


52 


BOOK III. vn, 8-16 


your doctrines. The only thing left for you to say 
is that pleasure of soul is pleasure in the things of 
the body, and then they become matters of prime 
importance, and the true nature of the good. 

That is why Maximus acted foolishly if he made 
his voyage for the sake of anything but the flesh, 
that is, for the sake of anything but the best. And 
a man acts foolishly too, if, when he is judge and 
able to take the property of other men, he keeps 
his hands off it. But, if you please, let us consider 
this point only, that the stealing be done secretly, 
safely, without anybody’s knowledge. For even 
Epicurus himself does not declare the act of theft 
evil, but only getting caught, and merely because 
it is impossible to feel certain that one will not be 
detected, he says, “Do not steal.” But I tell you 
that if it is done adroitly and circumspectly, we shall 
escape detection; besides that, we have influential 
friends in Rome, both men and women; and the 
Greeks are a feeble folk, none of them will have the 
courage to go up to Rome for that purpose. Why 
refrain from your own good? This is foolish, it is 
silly. And again, I shall not believe you, even if 
you tell me that you do refrain. For just as it is 
impossible to assent to what is seen to be false, and 
to reject what is true, so it is impossible to reject 
what is seen to be good. Now wealth is a good, and 
when it comes to pleasures is, so to speak, the thing 
most productive of them. Why should you not 
acquire it? And why should we not seduce our 
neighbour's wife, if we can escape detection? And 


53 Schenkl (the word seems to be known hitherto only 
from glosses, but it seems practically certain here): οἷον ἂν 
he (or ys) 5. 

| 53 


17 


18 


19 


20 


21 


22 


23 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ἂν δυνώμεθα λαθεῖν, ἂν δὲ φλυαρῇ ὁ ἀνήρ, καὶ 
αὐτὸν προσεκτραχηλίσωμεν; εἰ θέλεις εἶναι 
φιλόσοφος οἷος δεῖ, εἴ γε τέλειος, εἰ ἀκολουθῶν 
σου τοῖς δόγμασιν" εἰ δὲ μή, οὐδὲν διοίσεις ἡμῶν 
τῶν λεγομένων Στωικῶν καὶ αὐτοὶ γὰρ ἄλλα 
λέγομεν, ἄλλα δὲ ποιοῦμεν. ἡμεῖς λέγομεν τὰ 
καλά, ποιοῦμεν τὰ αἰσχρά σὺ τὴν ἐναντίαν 
διαστροφὴν ἔσῃ διεστραμμένος δογματίζων τὰ 
αἰσχρά, ποιῶν τὰ Kanrd.* 

Τὸν θεόν σοι, ἐπινοεῖς ᾿Εἰπικουρείων πόλιν ; 
“ἀγὼ οὐ γαμῶ." “οὐδ᾽ ἐγώ" οὐ γὰρ γαμητέον." 
ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ παιδοποιητέον, ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ πολιτευτέον. 
τί οὖν γένηται ; πόθεν οἱ πολῖται; τίς αὐτοὺς 
παιδεύσει; τίς ἐφήβαρχος, τίς γυμνασίαρχος ; 
τί δὲ καὶ παιδεύσει αὐτούς ; ἃ Λακεδαιμόνιοι 
ἐπαιδεύοντο ἢ ᾿Αθηναῖοι; λάβε μοι νέον, ἄγαγε 
κατὰ τὰ δόγματά σον. πονηρά ἐστι τὰ δόγματα, 
ἀνατρεπτικὰ πόλεως, λυμαντικὰ οἴκων, οὐδὲ 
γυναιξὶ πρέποντα. ἄφες ταῦτ᾽, ἄνθρωπε. bis 
ἐν ἡγεμονούσῃ πόλει: ἄρχειν σε δεῖ, κρίνειν 
δικαίως, ἀπέχεσθαι τῶν ἀλλοτρίων, σοὶ καλὴν 
γυναῖκα φαίνεσθαι μηδεμίαν ἢ τὴν σήν, καλὸν 
παῖδα μηδένα, καλὸν ἀργύρωμα μηδέν, χρύσωμα 
μηδέν. τούτοις σύμφωνα δόγματα ζήτησον, ἀφ᾽ 
ὧν ὁρμώμενος ἡδέως ἀφέξῃ πραγμάτων οὕτως 
πιθανῶν 3 πρὸς τὸ ἀγαγεῖν καὶ νικῆσαι. ἂν δὲ 
πρὸς TH πιθανότητι τῇ ἐκείνων καὶ φιλοσοφίαν 

1 Wolf (after Schegk) and Upton’s “codex”: δογματίζων 


τὰ καλά" ποιῶν τὰ αἰσχρά 5. 
* Shaftesbury ; πιθανῶς 8, 


"ποοσσσσ 





(eal ceinhiiaeeemmnaaaniimmenamemenzanenaummraah ao eT 


1 See note on 1. 1, 34. 
54 


BOOK III. vu. 16~23 


if her husband talks nonsense, why should we not 
break his neck to boot? That is, if you wish to be 
a proper sort of philosopher, a perfect one, consistent 
with your own doctrines. If not, you will be no 
better than we who bear the name of Stoics; for we 
too talk of one thing and do another. We talk of 
the noble and do the base; but you will be perverse 
in the opposite way, laying down base doctrines, and 
doing noble deeds. 

In the name of God, I ask you, can you imagine 
an Epicurean State? One man says, “I do not 
marry.” ‘Neither do I,” says another, “for people 
ought not to marry.”” No, nor have children; no, 
nor perform the duties of a citizen. And what, 
do you suppose, will happen then? Where are 
the citizens to come from? Who will educate 
them? Who will be superintendent of the ephebi,! 
or gymnasium director? Yes, and what will either 
of these teach them? What the young men of 
Lacedaemon or Athens were taught? Take me a 
young man; bring him up according to your 
doctrines. Your doctrines are bad, subversive of 
the State, destructive to the family, not even fit for 
women. Drop these doctrines, man. You live in 
an imperial State; it is your duty to hold office, to 
judge uprightly, to keep your hands off the property 
of other people; no woman but your wife ought to 
look handsome to you, no boy handsome, no silver 
plate handsome, no gold plate. Look for doctrines | 
consistent with these principles of conduct, doctrines 
which will enable you to refrain gladly from matters 
so persuasive to attract and to overpower 2 man. 
If, however, in addition to the persuasive power of 
the things just mentioned, we shall have gone 


55 


24 


26 


27 


28 


29 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


τινά ποτε ταύτην ἐξευρηκότες ὦμεν συνεπω- 
θοῦσαν ἡμᾶς ἐπ᾿ αὐτὰ καὶ ἐπιρρωννύουσαν, τί 
γένηται ; , Ἰ ; 7 fo εν 

Εν τορεύματι ᾿ τί κράτιστόν ἐστιν, ὁ ἄργυρος 
ἢ ἡ τέχνη; χειρὸς οὐσία μὲν ἡ σάρξ, προηγού- 
μενα δὲ τὰ χειρὸς ἔργα. οὐκοῦν καὶ καθήκοντα 
τρισσά' τὰ μὲν πρὸς τὸ εἶναι, τὰ δὲ πρὸς τὸ ποιὼ 
εἶναι, τὰ δ᾽ αὐτὰ τὰ προηγούμενα. οὕτως καὶ 
ἀνθρώπου οὐ τὴν ὕλην δεῖ τιμᾶν, τὰ σαρκίδια, 
ἀλλὰ τὰ προηγούμενα. τίνα ἐστὶ ταῦτα ; πολι- 
τεύεσθαι, γαμεῖν, παιδοποιεῖσθαι, θεὸν σέβειν, 
γονέων ἐπιμελεῖσθαι, καθόλον ὀρέγεσθαι, ἐκκλί- 
νειν, ὁρμᾶν, ἀφορμᾶν, ὡς ἕκαστον τούτων δεῖ 
ποιεῖν, ὡς πεφύκαμεν. πεφύκαμεν δὲ πῶς; ὡς 
ἐλεύθεροι, ὡς γενναῖοι, ὧς αἰδήμονες. ποῖον γὰρ 
ἄλλο ζῷον ἐρυθριᾷ, ποῖον αἰσχροῦ φαντασίαν 
λαμβάνει; τὴν ἡδονὴν δ᾽ ὑπόταξαι τούτοις ὡς 
διάκονον, ὡς ὑπηρέτιν, ἵνα προθυμίας ἐκκαλέση- 
ται, ἵν᾽ ἐν τοῖς κατὰ φύσιν ἔργοις πταρακρατῇ. 

3 > » \ 4 / 3 ‘ 9 \ ? - 

Αλλ᾽ ἐγὼ πλούσιός εἰμι Kal οὐδενὸς χρεία μοί 
éotiv.—Ti ody ἔτι προσποιῇ φιλοσοφεῖν ; ἀρκεῖ 


1 Wolf: ἐν τῶι ῥεύματι 8. 





1 The classitication of duties in this sentence is obscure, 
and the commentators have ever been in straits both to 
elucidate it, and to explain what bearing it has upon the 
context, The first two classes (which are essentially one) 
deal with outward existence; the last touches our higher 
nature. A full discussion of this matter will be found in 
A. Bonhéffer; Die Bihik des Stoilers Epiktet, Ὁ. 203-6. A 
very similar Stoic division of duties into five classes, where 
the third class of Epictetus is triply divided, will be found in 
Cicero, De Finibus, ITT. 16 and 20. I believe that the sentence, 
though probably going back to Epictetus, did not belong 


56 : | 


BOOK IIL. va, 23-29 


ahead and invented also some such doctrine as this 
of yours, which helps to push us on into them, and 
gives them additional strength, what is going to 
happen? 

In a piece of plate what is the best thing, the 
silver or the art? The substance of the hand is 
mere flesh, but the important thing is the works of 
the hand. Now duties are of three kinds; first, 
those that have to do with mere existence, second, 
those that have to do with existence of a particular 
sort, and third, the principal duties themselves.1_ So 
also in the case of man, it is not his material sub- 
stance that we should honour, his bits of flesh, but 
the principal things. What are these? The duties 
of citizenship, marriage, begetting children, re- 
verence to God, care of parents,? in a word, desire, 
avoidance, choice, refusal, the proper performance - 
of each one of these acts, and that is, in accordance 
with our nature. And what is our nature? To act 
as free men, as noble, as self-respecting. Why, 
what other living being blushes, what other compre- 
hends the impression of shame? And it is our 
nature to subordinate pleasure to these duties as 
their servant, their minister, so as to arouse our 
interest and keep us acting in accordance with 
nature. 

But I am rich and need nothing.—Why, then, 
do you still pretend to be a philosopher? Your 


here originally (so also Bonhéffer, it seems), but derived 
from a marginal note upon τὰ προηγούμενα, just below, and 
the sentence immediately following . 

2 After the Go/den Verses of Pythagoras, 3-4: 


τούς τε καταχθονίους σέβε δαίμονας, ἔννομα ῥέζων" 
a ~ 
τούς τε γόνεις τίμα, τούς τ᾽ ἄγχιστ᾽ ἐκγεγαῶτας. 


57 


91 


32 


33 


34 


35 * 


36 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


τὰ “χρυσώματα καὶ τὰ ἀργυρώματα" τί σοι 
ρεΐα δογμάτων js ἀλλὰ καὶ κριτής εἶμι τῶν 
YE ven _Oibas κρίνειν ; τί σε ἐποίησεν εἰδέ- 
ναὶ ;-- Καῖσάρ μοι κωδίκελλον ἔγραψεν.---Τ'ρα- 
ψάτω σοι, ἵνα κρίνῃς περὶ τῶν μουσικῶν" καὶ τί 
σοι ὄφελος ; ὅμως δὲ πῶς κριτὴς ἐγένου ; τὴν 
τίνος χεῖρα καταφιλήσας, τὴν Συμφόρου ἢ ἢ τὴν 
Νουμηνίου ; τίνος πρὸ τοῦ κοιτῶνος κοιμηθείς ; : 
τίνι πέμψας δῶρα; εἶτα οὐκ αἰσθάνῃ, ὅ ὅτι τοσού- 
του ἄξιόν ἐστι κριτὴν εἶναι ὅσου Νουμήνιος ;--- 
᾿Αλλὰ δύναμαι ὃν θέλω εἰς φυλακὴν Barelv.— 
Ὥς λίθον.---Αλλὰ δύναμαι ξυλοκοπῆσαι ὃν 
θέλω --Ὡς ὄνον. οὐκ ἔστι τοῦτο ἀνθρώπων 
ἀρχή. ὡς λογικῶν ἡμῶν ἄρξον δεικνὺς ἡμῖν τὰ 
συμφέροντα καὶ ἀκολουθήσομεν: δείκνυε τὰ 
ἀσύμφορα καὶ ἀποστραφησόμεθα. ζηλωτὰς 
ἡμᾶς κατασκεύασον σεαυτοῦ ὡς Σωκράτης ἑαυ- 
τοῦ. ἐκεῖνος ἦν ὃ ὡς ἀνθρώπων ἄρχων, ὃ 
κατεσκευακὼς ὑποτεταχότας αὐτῷ τὴν ὄρεξιν 
τὴν αὑτῶν, τὴν ἔκκλισιν, THY ὁρμήν, τὴν ἀφορμήν. 
«τοῦτο ποίησον, τοῦτο μὴ ποιήσῃς" εἶ δὲ μή: εἰς 
φυλακήν σε βαχῷ." οὐκέτι ὡς λογικῶν ἡ ἀρχὴ 
γίνεται. ἀλλ’ “ὡς ὁ Ζεὺς διέταξεν, τοῦτο ποίη- 
σον" ἂν δὲ μὴ ποιήσῃς, ξζημιωθήσῃ, βλαβήσῃ." 
ποίαν βλάβην; ; ἄλλην οὐδεμίαν, ἀλλὰ τὸ μὴ 
ποιῆσαι ἃ Sei: ἀπολέσεις τὸν πιστόν, τὸν αἰδή- 


- 





» 


1 Otherwise unknown, but obviously freedmen influential 


at court. 
® That is, so as to be able to salute him the very first thing 


in the morning. 


58 


BOOK III. vu. 29-36 


gold and silver plate are enough to satisfy you; 
what do you need doctrines for ?—Yes, but I sit too 
as judge over the Hellenes.—Do you know how to 
sit as judge? What has brought you to know that? 
——Caesar wrote credentials for me.—Let him write 
you credentials that will allow you to sit as a judge 
in music and literature; and what good will it do 
you? However this may be, there is another 
question, and that is, how did you come to be 
a judge? Whose hand did you kiss—that of 
Symphorus or that of Numenius?? In front of 
whose bedroom door did you sleep?? To whom did 
you send presents? After all, don’t you recognize 
that the office of judge is worth exactly as much as 
Numenius isP—But I can throw whem I will into 
prison.— As you can a stone.—But 1 can have 
beaten to death with a club whom I will.—As you 
can an ass.—That is not governing men. Govern us 
as rational beings by pointing out to us what is 
profitable, and we will follow you; point out what 
is unprofitable, and we will turn away from it. 
Bring us to admire and emulate you, as Socrates 
brought men to admire and emulate him. He was 
the one person who governed people as men, in that 
he brought them to subject to him their desire, 
their aversion, their choice, their refusal. ‘ Do 
this; do not do this; otherwise I will throw you 
into prison.”’ Say that, and yours ceases to be a 
government as over rational beings. Nay, rather, 
say, “As Zeus has ordained, do this; if you do not 
do so, you will be punished, you will suffer injury.” 
What kind of injury? No injury but that of not 
doing what you ought; you will destroy the man of 
fidelity in you, the man of honour, the man of 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


μονα, τὸν κόσμιον. τούτων ἄλλας βλάβας μεί- 
Lovas μὴ ζήτει. 


ἢ ~ \ Ν ΄ 7 
η΄. Πῶς πρὸς τὰς φαντασίας γυμναστέον ; 


1 ‘Os πρὸς τὰ ἐρωτήματα τὰ σοφιστικὰ γυμνα- 
ξόμεθα, οὕτως καὶ πρὸς τὰς φαντασίας καθ᾽ 
2 ἡμέραν ἔδει γυμνάξεσθαι" προτείνουσι γὰρ ἡμῖν 
καὶ αὗται ἐρωτήματα. ὁ υἱὸς ἀπέθανε τοῦ δεῖνος. 
ἀπόκριναι μὰ ἀπροαίρετον, οὐ κακόν. ὁ πατὴρ 
τὸν δεῖνα ἀποκληρονόμον ἀπέλιπεν. τί σοι 
δοκεῖ; “ ampoaipetov, οὐ κακόν." Kaitcap αὐτὸν 


εἰ 2 4 > f 9 3 / 
3 κατέκρινεν. ἀπροαίρετον, οὐ κακόν." ἐλυπήθη 
f 
ἐπὲ τούτοις. “προαιρετικόν, κακόν." γενναίως 
4 ὑπέμεινεν. “ προαιρετικόν, ἀγαθόν." κἂν οὕτως 


ἐθιξζώμεθα, προκόψομεν' οὐδέποτε γὰρ ἄνλῳ 
συγκαταθησόμεθα ἢ οὗ φαντασία καταληπτικὴ 
ὅ γίνεται. ὁ υἱὸς ἀπέθανε. τί ἐγένετο 5 ὁ υἱὸς 
ἀπέθανεν. ἄλλο οὐδέν; οὐδὲ ἕν. τὸ πλοῖον 
ἀπώλετο. τί ἐγένετο ; τὸ πλοῖον ἀπώλετο. εἰς 
φυλακὴν ἀπήχθη. τί γέγονεν ; εἰς φυλακὴν 
ἀπήχθη. τὸ δ᾽ ὅτι “ κακῶς πέπραχεν" ἐξ αὑτοῦ 


1 Schweighiiuser : ἄλλο οὐδὲ ἕν δ, ἄλλο οὐδέν ; οὐδέν Trin- 
cavelli and most editors. 





1 The φαντασία καταληπτική, a term peculiar to Stoic 
psychology, is ‘‘an impression so distinct and vivid and 
consistent and permanent as to carry its own conviction of 
certainty and to be its own criterion of truth” (P. ἘΠ. More, 
Hellenistic Ph losuphies, 85). See Bonhiotfer, ριξε und die 
Stoa, 160-7, 228-32. Among recent writers E. R. Bevan, 
Stutes and Sceptivs, 36, renders the phrase ‘‘ grasping im- 
pression”; G. Murray, The Stote Philosophy, 27 and 44, 
ἀρ οἰκο δὲ τὸ sense-impression.” Cf. R. Μ, Wenley, 


60 


BOOK III. vi. 36-virn δ 


decent behaviour. You need not look for greater 
injuries than these. 


CHAPTER VIII 


How ought we to exercise ourselves to deal mith 
the impressions of our senses ? 


As we exercise ourselves to meet the sophistical 
interrogations, so we ought also to exercise ourselves 
daily to meet the impressions of our senses, because 
these too put interrogations to us. So-and-so’s son 
is dead. Answer, “That lies outside the sphere of 
the moral purpose, it is not an evi]. His father 
has disinherited So-and-so; what do you think of it? 
“ That lies outside the sphere of the moral purpose, 
it is not an evil,” Caesar has condemned him. 
“ That lies outside the sphere of the moral purpose, 
it is not an evil.” He was grieved at all this. 
“That lies within the sphere of the moral purpose, 
it is an evil.” He has borne up under it manfully. 
* That lies within the sphere of the moral purpose, 
it is a good.” Now if we acquire this habit, we 
shall make progress; for we shall never give our 
assent to anything but that of which we get a con- 
vincing sense-impression.1 His son is dead. What 
happened? His son is dead. Nothing else? Not 
a thing. His ship is lost. What happened? His 
ship is lost. He was carried off to prison. What 
happened? He was carried off to prison. Bt the 
observation: “ He has fared ill,” is an addition that 


Stoicism, 87, for the metaphor in the adjective: ‘Conviction 
of ay must... involve an unshakable grip upon the 
actual. 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


3 9 fal “ 
6 ἕκαστος προστίθησιν. “adr οὐκ ὀρθῶς ταῦτα 
ζω ; 
ὁ Ζεὺς ποιεῖ." διὰ τί; ὅτε σε ὑπομενητικὸν 
3 f [τὸ “ a 3 " 2 ω 
ἐποίησεν, OTL μεγαλοψυχον, OTL ἀφεῖλεν αὐτῶν 
τὸ εἶναι κακά, ὅτι ἔξεστίν σοι πάσχοντι ταῦτα 
“ \ 
εὐδαιμονεῖν, ὅτι σοι THY θύραν ἤνοιξεν, ὅταν σοι 
μὴ ποιῇ ; ἄνθρωπε, ἔξελθε καὶ μὴ ἐγκάλει. 


7 Πῶς ἔχουσι Ῥωμαῖοι πρὸς φιλοσόφους ἂν 
€ 
θέλῃς γνῶναι, ἄκουσον. ᾿Ιταλικὸς ὁ μάλιστα 
“ ld 
δοκῶν αὐτῶν φιλόσοφος εἶναι παρόντος ποτέ μου 
χαλεπήνας τοῖς ἰδίοις, ὡς ἀνήκεστα πάσχων, 
“Οὐ δύναμαι, ἔ “φέρειν' ἀπόλλυτέ 
μαι, edn, “φέρειν ἁπόλλυτέ με, 
ποιήσετέ με τοιοῦτον γενέσθαι," δείξας ἐμέ. 


θ’ Π t es 3 , ς᾽. ¢ , 
. Πρὸς τινὰ βήτορα aviovta εἰς Ῥώμην 
ἐπὶ δίκῃ. 


1 Ἐϊνσελθόντος δέ τινος πρὸς αὐτόν, ὃς εἰς Ρώμην 
ἄνήει δίκην ἔχων περὶ τιμῆς τῆς αὑτοῦ, πυθό- 





1 Compare I. 9, 20; ITI. 13, 14, and Vol. I. p. xxv ff. 

2 For the particular expression here, see 11, 6. 22. 

8 The sense of this curious and apparently quite detached 
anecdote, which has puzzled some scholars, seems to be that 
the otherwise quite unknown Italicus, who was clearly not a 
philosopher propria personn, but merely enjoyed some lécal 
reputation among people at Rome for dabbling in philosophy, 
was being urged by his friends to submit to some hardship 
in a truly philosophic manner, and resented the implication 
that he actually was a philosopher like the mean and humble 
slave or freedman Epictetus. Roman popular feeling about 


62 


BOOK III. vm. 5-1x. 1 


each man makes on his own responsibility. “ But,” 
you say, “Zeus does not do right in all this.” What 
makes you think so? Because He has made you 
capable of patient endurance, and high-minded, 
because He has taken from these things the quality 
of being evils, because you are permitted to suffer 
these things and still to be happy, because He has 
opened for you the door, whenever they are not 
to your good?2 Man, go out, and do not complain. 


Hear how the Romans feel about philosophers, if 
you care to know. Italicus, who has a very great 
reputation among them as a philosopher, once, when 
I was present, got angry at his friends, as though he 
were suffering something intolerable, and said, “1 
cannot bear it: you are the death of me! you will 
make me just like him,’ and pointed at me!8 


CHAPTER IX 
To a certain rhetorician who was going to Rome for a 
lamsuit 


THERE came in to visit Epictetus one day a man who 
was on his way to Rome, where he was engaged in a 
lawsuit involving an honour to be bestowed on him.4 


philosophy is probably not greatly overdrawn in the well-. 
known advice of Ennius (frag. sc. 376 Vahlen) to taste of 
hilosophy, but not to gorge oneself upon it; and the jest of 
laytus (Captivi, 284), apropos of a reckless romancer, that 
‘the is not simply lying now, he is philosophizing.” 

4 The situation seems ἃ bit strange to us, but the famous 
lawsuit between Aeschines and Ctesiphon, in which Demos- 
thenes delivered the oration De Corona, technically, indeed, 
in behalf of Ctesiphon, but actually in his own cause, offers a _ 
close parallel. 

ΕΝ 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


μενος τὴν αἰτίαν, δι ἣν ἄνεισιν, ἐπερωτήσαντος 
ἐκείνου, τίνα γνώμην ἔχει περὶ τοῦ πράγματος, 
2 Ki μου πυνθάνῃ, τί πράξεις ἐν Ῥώμῃ, φησίν, 
πότερον κατορθώσεις ἢ ἢ ἀποτεύξῃ, θεώρημα πρὸς 
τοῦτο οὐκ ἔχω: εἰ δὲ; muy avn, TOS πράξεις, 
τοῦτο εἰπεῖν, ὅτι, εἰ μὲν ὀρθὰ δόγματα ἔχεις, 
καλῶς, εἰ δὲ φαῦλα, κακῶς. παντὶ γὰρ αἴτιον 
τοῦ πράσσειν πως τὸ" δόγμα. τί γάρ ἐστιν, 
8 δι 8 ὃ ἐπεθύμησας προστάτης χειροτονηθῆναι 
Κνωσίων ; τὸ δόγμα. τί ἐστίν, ἐ ὃ νῦν εἰς 
Ῥώμην ἀνέρχῃ ; ; τὸ δόγμα. καὶ μετὰ χειμῶνος 
καὶ κινδύνου καὶ ἀναλωμᾶτων 5— ᾿Ανάγκη γάρ 
4 ἐστιν.---  ἰς σοι λέγει τοῦτο ; τὸ δόγμα. οὐκοῦν 
εἰ πάντων αἴτια τὰ δόγματα, φαῦλα δέ τις ἔχει 
δόγματα, οἷον ἂν ἡ τὸ αἴτιον, τοιοῦτον καὶ τὸ 
5 ἀποτελούμενον. ἄρ᾽ οὖν πάντες ἔχομεν ὑγιῆ 
δόγματα καὶ σὺ καὶ 0 ὠντίδικός σου; καὶ πῶς 
διαφέρεσθε ; ἀλλὰ σὺ μᾶλλον ἢ ἐκεῖνος ; διὰ 
τί ; δοκεῖ σοι. κἀκείνῳ καὶ τοῖς μαινομένοις. 
6 τοῦτο πονηρὸν κριτήριον. ἀλλὰ δεῖξόν μοι, ὅτι 
ἐπίσκεψίν τινα καὶ ἐπιμέλειαν πεποίησαι τῶν 
σαυτοῦ δογμάτων. “καὶ ὡς νῦν εἰς “Ῥώμην πλεῖς 
ἐπὶ τῷ προστάτης εἶναι Κνωσίων καὶ οὐκ ἐξαρκεῖ 
σοι μένειν ἐν οἴκῳ τὰς τιμὰς ἔχοντι ἃς εἶχες, 
ἀλλὰ μείζονός τινος ἐπιθυμεῖς καὶ ἐπιφανεστέρου, 
πότε οὕτως ἔπλευσας ὑπὲρ τοῦ τὰ δόγματα 
7 sl adel τὰ σαυτοῦ Kal εἴ Te φαῦλον ἔχεις, 
Δ Schenkl ép. 3. or ἐμέ (Allen), 

2 πως τό Oldfather : πράσσειν τι δόγμα 5. Thesharp contrast 
between τί πιά εἰς and πὼς πράξεις above, which is the whole 
point in the present passage, is completely falsified by the 


reading i in ΚΑ. 
3. δι’ added by Shaftesbury. 


64 


BOOK III. 1x. 1~7 


Epictetus asked what the reason was for the trip 
to the Capital, and the man proceeded to ask 
what opinion he had about the matter. If you 
ask me what you are going to do in Rome, says 
Epictetus, whether you will succeed or fail, I have 
no precept to offer. If, however, you ask how you 
are going to fare, I have this to say: If you have 
sound judgements, you will fare well; if unsound 
judgements, ill; since in every case the way a man 
fares is determined by his judgement.t For what is 
it that made you eager to be elected patron of the 
people of Cnossos?# Your judgement. What is it 
that impels you now to go up to Rome? Your 
judgement. And that in stormy weather, in danger, 
and at expense ?—Yes, but I have to—Who tells you 
that? Your judgement. Very well, then, if a man’s 
judgements determine everything, and if a man has 
unsound judgements, whatever be the cause such also 
will be the consequence. Do we all, then, have sound 
judgements, both you and your opponent? If so, 
then how do you come to disagree? But do you 
have sound judgements rather than he? Why? 
You think so. So does he, and so do madmen. 
This is a poor criterion. But show me that you have 
made any study of your own judgements and have 
paid attention to them. And as now youare sailing to 
Rome so as to become patron of the men of Cnossos, 
and you are not satisfied to stay at home and keep 
the honours which you had, but you have set your 
heart upon something greater and more conspicuous, 
so did you ever make a voyage for the purpose of 
studying your own judgements, and of rejecting one, 


1 See critical note. 
* The principal city of Crete. 


10 


11 


12 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


~ 4 
ἐκβαλεῖν ; τίνι προσελήλυθας τούτον ἕνεκα ; 
a Δ ‘4 f 
ποῖον χρόνον ἐπέταξας σαυτῷ, ποίαν ἡλικίαν ; 
3 ‘ x I 7 3 \ > , > A 
ἔπελθέ σου τοὺς χρόνους, εἰ ἐμὲ αἰσχύνῃ, αὐτὸς 

n ζῚ , \ ἴω 
πρὸς σαυτόν. ὅτε παῖς ἧς, ἐξήταζες τὰ σαυτοῦ 
/ ὃ 
δόγματα; οὐχὶ δ᾽ ὡς πάντα ποιεῖς, ἐποίεις ἃ 
3 f ef Q , ys \ Fa) ξ a 
ἐποίεις ; ὅτε δὲ μειράκιον ἤδη καὶ TOY ῥητόρων 
3 \ > Δ 2 2 , 7 3 
ἤκουες καὶ αὐτὸς ἐμελέτας, TL σοι λείπειν ἐφαν- 
τάξου ; ὅτε δὲ νεανίσκος καὶ ἤδη ἐπολιτεύου καὶ 
7 4 ON 2) Ν 3 7 - μὰ 
δίκας αὐτὸς ἔλεγες καὶ εὐδοκίμεις, τίς σοι ἔτι 
bd 3 4 “ 2 ΕΝ 3 7 τ f 
ἴσος ἐφαίνετο; ποῦ δ᾽ ἂν ἠνέσχου ὑπό τινος 
᾿ f ¢ \ oo ? 7 ΓῚ 
ἐξεταζόμενος, ὅτι πονηρὰ ἔχεις δόγματα ; τί οὖν 
/ Vv “ ; ? Ἀ “ 
σοι θέλεις εἴπω ;---Βοήθησόν μοι εἰς TO πρᾶγμα. 
--᾿Οαὐκ ἔχω πρὸς τοῦτο θεωρήματα" οὐδὲ σύ, εἰ 
τούτου ἕνεκα ἐλήλυθας πρὸς ἐμέ, ὡς πρὸς φιλό- 
Ὁ 3 9 
σοῴφον ἐλήλυθας, ἀλλ ὡς πρὸς λαχανοπώλην, 
3 > # \ / \ , ic) v ¢ 
ἀλλ᾽ ὡς πρὸς cxutéa.—Il pos τί οὖν ἔχουσιν οἱ 
φιλόσοφοι θεωρήματα ;---Πρὸς τοῦτο, 6 τι ἂν 
bd ΔΑ Ἁ ¢ x é κα \ ; of 
ἀποβῇ, TO ἡγεμονικὸν ἡμῶν κατὰ φύσιν ἔχειν 
f 
καὶ διεξάγειν. μικρόν σοι δοκεῖ τοῦτο ;---Ο ὔ" 
\ / , 
ἀλλὰ τὸ μέγιστον.---Τ ov; ὀλίγου χρόνου 
i Ν \ t >. XN ~ 
χρείαν ἔχει Kal ἔστι παρερχόμενον αὐτὸ λαβεῖν ; 
2 , / 
εἰ Ouvacal, AdpPave. 
$ "2 κ᾿ 7 
Kit’ ἐρεῖς “ συνέβαλον ᾿Επικτήτῳ ὡς λίθῳ, ὡς 
μ᾿ f 5 > f 
ἀνδριάντι." εἶδες γάρ μὲ καὶ πλέον οὐδέν. 
4 2 ἔ Ὶ ; 
ἀνθρώπῳ 8 ὡς ἀνθρώπῳ συμβάλλει ὁ τὰ 
66 


BOOK III. x. 7-12 


if it is unsound? Whom have you ever visited for 
this purpose? What time have you set yourself, 
what period of your life? Review the periods of 
your life, all to yourself, if you are ashamed to do so 
before me. When you were a boy were you in the 
habit of examining your judgements? Did you not 
habitually do what you then did just as you do 
everything now? And when you grew to be a youth 
and were attending the lectures of the rhetoricians, 
and were yourself practising, what did you fancy that 
you yet lacked? And when you were a young man 
and began to take part in politics, and to plead 
cases yourself, and to have a good reputation, who 
any longer seemed in your eyes to be your equal? 
Would you under any circumstances have submitted 
to be put through an examination on the charge that 
you had wretched judgements? Very well then, 
what do you wish me to say to you?—Help me in 
this affair.— I have no precepts to offer for this; and 
you too, if you came to me for this purpose, have 
not come’ to me as to a philosopher, but as to a 
vegetable-dealer, as to a cobbler.—To what end, 
then, do philosophers have precepts to offer?-—To 
this end, that whatever happen, our governing 
principle shall be, and abide to the end, in accord 
with nature. Do you regard that as a trifle?—No; 
it is of the utmost moment.—What then? Does 
this require only a little time, and is it possible to 
acquire it on a passing visit? Acquire it, then, if 
you can! 

Then you will say, “When I met Epictetus it 
was like meeting a stone, a statue.” Yes, for you 
took a look at me, and nothing more. The person 
who meets a man as a man is one who learns to 


13 


14 


15 


16 


17 


18 


19 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


“ / \ 2 “ , 
δόγματα αὐτοῦ καταμανθάνων καὶ ἐν τῷ μέρει 
7 \ f 
τὰ ἴδια δεικνύων. κατάμαθέ pov τὰ δόγματα, 
“A / 
δεῖξόν μοι τὰ σὰ καὶ οὕτως λέγε συμβεβληκέναι 
\ 
μοι. ἐλέγξωμεν ἀλλήλους: εἴ TE ἔχω κακὸν 
? 27 >? Ψ δ θὲ 3 Ν f 
δόγμα, ἄφελε αὐτό" εἴ Te ἔχεις, θὲς εἰς τὸ μέσον. 
ΤᾺ ἡ 
τοῦτό ἐστι φιλοσόφῳ συμβάλλειν. οὔ ἀλλὰ 
“ - 
“ πάροδός ἐστι καὶ ἕως TO πλοῖον μισθούμεθα, 
#4 \ 3 , 3 ne 18 , 
δυνάμεθα καὶ ᾿Επίκτητον ἰδεῖν" ἴδωμεν, τί ποτε 
7 
λέγει." εἶτ᾽ ἐξελθὼν “οὐδὲν ἣν ὁ ᾿Επίκτητος, 
\ lf 
ἐσολοίκιζεν, ἐβαρβάριξεν.᾽ τίνος yap ἄλλου 
κριταὶ εἰσέρχεσθε; 
\ ” ap 
“’AXN ἂν πρὸς τούτοις, φησίν, “ ὦ, ἀγρὸν 
οὐχ ἔξω ὡς οὐδὲ σύ, ποτήρια ἀργυρᾶ οὐχ 
ef ¢ ὮΝ ; 7 \ ¢ γῸΝ 4 55 
ἕξω ὡς οὐδὲ σύ, κτήνη καλὰ ὡς οὐδὲ σύ. 
πρὸς ταῦτα ἴσως ἀρκεῖ ἐκεῖνο εἰπεῖν ὅτι 
“ ἀλλὰ χρείαν αὐτῶν οὐκ éyw σὺ δ᾽ ἂν πολλὰ 
κτήσῃ, ἄλλων χρείαν ἔχεις, θέλεις οὐ θέλεις, 
$Y ἊΝ lal 
πτωχότερός ov. —Tivos οὖν ἔχω χρείαν ;—Tod 
σοὶ μὴ παρόντος" τοῦ εὐσταθεῖν, τοῦ κατὰ φύσιν 
ἔχειν τὴν διάνοιαν, τοῦ μὴ ταράττεσθαι. πά- 
τρῶν, οὐ πάτρων, τί μοι μέλει ; σοὶ μέλει. πλου- 
μ ca! 
TLOTEPOS TOU εἰμι" οὐκ ἀγωνιῶ, TL φρονήσει περὶ 
5 a κα al "52 4 / ef 
ἐμοῦ ὁ Kaicap: οὐδένα κολακεύω τούτου ἕνεκα. 


παῦτα ἔχω ἀντὶ τῶν ἀργυρωμάτων, ἀντὶ πῶν 
χρυσωμάτων. σὺ χρυσὰ σκεύη, ὀστράκινον τὸν 


λό y 4 δό \ la 4 

oyov, τὰ δόγματα, Tas συγκαταθέσεις, τὰς 
e i δ a > 

opuds, τὰς ὀρέξεις. ὅταν δὲ ταῦτα ἔχω κατὰ 
f 

uae, διὰ τί μὴ φιλοτεχνήσω καὶ περὶ τὸν 

6 ἐς ἢ 1 


BOOK III. rx. 12-19 


understand the other’s judgements, and in his turt 
exhibits his own. Learn to know my judgements 
show me your own, and then say you have met me 
Let us put one another to the test; if I cherish any 
evil judgement, take it away; if you cherish one 
bring it forward. That is.what it means to meet ὃ 
philosopher. Oh no; but your way is: “ We are 
passing, and while we are hiring our ship, we have a 
chance to take a look at Epictetus; let’s see what in 
the world he has to say.” Then you leave with the 
remark: “ Epictetus was nothing at all, his language 
was full of solecisms and barbarisms.” What else 
were you capable of judging, when you came in like 
that ? 

“ But,” says someone, “if I devote myself to these 
things, I shall not own a farm any more than you do, 
I shall not have silver goblets any more than you, or 
fine cattle any more than you.” To all this it is 
perhaps enough to answer: “I do not need them; 
but you, even if you acquire many possessions, need 
still others, and whether you will or not, are more 
poverty-stricken than I am.”—What, then, do I 
need ?— What you do not have; steadfastness, your 
mind in a state of conformity with nature, freedom 
from vexation of spirit, Patron or not patron, what 
do I care? But you care. I am richer than you 
are; I am not worried about what Caesar is going to 
think of me; I flatter no man for that purpose. All 
this is what I have as an offset to your silver plate, 
and your gold plate. You have furnishings of gold, 
but your reason, your judgements, your assent, your 
choice, your desire—of earthenware. But when I 
have these in a state of conformity with nature, why 
should I not take up logic also as a sort of hobby? 


ζῶ 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS , 


/ 3 “ , 3 ”~ ? ry 
λόγον ; εὐσχολὼ yap οὐ περισπαταί μον 7 
\ 
διάνοια. τί ποιήσω μὴ περισπώμενος ; τούτου 
τί ἀνθρωπικώτερον ἔχω ; ὑμεῖς ὅταν μηδὲν ἔχητε, 
ταράσσεσθε, εἰς θέατρον εἰσέρχεσθε ἢ ἀναλύετε' 
\ a“ 
διὰ τί ὁ φιλόσοφος μὴ ἐξεργάσηται tov αὑτοῦ 
λόγον ; σὺ κρυστάλλινα, ἐγὼ τὰ τοῦ Ψευδομένου" 
σὺ μούρρινα, ἐγὼ τὰ τοῦ ᾿Αποφάσκοντος. σοὶ 
& 
“τάντα μικρὰ φαίνεται ἃ ἔχεις, ἐμοὶ τὰ ἐμὰ πάντα 
7 3 , ? 4 > ¢ > , t 
μεγάλα. ἀπλήρωτός σού ἐστιν ἡ ἐπιθυμία, ἡ 
ἐμὴ πεπλήρωται. τοῖς παιδίοις εἰς στενό- 
βρογχον κερώμιον καθιεῖσιν τὴν χεῖρα καὶ 
9 , 3 . 7 "νῷ , Δ 
ἐκφέρουσιν ἰσχαδοκάρυα ταὐτὸ " συμβαίνει" ἂν 
Ἁ wn n~ 
πληρώσῃ THY χεῖρα, ἐξενεγκεῖν οὐ δύναται, εἶτα 
14 34 / > nn 
κλάει. ἄφες ὀλίγα ἐξ αὐτῶν καὶ ἐξοίσεις. καὶ 
\ ra) 
σὺ ἄφες τὴν ὄρεξιν' μὴ πολλῶν ἐπιθύμει καὶ 
οἴσεις. 


.“, Πῶς φέρειν δεῖ τὰς νόσους ; 


e yf 5 f Ψ ς , “a , 
Εκάστου δόγματος ὅταν ἡ χρεία παρῇ, πρόχει- 
4 ad 3 ? 4 
pov αὐτὸ ἔχειν δεῖ" ἐπ᾽ ἀρίστῳ τὰ περὶ ἀρίστου, 


> 7 \ \ 7 Ἴ , ‘ 
ἐν βαλανείῳ ta περὶ βαλανείου, ἐν κοίτῃ τὰ περὶ 


’ 
κοὐτης. 


1 ταιδίοις supplied by Wolf. 2 Capps: τοῦτο 8. 
8. Wolf plausibly suggested εὑροήσεις, ‘* you will prosper,” 
for this extremely abrupt and obscure locution. 





ΠῚ See note in IL. 17, 34 
* Highly coloured and very expensive glass. 


70 


BOOK III. 1x. 19-x. 1 


For, I have plenty of leisure; my mind is not being 
dragged this way and that. What shall I do, seeing 
there is nothing that disturbs me? What have I 
which more becomes a man than this? You and 
your kind when you have nothing to do are restless, 
go to the theatre, or wander up and down aimlessly. 
Why should not the philosopher develop his own 
reason? You turn to vessels of crystal, I to the 
syllogism called “The Liar’’;+ you to myrrhine 
ware,? I to the syllogism called “The Denyer.’’ 
Everything that you already have seems small in 
your sight, but everything that I have seems 
important to me. Your strong desire is insatiate, 
mine is already satisfied. The same thing happens 
to the children who put their hand down into a 
narrow-necked jar and try to take out figs and nuts: 
if they get their hand full, they can’t get it out, and 
then they ery. Drop a few and you will get it out. 
And so do you too drop your desire; do not set your 
heart upon many things and you will obtain.‘ 


CHAPTER X 
How ought we to bear our illnesses ? 


Wuen the need arises for each separate judgement, 
we ought to have it ready; at lunch our judgements 
about lunch, at the bath our judgements about a 
bath, in bed our judgements about a bed. 


3. The exact nature of this argument is unknown, although 
Chrysippus wrote two works on the subject (Diog. Laert. 7, 
197), and it is casually mentioned also by Clement of. 
, Alexandria, Strom. 5, 11. 
4 See critical note. 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


> e -" 9. 5 4} ‘a 
und ὕπνον paraxolow ἐπ᾽ ὄμμασι προσδέ- 
ξασθαι, 

Η »" ξ “127 , θ a Η 
πρὶν τῶν ἡμερινῶν ἔργων λογίσασθαι ἕκαστα 
8 “πῇ παρέβην; τί δ᾽ ἔρεξα; τί μοι δέον οὐ 

τετέλεσται; 3 
ἀρξάμενος 8 ἀπὸ τούτου 8 ἐπέξιθι' καὶ μετέ- 
πετῶ 
7 
δειλὰ μὲν οὖν ῥέξας ἐπιπλήσσεο, χρηστὰ δὲ 
τέρπου. 


to 


4 καὶ τούτους τοὺς στίχους κατέχειν χρηστικῶς, 
οὐχ ἵνα δι’ αὐτῶν ἀναφωνῶμεν, ὡς διὰ τοῦ Παιὰν 
ὅ ΓΑπολλον. πάλιν ἐν πυρετῷ τὰ πρὸς τοῦτο" 
μή, ἂν πυρέξωμεν, ἀφιέναι πάντα καὶ ἐπίλανθά- 
νεσθαι' “ἂν ἐγὼ ἔτε φιλοσοφήσω, ὃ θέλει 
γινέσθω. πού wot ἀπελθόντα τοῦ σωματίου 
ἐπιμελεῖσθαι δεῖ. ὃ εἴ ye® καὶ πυρετὸς οὐκ 
6 ἔρχεται. τὸ δὲ φιλοσοφῆσαι τί ἐστίν; οὐχὶ 
παρασκευάσασθαι πρὸς τὰ συμβαίνοντα ; οὐ 
παρακολουθεῖς οὖν, ὅτι τοιοῦτόν TL λέγεις" “ ἂν 
ἔτι ἐγὼ παρασκευάσωμαι πρὸς τὸ πράως φέρειν 
τὰ συμβαίνοντα, ὃ θέλει γινέσθω"; οἷον εἴ. τις 


1 Corrected from the ordinary text by Schweighduser : 
ἡμεριῶν 8, 3 

2 ©. Schenkl: ἐκτετέλεσται S; but the ordinary text οὖκ 
ἐτελέσθη appears also below in iv. 6, 35. 

3H. Schenkl: τοῦδε S: πρώτου the ordinary text (and 
Bentley). 
_* οὖν added by C, Schenkl: ἐκπρήξας the ordinary text (and 
Bentley). | 


72 


BOOK III. x. 2-6 


«Also allow not sleep to draw nigh to your 
languorous eyelids, 

Ere you have reckoned up each several deed of 
the daytime : 

‘Where went I wrong? Did what? And what 
to be done was left undone ?’ 

Starting from this point review, then, your acts, 
and thereafter remember : 

Censure yourself for the acts that are base, but 
rejoice in the goodly.”’? 


And keep these verses on hand to use, not by 
way of exclamations, as we cry, “ Paean Apollo!” 
Again, in a fever have ready the judgements which 
apply to that. Let us not, if we fall into a fever, 
abandon and forget all our principles, saying: “If I 
ever study philosophy again, let anything happen that 
will! Pll have to go away somewhere and take care of 
my poor body.’ Yes indeed, if fever does not go 
there too !? But whatis philosophy? Does it not mean 
making preparation to meet the things that come 
upon us? Do you not understand, then, that what 
you are saying amounts to something like this: “If 
I ever again prepare to bear quietly the things that 
come upon me, let anything happen that will’’? 


1 The Golden Verses, vulgarly ascribed to Pythagoras, 40- 
44, with several variations in detail. 

2 The sense of this difficult and corrupt passage seems to 
be that Epictetus sarcastically approves the plan, with, 
however, the proviso, that there be no fever where his 
inteflocutor plans to go; which was impossible, because 
there was no such place. In other words, one cannot avoid 
hardships by changing one’s residence ; therefore, prepare to 
meet them wherever you are, 


5 δεῖ added by Upton. 6 Schweighauser: re 8, 
73 


7 


10 


11 


12 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


πληγὰς λαβὼν ἀποσταίη τοῦ παγκρατιάξειν. 
ἀλλ᾽ ἐκεῖ μὲν ἔξεστι καταλῦσαι καὶ μὴ δέρεσθαι, 
ἐνθάδε δ᾽ ἂν καταλύσωμεν φιλοσοφοῦντες, τί 
ὄφελος; τί οὖν δεῖ λέγειν πρὸς αὑτὸν! ἐφ᾽ 
ἑκάστου τῶν τραχέων ; ὅτι “ ἕνεκα τούτου ἐγυμ- 
ναζόμην, ἐπὶ τοῦτο ἤσκουν. ὁ θεὸς σοι λέγει 
“86s μοι ἀπόδειξιν, εἰ νομίμως ἤθλησας, εἰ 
ἔφαγες ὅσα δεῖ, εἰ ἐγυμνάσθης, εἰ τοῦ ἀλείπτου 
ἤκουσας. εἶτ' ἐπ᾽ αὐτοῦ τοῦ ἔργου καταμα- 
λακίξῃ ; νῦν τοῦ πυρέττειν καιρός ἐστιν, τοῦτο 
καλῶς γινέσθω: τοῦ διψᾶν, δίψα καλῶς: τοῦ 
πεινῶν, πείνα καλῶς. οὐκ ἔστιν ἐπὶ coi; τίς 
σε κωλύσει; ἀλλὰ πιεῖν μὲν κωλύσει ὁ ἰατρός, 
καλῶς δὲ διψᾶν οὐ δύναται' καὶ φαγεῖν μὲν 
κωλύσει, πεινᾶν δὲ καλῶς οὐ δύναται. 

᾿Αλλ᾽ οὐ φιλολογῶ ; --- Τίνος δ᾽ ἕνεκα φελο- 
λογεῖς; ἀνδράποδον, οὐχ ἵνα εὐροῇς ; οὐχ ἵνα 
εὐσταθῆῇς ; οὐχ ἵνα κατὰ φύσιν ἔχης καὶ διεξά- 
γῃς ; τί κωλύει πυρέσσοντα κατὰ φύσιν ἔχειν 
τὸ ἡγεμονικόν ; ἐνθάδ᾽ ὁ ἔλεγχος τοῦ πράγματος, 
ἡ δοκιμασία τοῦ φιλοσοφοῦντος. μέρος γάρ ἐστι 
καὶ τοῦτο τοῦ βίου, ὡς περίπατος, ὡς πλοῦς, ὡς 
ὁδοιπορία, οὕτως καὶ πυρετός. μή TL περιπατῶν 
ἀναγυγνώσκεις ; — Ov. — Οὕτως οὐδὲ πυρέσσων. 
ἀλλ᾽ ἂν καλῶς περιπατῆς, ἔχεις τὸ τοῦ περίπα- 


1 Kronenberg (after Schegk): λέγειν αὖ τόν .. 





1 See note on IIT. 1, 5. 

2 The same phrase appears in 2 Timothy ii. 5. 

3 At Olympia, for example, men had to practise under 
supervision and observe a strict diet for one whole month 
before the games. 


74 


BOOK III. x. 6-12 


It is just as if a man should give up the pancratium ! 
because he has received blows, ‘The only difference 
is that in the pancratium a man may stop, and so 
avoid a severe beating, but in life, if we stop the 
pursuit of philosophy, what good does it do? What, 
then, ought a man to say to himself at each hardship 
that befalls him? “It was for ἐμέ that I kept 
training, it was to meet this that I used to practise.” 
God says to you, “ Give Me proof, whether you have 
striven lawfully,2 eaten what is prescribed,? taken 
exercise, heeded your trainer.” After that, do you 
flinch when the time for action arrives? Now it is 
time for your fever, let it come upon you in the right 
way; for thirst, bear your thirst in the right way ; 
to go hungry, bear hunger in the right way. Itis not 
in your power, yousay? Whois there to prevent you ἢ 
Nay, your physician will prevent you from drinking, 
but he cannot prevent you from thirsting in the 
right way; and he will prevent you from eating, but 
he cannot prevent you from bearing hunger in the 
right way. 

But am I not a scholar?—-And for what purpose 
do you devote yourself to scholarship? Slave, is it 
not that you may be happy? Is it not that you may 
be secure? Is it not that you may conform to nature 
and live your life in that way. What prevents you, 
when you have a fever, from having your governing 
principle conform with nature? Here is the proof 
of the matter, the test of the philosopher. For this 
too is a part of life; like a stroll, a voyage, a journey, 
such is also a fever. I presume you do not read 
while taking a stroll, do you?—-No.—No more than 
when you have a fever. But if you stroll in the 
right way, you perform what is expected of a stroller; 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


“" Ἂν / f ‘ ἴω Va 
τοῦντος" ἂν καλῶς πυρέξης, ἔχεις τὰ τοῦ πυρέσ- 
[ων é \ \ 
13 covtos. τί ἐστὶ καλῶς πυρέσσειν; μὴ θεὸν 
\ ὃ e \ ca 
μέμψασθαι, μὴ ἄνθρωπον, μὴ θλιβῆναι ὑπὸ τῶν 
“ / 
γινομένων, εὖ καὶ καλῶς προσδέχεσθαι τὸν θάνα- 
“ € 3 
τον, ποιεῖν τὰ προστασσόμενα' ὅταν ὁ ἰατρὸς 
xf Ἁ a θ , » δ᾽ x v 
εἰσέρχηται, μὴ φοβεῖσθαι, τί εἴπῃ, μηὸ ἂν εἴπῃ 
“ κομψῶς eyes,” ὑπερχαίρειν' τί γάρ σοι ἀγαθὸν 
14 εἶπεν; ὅτε γὰρ ὑγίαινες, τί σοι ἣν ἀγαθόν ; 
δ᾽ A 8) ee a) 37 395 10 ΄ν ᾽ 7 
. μηδ᾽ ἂν εἴπη “κακῶς Eyes,’ ἀθυμεῖν' τί γάρ 
ἐστι τὸ κακῶς ἔχειν ; ἐγγίζειν τῷ διαλυθῆναι 
τὴν ψυχὴν ἀπὸ τοῦ σώματος. τί οὖν δεινόν 
to) \ n“ 
ἐστιν; ἐὰν νῦν μὴ ἐγγίσῃς, ὕστερον οὐκ ἐγγιεῖς ; 
Ν, n 
ἀλλὰ ὁ κόσμος μέλλει ἀνατρέπεσθαι σοῦ ἀποθα- 
’ ᾽ὔ > 7 \ 3 7 7 / 
15 νόντος ; τί οὖν KONAKEVELS TOV ἰατρὸν ; τί λέγεις 
? Ἂ 
“ἐὰν σὺ θέλῃς, κύριε, καλῶς ἕξω "ἢ; τί παρέχεις 
> aA 3 \ A 3A 5» n > 4 \ \ 
αὐτῷ ἀφορμὴν τοῦ ἐπᾶραι ὀφρῦν ; οὐχὶ δὲ τὴν 
é 3 a! b) / a 
αὑτοῦ ἀξίαν αὐτῷ ἀποδίδως, ὡς σκυτεῖ περὶ τὸν 
πόδα, ὡς τέκτονι περὶ τὴν οἰκίαν, οὕτως καὶ τῷ 
ἰατρῷ περὶ τὸ σωμάτιον, τὸ οὐκ ἐμόν, τὸ φύσει 
e ‘4 “" 
νεκρόν ; τούτων ὁ καιρός ἐστι τῷ πυρέσσοντι" 
fe) \ n 
16 ἂν ταῦτα ἐκπληρώσῃ, ἔχει τὰ αὑτοῦ. ov γάρ 
5 ¥ A 7 fal 7 9 \ 
ἐστιν ἔργον τοῦ φιλοσόφου ταῦτα τὰ ἐκτὸς 
“A \ / 
τηρεῖν, οὔτε TO οἰνάριον οὔτε τὸ ἐλάδιον οὔτε 
Ν / ? \ / \ td ¢ f 4 
TO σωμάτιον, ἀλλὰ TL; TO ἴδιον ἡγεμονικόν. τὰ 
"»" } Ὁ: A ; 
δ᾽ ἔξω πῶς; μέχρι τοῦ μὴ ἀλογίστως κατὰ 
17 ταῦτα ἀναστρέφεσθαι. ποῦ οὖν ἔτι καιρὸς τοῦ 





1 That is, matter which is only temporarily endowed with 
life by virtue of union for a short while with the soul. 


76 


BOOK III. x. 12-17 


if you have fever in the right way, you perform the 
things expected of the man who has a fever. What 
does it mean to have fever in the right way? Not 
to blame God, or man, not to be overwhelmed by 
what happens to you, to await death bravely and in 
the right way, to do what is enjoined upon you; 
when your physician comes to see you, not to be 
afraid of what he will say, and at the same time not 
to be carried away with joy, if he says, “ You are 
doing splendidly”; for what good to you lay in 
that remark? Why, when you were well, what good 
wasit to you? It means not to be downhearted, too, 
if he says, “ You are in a bad way.” For what does 
it mean to be ina bad way? That you are close to 
a separation of the soul from the body. What, then, 
is terrifying about that? If you do not draw near 
now, will you not draw near later? And is the 
universe going to be upset when you die? Why, 
then, do you wheedle your physician? Why do you 
say, “If you wish, Master, I shall get well”? Why 
do you give him occasion to put on airs? Why not 
give him just what is his due? As I give the shoe- 
maker his due about my foot, the builder his due 
about my house, so also the physician his due about 
my paltry body, something that is not mine, some- 
thing that is by nature dead.1_ These are the things 
that the moment demands for a man who is in a 
fever; if he meets these demands, he has what 
properly belongs to him. For it is not the business 
of the philosopher to guard these external matters 
—neither his paltry wine, nor his paltry oil, nor his 
paltry body—but what? His own governing principle. 
And how treat externals? Only so far as not to act 
thoughtlessly about them. What proper occasion is 


18 


19 


20 


ὃ 


4 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


“ n Ὰ 2 ἴα al ᾿ 

φοβεῖσθαι; ποῦ οὖν ἔτι καιρὸς ὀργῆς ; ποῦ φόβου 
a fal \ d Saf 
περὶ τῶν ἀλλοτρίων, περὶ τῶν μηδενὸς ἀξίων ; 
». o , “~ 
δύο γὰρ ταῦτα πρόχειρα ἔχειν δεῖ" ὅτε ἔξω τῆς 
ἢ 

προαιρέσεως οὐδέν ἐστιν οὔτε ἀγαθὸν οὔτε κακὸν 
καὶ ὅτι οὐ δεῖ προηγεῖσθαι τῶν πραγμάτων, ἀλλ᾽ 
ἐπακολουθεῖν. “οὐκ ἔδει οὕτως μοι προσε- 

a 3 \ fa) 
νεχθῆναι τὸν ἀδελφόν." ov ἀλλὰ τοῦτο μὲν 
+ a "ἢ > N 3 τ Ν fal "» ΔΝ 
ἐκεῖνος ὄψεται. ἐγὼ δ᾽, ὡς ἂν προσενεχθῇ, αὐτὸς 

nw nr 4 ἴω “Ὁ 
ὡς δεῖ χρήσομαι τοῖς πρὸς ἐκεῖνον. τοῦτο γὰρ 
> ἢ 5 2 a“ δ᾽ ὑλλό ᾿ ἴω. "ὃ \ 
ἐμόν ἐστιν, ἐκεῖνο ἀλλότριον’ τοῦτο οὐδεὶς 
κωλῦσαι δύναται, ἐκεῖνο κωλύεται. 


ια΄. Σποράδην τινά. 


Εἰσί τινες ὡς ἐκ νόμον διατεταγμέναι κολάσεις 
τοῖς ἀπειθοῦσι τῇ θείᾳ διοικήσει" ““ὃς ἂν ἄλλο 
Tt ἡγήσηται ἀγαθὸν παρὰ τὰ προαιρετικά, φθο- 
νείτω, ἐπιθυμείτω, κολακευέτω, ταρασσέσθω: ὃς 
ἂν ἄλλο κακόν, λυπείσθω, πενθείτω, θρηνείτω, 
δυστυχείτω." καὶ ὅμως οὕτως πικρῶς κολαζό- 
μενοι ἀποστῆναι οὐ δυνάμεθα. 


Μέμνησο, τί λέγει ὁ ποιητὴς περὶ τοῦ ξένου" 
ξεῖν᾽, οὔ μοι θέμες ἔστ᾽,1 οὐδ᾽ εἰ κακίων σέθεν 
ἔλθοι, | 
a b a τ Ἀ \ } 3 τὰ 9 
ξεῖνον ἀτιμῆσαι" πρὸς yap Διὸς εἰσιν ἅπαντες 
ξεῖνοί τε πτωχοί τε. 


1s: ἔστι καί 8, 
2 ἔλθοι. .. ἅπαντες supplied by Schenk]: σεθέντες &. 


BOOK III, x. 17-x1. 4 


there, then, any longer for fear? What proper 
occasion, then, any longer for anger? Or for fear 
about things that are not his own concern, worth- 
less things? For here are the two principles that 
you ought to have ready at hand: Outside the 
sphere of the moral purpose there is nothing either 
good or bad; and, We ought not to lead events, but 
to follow them. “My brother ought not to have 
treated me so.” No; but it is for him to look to 
that. As for me, no matter how he behaves, 1 shall 
observe all my relations to him as I ought. For this 
is my part, the other does not belong to me; in 
this nobody can hinder me, the other is subject to 
hindrance. 


CHAPTER XI 


Some scattered sayings 


THERE are certain punishments, assigned as it were 
by law, for those who are disobedient to the divine 
dispensation. ‘ Whoever shall regard as good any- 
thing but the things that fall within the scope of his 
moral purpose, let him envy, yearn, flatter, feel 
disturbed ; whoever shall regard anything else as 
evil, let him sorrow, grieve, lament, be unhappy.” 
Nevertheless, for all that we are so severely punished, 
we cannot desist. 


Remember what the poet 1 says about the stranger : 

Stranger, I may not with right dishonour a 
stranger, not even | 

Worse man were he than art thou; for of God 
are all strangers and beggars. 


1 Homer (frequently so designated, especially in late | 
antiquity), in the Odyssey, XIV. 56-8. 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


5 τοῦτο οὖν καὶ ἐπὶ πατρὸς πρόχειρον ἔχειν' οὔ 
μοι θέμις ἔστ᾽ οὐδ᾽ εἰ κακίων σέθεν ἔλθοι, πατέρ᾽ } 
ἀτιμῆσαι" πρὸς γὰρ Διός εἰσιν ἅπαντες τοῦ 11α- 

6 τρῴου: καὶ ἐπ’ ἀδελφῷ' πρὸς γὰρ Διὸς εἰσιν 
ἅπαντες τοῦ ‘Ouoyviov. καὶ οὕτως κατὰ τὰς 
ἄλλας σχέσεις εὑρήσομεν ἐπόπτην τὸν Δία. 


(β΄. Περὶ ἀσκήσεως. 


1 Τὰς ἀσκήσεις οὐ δεῖ διὰ τῶν παρὰ φύσιν καὶ 
παραδόξων ποιεῖσθαι, ἐπεί τοι τῶν θαυματο- 
ποιῶν οὐδὲν διοίσομεν οἱ λέγοντες φιλοσοφεῖν. 

2 δύσκολον γάρ ἐστι καὶ τὸ ἐπὶ σχοινίου περι- 
πατεῖν καὶ οὐ μόνον δύσκολον, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐπι- 
κίνδυνον. τούτου ἕνεκα δεῖ καὶ ἡμᾶς μελετῶν 
ἐπὶ σχοινίου περιπατεῖν ἢ φοίνικα ἱστάνειν ἢ 

8 ἀνδριάντας περιλαμβάνειν ; οὐδαμῶς. οὐκ ἔστι 
τὸ δύσκολον πᾶν καὶ ἐπικίνδυνον ἐπιτήδειον 
πρὸς ἄσκησιν, ἀλλὰ τὸ πρόσφορον τῷ προκει- 

4 μένῳ ἐκπονηθῆναι. τί & ἐστὶ τὸ προκείμενον 
ἐκπονηθῆναι ; ὀρέξει καὶ ἐκκλίσει ἀκωλύτως 
ἀναστρέφεσθαι. τοῦτο δὲ τί ἐστίν ; μήτε dpe- 
γόμενον ἀποτυγχάνειν μήτ᾽ ἐκκλίνοντα περυπίπ- 
τειν. πρὸς τοῦτο οὖν καὶ τὴν ἄσκησιν ῥέπειν 


1 Schweighauser: πάτερ S. 





ΕΝ 


1 For this aspect of Zeus see O. Gruppe, Griech. Mythol. 
etc., Ὁ. 1116; and especially A. B. Cook, Zews (index). 

* “Setting up a palm” may possibly mean climbing a pole 
with only the hands and the feet, like the climbers of paling, ag 
Upton and Schweighauser (after Bulinger) suggest. There was 


80 


BOOK III. χα, 4—xu1. 4 


This, then, is what one should have ready to use in 
the case of a father: “I may not rightfully dishonour 
a father, not even if a worse man than art thou 
should come; for of Zeus, the God of Fathers,! are 
they all’’; and so in the case of a brother: “ For of 
Zeus, the God of Kindred, are they all.” And 
similarly, in the other social relations, we shall find 
Zeus overseeing them all, 


CHAPTER XII 
Of training 


We ought not to take our training in things that 
are unnatural or fantastic, since in that case we who 
profess to be philosophers will be no better than the 
mountebanks. For it is a hard thing also to walk a 
tight-rope, and not merely hard but dangerous too. 
Ought we also for this reason to practise walking a 
tight-rope, or setting up a palm, or throwing our 
arms about statues?? Not a bit of it. Not every 
dificult and dangerous thing is suitable for training, 
but only that which is conducive to success in 
achieving the object of our effort. And what is the 
object of our effort? To act without hindrance in 
choice and in aversion. And what does this mean? 
Neither to fail to get what we desire, nor to fall into 
what we would avoid. Toward this end, therefore, our 


a ‘‘paln-bearer” (poweiopdpos, or omaderxopdpos) connected 
with the gymnasium at Tegea in Arcadia (ZG. V. 2, Nos. 47, 
48, 50, 53), who possibly had charge of the exercise referred 
to here, whatever its exact character may have been. As 
for embracing statues, Diogenes was said to have done that 
nude in cold weather, so as to harden himself. Diog. Laert. 
6, 23. 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


5 δεῖ. ἐπεὶ yap οὐκ ἔστιν ἀναπότευκτον σχεῖν τὴν 
ὄρεξιν καὶ τὴν ἔκκλισιν ἀπερίπτωτον ἄνευ με- 
γάλης καὶ συνεχοῦς ἀσκήσεως, ἴσθι ὅτι, ἐὰν ἔξω 
ἐάσῃς ἀποστρέφεσθαι αὐτὴν ἐπὶ τὰ ἀπροαίρετα, 
οὔτε τὴν ὄρεξιν ἐπιτευκτικὴν ἕξεις οὔτε τὴν 
ἔκκλισιν ἀπερίπτωτον. καὶ ἐπεὶ τὸ ἔθος ἰσχυρὸν 
προηγῆται πρὸς μόνα ταῦτα εἰθισμένων ἡμῶν 
χρῆσθαι ὀρέξει καὶ ἐκκλίσει, δεῖ τῷ ἔθει τούτῳ 
ἐναντίον ἔθος ἀντιθεῖναι καὶ ὅπου ὁ πολὺς ὄλισθος 
τῶν φαντασιῶν, ἐκεῖ ἀντιτιθέναι τὸ ἀσκητικόν. 

7 ἙἙτεροκλινῶς ἔχω πρὸς ἡδονήν" ἀνατοιχήσω 
ἐπὶ τὸ ἐναντίον ὑπὲρ τὸ μέτρον τῆς ἀσκήσεως 
ἕνεκα. ἐκκλιτικῶς ἔχω πόνου" τρίψω μου καὶ 
γυμνάσω πρὸς τοῦτο τὰς φαντασίας ὑπὲρ τοῦ 
ἀποστῆναι τὴν ἔκκλισιν ἀπὸ παντὸς τοῦ τοιού- 

8 του. τίς γάρ ἐστιν ἀσκητής ; ὁ μελετῶν ὀρέξει 
μὲν pn? χρῆσθαι, ἐκκλίσει δὲ πρὸς μόνα τὰ 
προαιρετικὰ χρῆσθαι, καὶ μελετῶν μᾶλλον ἐν 
τοῖς δυσκαταπονήτοις. καθ᾽ ὃ καὶ ἄλλῳ πρὸς 

9 ἄλλα μᾶλλον ἀσκητέον. τί οὖν ὧδε ποιεῖ τὸ 
φοίνικα στῆσαι ἢ τὸ στέγην δερματίνην καὶ 

10 ὅλμον καὶ ὕπερον περιφέρειν ; ἄνθρωπε, ἄσκη- 


9 


1 Bentley (anticipating Schweighauser): ἂν ἃ... how Β. 
2 μή supplied by Gataker. 





1 For the ‘‘ palm tree,” see above, note on §2. As for the 
other items, it is conceivable that some Cynics may have 
carried about with them such equipment ostentatiougly to 
indicate that they had all they needed for life; that is, 
shelter and the simplest utensils to prepare grain for food, 
somewhat as Diogenes was content with his pithos and a cup 
(although eventually he discarded even the latter). But it 
must be confessed that the passage is very obscure. Seneca, 
De tra, 2, 12, speaks somewhat disparagingly of dle qui 


BOOK III. xu. 4-10 


training also should tend. For since it is impossible 
without great and constant training to secure that our 
desire fail not to attain, and our aversion fall not into 
what it would avoid, be assured that, if you allow 
training to turn outwards, towards the things that 
are not in the realm of the moral purpose, you will 
have neither your desire successful in attaining what 
it would, nor your aversion successful in avoiding 
what it would. And since habit is a powerful in- 
fluence, when we have accustomed ourselves to employ 
desire and aversion only upon these externals, we 
must set a contrary habit to counteract this habit, 
and where the very slippery nature of sense-impres- 
sions is in play, there we must set our training as a 
counteracting force. 

I am inclined to pleasure; I will betake myself to 
the opposite side of the rolling ship, and that beyond 
measure, so as to train myself. I am inclined to 
avoid hard work; I will strain and exercise my 
sense-impressions to this end, so that my aversion 
from everything of this kind shall cease. For who 
is the man in training? He is the man who 
practises not employing his desire, and practises 
employing his aversion only upon the things that 
are within the sphere of his moral purpose, yes, and 
practises particularly in the things that are difficult 
to master. And so different men will have to 
practise particularly to meet different things. To 
what purpose is it, then, under these conditions, to 
set up a palm tree, or to carry around a leather tent, 
or a mortar and pestle?! Man, practise, if you are 
meditatus est... sarcinue ingenti cervires supponere (that is, 
‘*the man who has practised carrying about enormous 


burdens on his back”), pretty clearly in reference to this 
same custom, but without throwing much light upon it. 


11 


12 


13 


14 
15 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


σον, εἰ γοργὸς εἶ, λοιδορούμενος ἀνέχεσθαι, ἀτι- 
μασθεὶς μὴ ἀχθεσθῆναι. εἶθ᾽ οὕτως προβήσῃ, 
es κἂν πλήξῃ σέ τις, εἴπῃς αὐτὸς πρὸς αὑτὸν 
ὅτι “ δόξον ἀνδριάντα περιειληφέναι." εἶτα, καὶ 
οἰναρίῳ κομψῶς χρῆσθαι, μὴ εἰς τὸ πολὺ πίνειν 
(καὶ “γὰρ περὶ τοῦτο ἐπαρίστεροι ἀσκηταί εἰσιν), 
ἀλλὰ πρῶτον εἰς τὸ ἀποσχέσθαι, καὶ , κορασιδίου 
ἀπέχεσθαι καὶ πλακουνταρίου. εἶτά ΤΟΤΕ ὑπὲρ 
δοκιμασίας, εἰ ἄρα, ͵καθήσεις εὐκαίρως αὐτὸς 
σαυτὸν ὑπὲρ τοῦ γνῶναι, εἰ ὁμοίως ἡττῶσίν ce 
ai φαντασίαι. τὰ πρῶτα δὲ φεῦγε μακρὰν ἀπὸ 
τῶν ἰσχυροτέρων. ἄνισος ἡ μάχη κορασιδίῳ 
κομψῷ πρὸς νέον ἀρχόμενον φιλοσοφεῖν: χύτρα, 
φασί, καὶ πέτρα ov συμφωνεῖ. 

Μετὰ τὴν ὄρεξιν καὶ τὴν ἔκκλισιν δεύτερος 
τόπος ὁ περὶ τὴν ὁρμὴν καὶ ἀφορμήν' ip’? 
εὐπειθὴς τῷ λόγῳ, ἵνα μὴ παρὰ καιρόν, μὴ 
παρὰ τόπον, μὴ παρὰ ἄλλην τινὰ τοιαύτην 
συμμετρίαν. 

Τρίτος ὃ “περὶ τὰς συγκαταθέσεις, ὁ πρὸς τὰ 
πιθανὰ καὶ ἑλκυστικά. ὡς γὰρ ὃ Σωκράτης 
ἔλεγεν ἀνεξέταστον βίον μὴ ζῆν, οὕτως ἀνεξέτα- 
στον φαντασίαν μὴ παραδέχεσθαι, ἀλλὰ λέγειν 
os ἔκδεξαι, ἄφες ἴδω, τίς εἶ καὶ πόθεν ἔρχῃ, ὡς 


ot νυκτοφύλακες “ δεῖξόν pot τὰ συνθήματα." 


1 § (but only the first letter is by the first hand; 
τρόπος, which was probably the original reading, 8). 

2 ty’ supplied by Shaftesbury. 

3 Reiske : ἀσυμμετρίαν 5. 





+ Compare the fable about the earthenware Pee and the 
bronze jar in Babrius 193 (Crusius) = Aesop 422 (Halm), 
Avianus I], ete. 


84 


BOOK III. xu. 10-15 


arrogant, to submit when you are reviled, not to be 
disturbed when you are insulted. Then you will 
make such progress, that, even if someone strikes 
you, you will say to yourself, “Imagine that you 
have thrown your arms about a statue.” Next train 
yourself to use wine with discretion, not with a view 
to heavy drinking (for there are some clumsy fools 
who practise with this in mind), but first for the 
purpose of achieving abstention from wine, and keep- 
ing your hands off a wench, or a sweet-cake. And 
then some day, if the occasion for a test really comes, 
you will enter the lists at a proper time for the sake 
of discovering whether your sense-impressions still 
overcome you just as they did before. But first of 
all flee far away from the things that are too strong 
for you. It is not a fair match that, between a pretty 
wench and a young beginner in philosophy. “A 
pot,” as they say, “and a stone do not go together.” 4 

After your desire and your aversion the next 
topic? has to do with your choice and refusal. Here 
the object is to be obedient to reason, not to choose 
or to refuse at the wrong time, or the wrong place, 
or contrary to some other similar propriety. 

The third topic has to do with cases of assent ; 
it is concerned’ with the things that are plausible 
and attractive. For, just as Socrates used to tell us 
not to live a life unsubjected to examination,® SO 
we ought not to accept a sense-impression un- 
subjected to examination, but should say, “ Wait, 
allow me to see who you are and whence you come’ 4 
(just as the night-watch say, “Show me your 


* Upon this division of the field of philosophy, which 
appears to be peculiar to Epictetus, see note on III. 2, 1. 
3. See note on 1. 26, 18. 4 Compare IT. 18, 24, 
Re 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


Poy 7 7 a n~ 4 
“ἔχεις τὸ παρὰ τῆς φύσεως σύμβολον, ὃ δεῖ THY 
, v ’ - 3} Ν 
16 παραδεχθησομένην ἔχειν φαντασίαν ;᾿ καὶ λοι- 
£ w Ἄς ~ 
πὸν ὅσα τῷ σώματι προσάγεται ὑπὸ τῶν γυμνα- 
ῇ 9 ἢ nN \ DOG ¢/ Ν v 
ζόντων αὐτό, ἂν μὲν ὧδέ πον ῥέπῃ πρὸς ὄρεξιν 
ἈΝ 3 7 ΝᾺ Ν 
καὶ ἔκκλισιν, εἴη ἂν καὶ αὐτὰ ἀσκητικά" ἂν δὲ 
} 
πρὸς ἐπίδειξιν, ἔξω νενευκότος ἐστὶ καὶ ἄλλο 
\ ”~ A ω 
Tt θηρωμένου καὶ θεατὰς ξητοῦντος τοὺς ἐροῦντας 
coy “ ial e 
17 “ὧΞ μεγάλου ἀνθρώπου. διὰ τοῦτο καλῶς ὁ 
᾿Απολλώνιος ἔλεγεν ὅτε “ὅταν θέλῃς σαυτῷ 
»" “ ¢ 
ἀσκῆσαι, διψῶν ποτὲ καύματος ἐφέλκυσαι 
“ , 
βρόγχον ψυχροῦ καὶ ἔκπτυσον καὶ μηδενὶ 


᾿ / 3 7 \ “~ 4 
uy’. Tt ἐρημία καὶ ποῖος ἔρημος. 
1 ᾿Ἐρημία ἐστὶ κατάστασίς τις ἀβοηθήτου. οὐ 
A ξ f Xx 3 Ἁ \ [τ 393. 0. € 
yap ὃ μόνος ὧν εὐθὺς καὶ ἔρημος, ὥσπερ οὐδ᾽ 6 
2 ἐν πολλοῖς ὧν οὐκ ἔρημος. ὅταν γοῦν ἀπολέσω- 
μὲν ἢ ἀδελφὸν ἢ υἱὸν ἢ φίλον, ᾧ προσαναπαυό- 
μεθα, λέγομεν ἀπολελεῖφθαι ἔρημοι, πολλάκις ἐν 
“Ῥώμῃ ὄντες, τοσούτου ὄνλου ἡμῖν ἀπαντῶντος 
μῇ μ | 


1 Wolf: νενευκός S, 2 Wolf: as 8. 





1 A token or mark of identification was frequently called 
for in ancient times by the police (especially at night), much 
as in some of the occupied and annexed districts of Europe 
since the Great War. 


86 


BOOK III. xu, 15—xur. 2 


tokens’’).1 “ Do you have your token from nature, the 
one which every sense-impression which is to be 
accepted must have?”’ And, in conclusion, all the 
methods which are applied to the body by the 
persons who are giving it exercise, might also them- 
selves be conducive to training, if in some such way 
as this they tend toward desire and aversion; but if 
they tend toward display, they are characteristic of 
a man who has turned toward the outside world, 
and is hunting for something other than the thing 
itself which he is doing, and is looking for spectators 
who will say, “ Ah, what a great man!” It is this 
consideration which renders admirable the remark 
that Apollonius used to make: “When you wish 
to train for your own sake, then when you are thirsty 
some hot day take a mouthful of cold water, and spit 
it out—* and don’t tell anybody about it!” 


CHAPTER XIII 


The meaning of a forlorn state, and the kind of 
person a forlorn man 15 


A FORLORN state is the condition of one who is 
without help. For a man is not forlorn merely 
because he is alone, any more than a man in the 
midst of a crowd is necessarily not forlorn. At all 
events, when we have lost a brother, or a son, or a 
friend with whom we have shared the same bed, we 
say that we have been left forlorn, though often we are 
in Rome, with such large crowds meeting us in the 
streets, and so many people living in the same 

* Something of the same sort is said, but upon somewhat 


dubious authority, to have been an exercise often practised 
by Plato (Stobaeus, Flor, TIL. 17, 35). ὲ 
7 


6 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


Kal j j ἔσθ᾽ ὅ Lt πλῆς- 
ὶ τοσούτων συνοικούντων, ἔσθ᾽ ὅτε καὶ πλῆ 
Gos δούλων ἔχοντες. θέλει γὰρ ὁ ἔρημος κατὰ 
τὴν ἔννοιαν ἀβοήθητός τις εἶναι καὶ ἐκκείμενος 
τοῖς βλάπτειν βουλομένοις. διὰ τοῦτο, ὅταν 
ὁδεύωμεν, τότε μάλιστα ἐρήμους λέγομεν ἑαυ- 
τούς, ὅταν εἰς λῃστὰς ἐμπέσωμεν. οὐ γὰρ 
ἀνθρώπου ὄψις ἐξαιρεῖται ἐρημίας, ἀλλὰ πιστοῦ 
καὶ αἰδήμονος καὶ ὠφελίμου. ἐπεὶ εἰ τὸ μόνον 
εἶναι ἀρκεῖ πρὸς τὸ ἔρημον εἶναι, λέγε ὅτι καὶ 
ὁ Ζεὺς ἐν τῇ ἐκπυρώσει ἔρημός ἐστι καὶ κατα- 
κλαίει αὐτὸς ἑαυτοῦ: “τάλας ἐγώ, οὔτε τὴν 
“Ἥραν ἔχω οὔτε τὴν ᾿Αθηνῶν οὔτε τὸν ᾿Απόλλωνα 
οὔτε ὅλως ἢ ἀδελφὸν ἢ υἱὸν ἢ ἔγγονον ἢ συγ- 
γενῆ. ταῦτα καὶ λέγουσί τινες ὅτι ποιεῖ μόνος 
ἐν τῇ ἐκπυρώσει. οὐ γὰρ ἐπινοοῦσι διεξαγωγὴν 
μόνου ἀπό τινος φυσικοῦ ὁρμώμενοι, ἀπὸ τοῦ 
φύσει κοινωνικοῦ εἶναι καὶ φιλαλλήλου καὶ ἡδέως 
συναναστρέφεσθαι ἀνθρώποις. ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲν ἧττον 
δεῖ τινὰ καὶ πρὸς τοῦτο παρασκευὴν ἔχειν τὸ 
δύνασθαι αὐτὸν ἑαυτῷ ἀρκεῖν, δύνασθαι αὐτὸν 
ἑαυτῷ συνεῖναι' ὡς ὁ Ζεὺς αὐτὸς ἑαυτῷ σύνεστιν 
καὶ ἡσυχάξει ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ καὶ ἐννοεῖ τὴν διοίκησιν 


“~ \ \ / 
THY ἑαυτοῦ ola ἐστὶ καὶ ἐν ἐπινοίαις γίνεται mpe- 


πούσαις ἑαυτῷ, οὕτως καὶ ἡμᾶς δύνασθαι αὐτοὺς 
ἑαυτοῖς λαλεῖν, μὴ προσδεῖσθαι ἄλλων, διαγωγῆς 


1 καί added by Schegk. 
2 καί after this word was deleted by Reiske. 





1 The periodic consumption of the universe by fire, and its 
rebirth, -ὦ doctrine which the Stoics inherited from Hera- 
cleitus. Even the deities, with the exception of Zeus, succumb 
in the @étterddmmerung. Precisely the same situation as 


88 


BOOK III, xu. 2-7 


house with us, and sometimes even though we have 
a multitude of slaves. For according to the nature of 
the concept the ‘forlorn’ means the person who is 
without help, and exposed to those who wish to 
injure him. That is why, when we go on a journey, 
we call ourselves forlorn most especially at the 
moment that we encounter robbers. For it is not 
the sight of a human being as such which puts an 
end to our forlorn condition, but the sight of a 
faithful, and unassuming, and helpful human 
being. Why, if being alone is enough to make one 
forlorn, you will have to say that even Zeus himself 
is forlorn at the World-Conflagration,! and bewails 
himself: “Wretched me! I have neither Hera, 
nor Athena, nor Apollo, nor, in a word, brother, or 
son, or grandson, or kinsman.” There are even 
those who say that this is what he does when left 
alone at the World-Conflagration ; for they cannot 
conceive of the mode of life of one who is all alone, 
starting as they do from a natural principle, namely, 
the facts of natural community of interest among 
men, and mutual affection, and joy in intercourse. 
But one ought none the less to prepare oneself for 
this also, that is, to be able to be self-sufficient, to be 
able to commune with oneself; even as Zeus communes 
with himself, and is at peace with himself, and con- 
templates the character of his governance, and 
occupies himself with ideas appropriate to himself, 
so ought we also to be able to converse with ourselves, 
not to be in need of others, not to-be at a loss for 


that described here is referred to by Seneca, Yp. Mor. 9,16: 
Qualis est Jovis (vita), cum resoluto mundo et dis in unum con- 
Jusis paulisper cessante natura adquitesctt sibt cogitationibus suts 
traditus, 


89 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


8 μὴ ἀπορεῖν" ἐφιστάνειν τῇ θείᾳ διοικήσει, τῇ 


10 


ll 


12 


13 


αὑτῶν πρὸς τἄλλα σχέσει" ἐπιβλέπειν, πῶς 
πρότερον εἴχομεν, πρὸς τὰ συμβαίνοντα, πῶς νῦν" 
τίνα ἐστὶν ἔτι τὰ θλίβοντα: πῶς ἂν θεραπευθῇ 
καὶ ταῦτα, πῶς ἐξαιρεθῇ" εἴ τινα ἐξεργασίας 
δεῖται τούτων, κατὰ τὸν αὐτῶν 5 λόγον ἐξεργά- 
ἕεσθαι. 

Ὁρᾶτε γάρ, ὅτι εἰρήνην μεγάλην ὁ Καῖσαρ 
ἡμῖν δοκεῖ παρέχειν, ὅτε οὐκ εἰσὶν οὐκέτι πόλεμοι 
οὐδὲ μάχαι οὐδὲ λῃστήρια μεγάλα οὐδὲ πειρα- 
τικά, GAN ἔξεστιν πάσῃ ὥρᾳ ὁδεύειν, πλεῖν ἀπ’ 
ἀνατολῶν ἐπὶ δυσμάς. μή TL οὖν καὶ ἀπὸ 
πυρετοῦ δύναται ἡμῖν εἰρήνην παρασχεῖν, μ μή τι 
καὶ ἀπὸ ναυαγίου, μή τι καὶ ἀπὸ ἐμπρησμοῦ 4 
ἀπὸ σεισμοῦ ἢ ἀπὸ κεραυνοῦ ; ἄγε ἀπ ἔρωτος ; 
οὐ δύναται. ἀπὸ πένθους ; οὐ δύναται. ἀπὸ 
φθόνου ; οὐ δύναται. ἀπ᾽ οὐδενὸς ἁπλῶς τού- 
τῶν" ὁ δὲ λόγος ὃ τῶν φιλοσόφων ὑπισχνεῖται 
καὶ ἀπὸ τούτων εἰρήνην παρέχειν. καὶ τί λέγει; ; 

“ἄν μοι προσέχητε, ὦ ἄνθρωποι, ὅπου ἂν ἦτε, 
ὅ τι ἂν ποιῆτε, οὐ λυπηθήσεσθε, οὐκ ὀργισθή- 
σεσθε, οὐκ ἀναγκασθήσεσθε, οὐ κωλυθήσεσθε, 
ἀπαθεῖς δὲ καὶ ἐλεύθεροι διάξετε ἀπὸ πάντων." 
ταύτην τὴν εἰρήνην τίς ἔχων κεκηρυγμένην οὐχ 
ὑπὸ τοῦ Καίσαρος (πόθεν γῶρ αὐτῷ ταύτην 
κηρύξαι Ἔ ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ κεκηρυγμένην διὰ 
τοῦ λόγου οὐκ ἀρκεῖται, ὅταν 2 μόνος, ἐπι- 
βλέπων καὶ ἐνθυμούμενος “νῦν ἐμοὶ κακὸν οὐδὲν 
δύναται συμβῆναι, ἐμοὶ λῃστὴς οὐκ ἔστιν, ἐμοὶ 
σεισμὸς οὐκ ἔστιν, πάντα εἰρήνης μεστά, πάντα 

1 Schenkl: τῶν 8. 2 Reiske (after Schegk) : αὐτοῦ §. 

8 ἢ supplied by Sd. 
go 


BOOK III. xu. 7-13 


some way to spend our time; we ought to devote 
ourselves to the study of the divine governance, and 
of our own relation to all other things; to consider 
how we used to act toward the things that happen 
to us, and how we act now; what the things are 
that still distress us; how these too can be remedied, 
or how removed ; if any of these matters that I have 
mentioned need to be brought to perfection, to 
perfect them in accordance with the principle of 
reason inherent in them. 

Behold now, Caesar seems to provide us with 
profound peace, there are no wars any longer, nor 
battles, no brigandage on a large scale, nor piracy, 
but at any hour we may travel by land, or sail from 
the rising of the sun to its setting. Can he, then, 
at all provide us with peace from fever too, and 
from shipwreck too, and from fire, or earthquake, or 
lightning? Come, can he give us peace from love? 
He cannot. From sorrow? From envy? He cari- 
not—from absolutely none of these things. But the 
doctrine of the philosophers promises to give us 
peace from these troubles too. And what does it 
say? “Men, if you heed me, wherever you may 
be, whatever you may be doing, you will feel no 
pain, no anger, no compulsion, no hindrance, but you 
will pass your lives in tranquillity and in freedom from 
every disturbance.”” Whenaman has this kind of 
peace proclaimed to him, not by Caesar—why, how 
could ke possibly proclaim it?—but proclaimed by 
God through the reason, is he not satisfied, when he 
is alone? When he contemplates and reflects, 
“ Now no evil can befall me, for me there is no such 
thing as a brigand, for me there is no such thing as 
an, earthquake, everything is full of peace, everything 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


» } a“ 100 a ᾿ a1 , 
ἀταραξίας" πᾶσα 0005, Taca πόλις, Tas* σύνο- 
7 \ > 4 2, / 
δος, γείτων, κοινωνὸς ἀβλαβής. ἄλλος παρέχει 
τροφάς, ᾧ μέλει, ἄλλος ἐσθῆτα, ἄλλος αἰσθήσεις 
7, 4 
14 ἔδωκεν, ἄλλος προλήψεις. ὅταν δὲ μὴ παρέχῃ 
τἀναγκαῖα, τὸ ἀνακλητικὸν σημαίνει, τὴν θύραν 
ἤνοιξεν καὶ λέγει σοι "ἔρχου. ποῦ; εἰς οὐδὲν 
δεινόν, ἀλλ᾽ ὅθεν ἐγένου, εἰς τὰ φίλα καὶ συγ- 
15 γενῆ, εἰς τὰ στοιχεῖα. ὅσον ἣν ἐν σοὶ πυρός, 
εἰς πῦρ ἄπεισιν, ὅσον ἦν γῃδίου, εἰς γήδιον, ὅσον 
πνευματίου, εἰς πνευμάτιον, ὅσον ὑδατίου, εἰς 
ὑδάτιον. οὐδεὶς “Atdns οὐδ᾽ ᾿Αχέρων οὐδὲ Κω- 
κυτὸς οὐδὲ Πυριφλεγέθων, ἀλλὰ πάντα θεῶν 
16 μεστὰ καὶ δαιμόνων." ταῦτά τις ἐνθυμεῖσθαι 
ἔχων καὶ βλέπων τὸν ἥλιον καὶ σελήνην καὶ 
ἄστρα καὶ γῆς ἀπολαύων καὶ θαλάσσης ἔρημός 
17 ἐστιν οὐ μᾶλλον ἢ καὶ ἀβοήθητος. “Tt οὖν; 
ῳ 3 θ ΄, td 2 ? 3} 7 
ἄν τις ἐπελθὼν pot μόνῳ ἀποσφάξῃ me; μωρξ, 
σὲ οὔ, ἀλλὰ τὸ σωμάτιον. 
, 5S Μ ἢ / ΕΣ: , , , 
18 Ποία οὖν ἔτι ἐρημία, ποία ἀπορία ; τί χείρονας 
ἑαυτοὺς ποιῶμεν τῶν παιδαρίων; & τινα ὅταν 
a f / a 
ἀπολειφθῇ μόνα, τί ποιεῖ; ἄραντα ὀστράκια καὶ 
σποδὸν οἰκοδομεῖ τί ποτε, εἶτα καταστρέφει καὶ 
πάλιν ἄλλο οἰκοδομεῖ" καὶ οὕτως οὐδέποτε ἀπο- 
19 ρεῖ διαγωγῆς. ἐγὼ οὖν, ἂν πλεύσητε ὑμεῖς, μέλλω 
7 f vd f 3 ’ \ 
καθήμενος Kale OTL μόνος ἀπελείφθην -xal 
bd , 
ἔρημος οὕτως ; οὐκ ὀστράκια ἕξω, οὐ σποδόν ; 


1 Schweighauser (as in IT. 14, 8; IV. 1, 97): πᾶσα 8. 





1 A reverenf expression for God. See note on III. 1, 43. 
ΟΖ 


BOOK III. xu. 13-19 


full of tranquillity; every road, every city, every 
fellow-traveller, neighbour, companion, all are harm- 
less. Another,} whose care it is, supplies food ; 
Another supplies raiment ; Another has given senses ; 
Another preconceptions. Now whenever He does 
not provide the necessities for existence, He sounds 
the recall; He has thrown open the door and 
says to you, “Go.” Where? To nothing you need 
fear, but back to that from which you came, to 
what is friendly and akin to you, to the physical 
elements.2, What there was of fire in you shall pass 
into fire, what there was of earth into earth, what 
there was of spirit into spirit, what there was of 
water into water. There is no Hades, nor Acheron, 
nor Cocytus, nor Pyriphlegethon, but everything is 
filled with gods and divine powers.” ? A man who 
has this to think upon, and who beholds the sun, 
and moon, and stars, and enjoys land and sea, is no 
more forlorn than he is without help. ‘ Why, what 
then? What if someone should attack me when | 
am alone and murder me?” Fool, not murder you, 
but your trivial body. 

What kind of forlornness is left, then, to talk 
about? What kind of helplessness? Why make 
ourselves worse than little children? When they 
are left alone, what do they do? They gather up 
sherds and dust and build something or other, then 
tear it down and build something else again ; and so 
they are never at a loss as to how to spend their 
timé. Am I, then, if you set sail, to sit down and 
ery because I am left alone and forlorn in tAat fashion ? 
Shan’t I have sherds, shan’t I have dust? But they 


2 Compare the Introduction, p. xxv f. 
® A doctrine ascribed to Thales, Diog. Laert. 1, 27. 


93 


20 


23 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


cal “a ~ ¢ a > 
ἀλλ᾽ ἐκεῖνα ὑπ᾽ ἀφροσύνης ταῦτα ποιεῖ, ἡμεῖς ὃ 
ὑπὸ φρονήσεως δυστυχοῦμεν ; 


ral \ “ 3 
Πᾶσα μεγάλη δύναμις ἐπισφαλὴς τῷ apxo- 
3 a A 4 ? 
μένῳ. φέρειν οὖν δεῖ τὰ τοιαῦτα κατὰ δύναμιν, 
ἀλλὰ κατὰ φύσιν. . .1 ἀλλ᾽ οὐχὶ τῷ φθισικῴ. 
(7 9 
μελέτησόν ποτε διαγωγὴν ws ἄρρωστος, iva ποθ 
ἤ 
ὡς ὑγιαίνων διαγάγῃς. ἀσίτησον, ὑδροπότησον' 
7 \ 
ἀπόσχου ποτὲ παντάπασιν ὀρέξεως, ἵνα ποτὲ Kal 
3 “ 3 nm 3 2 3 f v4 ἢ» 
εὐλόγως ὀρεχθῇῆς. εἰ δ᾽ εὐλόγως, ὅταν ἔχῃς τι 
? co! 2 ΄ cy 3 f ἢ 3 1 
ἐν σεαυτῷ ἀγαθόν, εὖ ὀρεχθήσῃ. οὔ" ἀλλ 
εὐθέως ὡς σοφοὶ διάγειν ἐθέλομεν καὶ ὠφελεῖν 
ἀνθρώπους. ποίαν ὠφέλειαν ; τί ποιεῖς ; σαυτὸν 
γὰρ ὠφέλησας ; ἀλλὰ προτρέψαι αὐτοὺς θέλεις, 
\ Ν f ? ᾿ ᾽ Aa 
σὺ yap προτέτρεψαι; θέλεις αὐτοὺς ὠφελῆσαι ; 
“ A “ Ἂ / 
δεῖξον αὐτοῖς ἐπὶ σεαυτοῦ, οἵους ποιεῖ φιλοσοφία, 
\ \ ΄ 3 , ‘ / * 
Kal μὴ φλυάρει. ἐσθίων τοὺς συνεσθίοντας 
ὠφέλει, πίνων τοὺς πίνοντας, εἴκων πᾶσι, παρα- 
n , 
χωρῶν, ἀνεχόμενος, οὕτως αὐτοὺς ὠφέλει καὶ μὴ 
κατεξέρα αὐτῶν τὸ σαυτοῦ ᾧλέγμα. 


1 Reiske indicated the lacuna. 


1 The change in subject-matter is so abrupt that some- 
thing may perhaps have fallen out in some ancestor of S, or 
perhaps the next chapter-heading has become displaced’ by a 
few lines. Yet there are similarly abrupt transitions in III. 
8, 7 and IIT, 15, 14. | 

2 Something like ‘‘ Give food (or wine) to the healthy man ” 
(Reiske), or ‘*Wrestling is very good for the healthy man” 
(Schenkl), has probably fallen out at this point. 


94 


BOOK III. xu. 19-23 


act thus out of folly, and are we miserable out of 
wisdom ? 


1Great power is always dangerous for the be- 
ginner. We ought, therefore, to bear such things 
according to our power—nay, in accordance with 
nature. . .*? but not for the consumptive. Practise 
at some one time astyle of living like an invalid, that 
at some other time you may live like a healthy man. 
Take no food, drink only water; refrain at some 
one time altogether from desire, that at some other 
time you may exercise desire, and then with good 
reason, And if you do so with good reason, 
whenever you have some good in you, you will 
exercise your desire aright.2 No, that’s not our 
way, but we wish to live like wise men from the 
very start, and to help mankind. Help indeed! 
What are you about? Why, have you helped your- 
self? But you wish to help them progress. Why, 
have you made progress yourself? Do you wish to 
help them? Then show them, by your own 
example, the kind of men philosophy produces, 
and stop talking nonsense. As you eat, help 
those who are eating with you; as you drink, 
those who are drinking with you; by yielding to 
everybody, giving place, submitting—help men in 
this way, and don’t bespatter them with your own 
sputum.+ 


8 <“Tt is one of the paradoxes of conduct that a man cannot 
will to do good until in a sense he has become good, but 
Epictetus would doubtless admit that the will must from the 
first have exercise.” Matheson, I. 32. 

4 Referring, no doubt, to the sputtering of excessively 
ardent lecturers, 


95 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ιδ΄, Σποράδην τινά. 


1. ‘Os οἱ καλοὶ ' τραγῳδοὶ μόνοι σαι οὐ δύνανται, 
3 a , / 
ἀλλὰ μετὰ πολλῶν, οὕτως ἔνιοι μόνοι περίπα- 
5. τῆσαι οὐ δύνανται. ἄνθρωπε, εἴ τις εἶ, καὶ 
μόνος περιπάτησον καὶ σαυτῷ λάλησον καὶ μὴ 
A“ ~ / 7 
8 ἐν τῷ χορῷ κρύπτου. σκὠώφθητί ποτε, περί- 
¢, n ig 
Brewat, ἐνσείσθητι, ἵνα γνῷς, Tis εἶ. 
Ψ ᾿ Ὁ Me x A 3 t ’ 
4 Ὅταν tis ὕδωρ πίνῃ ἢ ποιῇ τε ἀσκητικὸν, Ex 
, > a ; ΣΝ \ ; ro ae 
πάσης ἀφορμῆς λέγει αὐτὸ πρὸς πάντας" “ἐγὼ 
ὅ ὕδωρ πίνω." διὰ γὰρ τοῦτο ὕδωρ πίνεις, διὰ 
\ \ “ὃ , 5 θ "ἢ “- 
γὰρ τὸ ὕδωρ πίνειν; ἄνθρωπε, εἴ σοι λυσιτελεῖ 
; ἴω 3 Ν “ 7 nm 3 \ 
6 πίνειν, πῖνε' εἰ δὲ μή, γελοίως ποιεῖς. εἰ δὲ 
\ 
συμφέρει σοι καὶ πίνεις, σιώπα πρὸς τοὺς δυσα- 
“ δ “" 
ρεστοῦντας τοιούτοις 5 ἀνθρώποις. τί οὖν ; αὐτοῖς 
τούτοις ἀρέσκειν θέλεις ; 
a A 
7 Τῶν πραττομένων τὰ μὲν προηγουμένως πράτ- 
τεται, τὰ δὲ κατὰ περίστασιν, τὰ δὲ κατ᾽ οἶκονο- 
fd \ A \ , \ Ν 3 
μίαν, τὰ δὲ κατὰ συμπεριφοράν, τὰ δὲ κατ 
ἔνστασιν. 
8 Δύο ταῦτα ἐξελεῖν τῶν ἀνθρώπων, οἴησιν καὶ 
ἀπιστίαν. οἴησις μὲν οὖν ἐστὶ τὸ δοκεῖν μηδενὸς 
ὃ A θ ’ ? δὲ ν ὃ ἢ \ 
προσδεῖσθαι, ἀπιστία ὃὲ TO ὑπολαμβάνειν μὴ 
1 This has been read uniformly κακοί ever since the time 
of Wolf. But it is clear from Aristotle, Pol. 3. 13, 21, that 
superior solo voices were not used in the chorus, and it is a 
notorious fact that excellent choral effects are secured with 


voices which are not suitable for solo performance. 
2 Meibom: τοῖς 8. 


οὔ 


BOOK III. χιν. 1~8 


CHAPTER XIV 


Some scailered sayings 


As the good chorus-singersin tragedy cannot render 
solos, but can sing perfectly well with a number 
of other voices, so some men cannot walk around 
by themselves. Man, if you are anybody, both walk 
around by yourself, and talk to yourself, and don’t 
hide yourself inthe chorus. Let yourself be laughed 
at sometimes, look about you, shake yourself up, so 
as to find out who you actually are. 

Whenever a man drinks water only, or has some 
ascetic practice, he takes every opportunity to talk 
about it to everybody: “I drink water only.” Why, 
do you drink water just for the sake of drinking 
water? Man, if it is good for you to drink water, 
drink it! Otherwise your conduct is absurd. But 
if it does you good and you drink water only, 
don’t say a word about it to the people who are 
annoyed by such persons. Why, what’s your object ? 
Are these just the ones you wish to please ἢ 1 ~ 

Among actions some are performed primarily on 
their own account, others on occasion, or as a matter 
of good management, or as required by tact, or as 
part of a formal plan. 

Here are two things of which one must rid men, 
conceit and diffidence. Now conceit is to fancy that 
one needs nothing further. And diffidence is to 
assume that one cannot enjoy a life of serenity 


1 That is: If you drink water only, do it to please your- 
self, and not for the sake of impressing others; above all, 
not for the sake of trying to impress those who dislike 
teetotalers. 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


fu / 
δυνατὸν εἶναι εὐροεῖν + τοσούτων περιεστηκότων. 


9 τὴν μὲν οὖν οἴησιν ἔλεγχος ἐξαιρεῖ, καὶ τοῦτο 


10 


11 
12 


18 


14 


a“ “A ys / 2 ef ὯΝ > LO 7 
πρῶτον ποιεῖ Σωκράτης... .3 ὅτι δ᾽ οὐκ ἀδύνα- 
id 3 \ a 7 \ f 50 7 
τόν ἐστι τὸ πρᾶγμα, σκέψαι καὶ ζήτησον -- οὐδέν 
σε βλάψει ἡ ζήτησις αὕτη" καὶ σχεδὸν τὸ φιλο- 

ἊΝ a > “ ~ 3 f 2 
σοφεῖν τοῦτ᾽ ἔστι, ζητεῖν, πῶς ἐνδέχεται ἀπαρα- 
ποδίστως ὀρέξει χρῆσθαι καὶ ἐκκλίσει. 

ζω e 
“ Κρείσσων εἰμὶ cod: ὁ γὰρ πατήρ μου ὑπατικός 


ἐστιν." ἄλλος λέγει ““ ἐγὼ δεδημάρχηκα, σὺ δ᾽ 


wv 99 


bi > Ff 9 2 x Ψ 
οὔ. εἰ © ἵπποι ἦμεν, ἔλεγες ἂν ὅτι 


¢ 


ς , 
ὁ πατήρ 
/ 33 x ‘ 
μου ὠκύτερος ἦν, ἢ ὅτι “eyo ἔχω πολλὰς 
θὰ \ / 2 A oo ἐς ᾿ 
κριθᾶς καὶ χόρτον, ἢ OTe “κομψὰ περιτρα- 
7 nn 
χήλια." τί οὖν εἰ ταῦτά σου λέγοντος εἶπον ὅτι 
cc ω / Ὁ bb) v > ? 3 , 
ἔστω ταῦτα, τρέχωμεν οὖν ᾿ ; ἄγε, ἐπ᾽ ἀνθρώ- 
&) Oe 3 ἴω i 379 ὧ 
που οὖν οὐδὲν ἐστι τοιοῦτον οἷον ἐφ᾽ ἵππου 
δρόμος, ἐξ οὗ γνωσθήσεται ὁ χείρων καὶ ὃ 
κρείττων ; μήποτ᾽ ἐστὶν αἰδώς, πίστις, δικαιο- 
/ 
σύνῃ ; τούτοις δείκνυε κρείττονα σεαυτόν, WW’ ὡς 
f 
ἄνθρωπος ἧς ὃ κρείττων. dv por λέγῃς ὅτι 
“ μεγάλα λακτίξω," ἐρῶ σοι κἀγὼ OTL “ ἐπὶ ὄνον 
bd / a. ἋΣ 
ἔργῳ μέγα φβῥονεῖς. 
ξ 
1 Schenk] {after Wolf): εὑρεῖν σ Θ΄ (mostly by Se in an 
erasure). 
5 Reiske observed the lacuna. 


3 ἢ supplied by Hense. 
& τί οὖν εἰ Oldfather : εἰ οὖν δ, εἶτ᾽ οὖν or τί οὗ, Reiske. 


98 


BOOK IIL xiv. 8-14 


under so many adverse circumstances. Now conceit 
is removed by cross-examination, and this is what 
Socrates starts with. ...1 But that the matter is 
not impossible, consider and search—this kind of 
search will do you no harm; and, indeed, to 
philosophize practically amounts to this, that is, to 
search how it is possible to employ desire and 
aversion without hindrance. 

“ ] am superior to you, for my father has consular 
rank.”’2 Another says, “ I have been a tribune, and 
you have not.’ And if we were horses, you would 
be saying: “ My sire was swifter than yours,” or, “ I 
have quantities of barley and fodder,” or, “I have 
pretty neck-trappings.” What then, if, when you 
were talking like this, 1 said, “Granted all that, 
let’s run a race, then’? Come now, is there, 
then, nothing in man like running in the case of 
a horse, whereby the worse and the _ better 
will be recognized? Isn’t there such a thing as 
reverence, faith, justice? Prove yourself superior 
in these points, in order to be superior as a human 
being. If you tell me, “I can deliver a mighty 
kick,’ I shall say to you in my turn, “ You are 
proud over what is the act of an ass,” 


1 There is no clear connection here with the preceding, 
and the topic of theremoval of diffidence could scarcely have 
been passed over. 

* The subject-matter of this is closely paralleled in frag. 
18, Hnghetridion 44, and in the florilegia. It was clearly % a 
common place. 

8 Much practised by the pancratiasts, who struck both 
with the heel and with the knee, 


Tlie nae ae antenatal 





οὐ In Schweighiiuser without comment, after Scheyk : ἢ 5. 


bo 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


7 


a ? 
te ὍΟτι δεῖ περιεσκεμμένως ἔρχεσθαι ἐφ 
ἕκαστα. 


“Ἑκάστου é ἔργου σκόπει τὰ καθηγούμενα καὶ τὰ 
ἀκόλουθα καὶ οὕτως ἔρχου ἐπ’ αὐτό. εἰ δὲ μή, 
τὴν μὲν πρώτην ἥξεις “προθύμως ἅτε μηδὲν τῶν 
ἑξῆς ἐντεθυμημένος, ὕστερον δ᾽ ἀναφανέντων 
τινῶν αἰσχρῶς ἀποστήσῃ. “θέλω ᾿Ολύμπια 
νικῆσαι." ἀλλὰ σκόπει τὰ καθηγούμενα αὐτοῦ καὶ 
τὰ ἀκόλουθα" καὶ οὕτως ἄν σοι λυσιτελῇ, ἅπτου 
τοῦ ἔργου. δεῖ σε εὐτακτεῖν, ἀναγκοφαγεῖν, ἀπέχε- 
σθαι πεμμάτων, γυμνάξεσθαι πρὸς ἀνάγκην, ὥρᾳ 
τεταγμένῃ, ἐν καύματι, ἐν ψύχει" μὴ ψυχρὸν πίνειν, 
μὴ οἶνον ὅτ᾽ ἔτυχεν" ἁπλῶς ὡς ἰατρῷ * παραδε- 
δωκέναι σεαυτὸν τῷ ἐπιστάτῃ" εἶτα ἐν τῷ ἀγῶνι 
παρορύσσεσθαι, ἔστιν ὅτε χεῖρα ἐρβαλεῖν, σφυ- 
ρὸν στρέψαι, πολλὴν ἁφὴν καταπιεῖν, μαστι- 
γωθῆναι: καὶ μετὰ τούτων πάντων ἔσθ᾽ ὅτε 
νικηθῆναι. ταῦτα λογισάμενος, ἂν ἔτι θέλῃς, 
ἔρχου ἐπὶ τὸ ἀθλεῖν" εἰ δὲ μή, ὅρα ὅτι ὡς τὰ 
παιδία ἀναστραφήσῃ, ὃ ἃ νῦν μὲν ἀθλητὰς παίξει, 
νῦν δὲ “μονομάχους, νῦν δὲ σαλπίξει, εἶτα τρα- 


6 γῳδεῖ ὅ Te ἂν ὃ ἴδῃ καὶ θαυμάσῃ. οὕτως καὶ σὺ 


: The text of the Hncheiridion: ἅἃπλῶς ἰατρῷ γάρ 8 


(originally). 
* The text of the Hncheiridion: ὀφρύν S (originally), 
changed to ὀσφύν. 3 Reiske: ὅταν 8. 





1 Repeated with slight variations in Hnehetridion, 29. 

2 See note on Ench. 29, 2 

3 A technical term (Diog. Laert. 6, 27) of somewhat 
uncertain meaning, but probably referring to a preliminary 
wallowing in dust or mud before the wrestling match at the 
panecratiium. 


LOO 


BOOK III. xv. 1-6 


CHAPTER XV1 


That we ought to approach each separate thing mith 
circumspection 


In each separate thing that you do consider the 
matters which come first, and those which follow 
after, and only then approach the thing itself. Other- 
wise, at the start you will come to it enthusiastic- 
ally because you have never reflected upon any of 
the subsequent steps, but later on, when some of 
them appear, you will give up disgracefully. “I 
wish to win an Olympic victory.”” But consider the 
matters which come before that and those which 
follow after ; and only when you have done that, then, 
if it profits you, put your hand tothe task. You have 
to submit to discipline, follow a strict diet, give up 
sweet-cakes, train under compulsion, at a fixed 
hour, in heat or in cold; you must not drink cold 
water,? nor wine just whenever you feel like it; 
you must have turned yourself over to your trainer 
precisely as you would to a physician. Then when 
the contest comes on, you have to “dig in”’ beside? 
your opponent, sometimes dislocate your wrist, 
sprain your ankle, swallow quantities of sand, take 
a scourging;* yes, and then sometimes get beaten 
along with all that. After you have counted up 
these points, go on into the games, if you still wish 
to; otherwise, I would have you observe that you 
will be turning back like children. Sometimes they 
play athletes, again gladiators, again they blow 
trumpets, and then act a play about anything that 
they have seen and admired. So you too are now 


4 That is, for any foul committed. 
ΤΟΙ 


10 


1} 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


νῦν μὲν ἀθλητής, νῦν δὲ μονομάχος, εἶτα φιλόσο- 

Ξ ee c L a nA 30s. 9 > ¢« ¢ 
hos, εἶτα ῥήτωρ, ὅλῃ δὲ TH ψυχῇ οὐδέν, ἀλλ᾽ ὡς ὁ 
πίθηκος πᾶν ὃ ἂν ἴδῃς μιμῇ καὶ det σοι ἄλλο ἐξ 
ἄλλου ἀρέσκει, τὸ σύνηθες δ᾽ ἀπαρέσκει. οὐ γὰρ 
μετὰ σκέψεως ἦλθες ἐπί τι οὐδὲ περιοδεύσας 
ὅλον τὸ πρᾶγμα οὐδὲ βασανίσας, ἀλλ᾽ εἰκῆ καὶ 
κατὰ ψυχρὰν ἐπιθυμίαν. 

Οὕτως τινὲς ἰδόντες φιλόσοφον καὶ ἀκούσαντές 
τος οὕτως λέγοντος, ὡς υὐφρώάτης λέγει (καίτοι 
τίς οὕτως δύναται εἰπεῖν ὡς ἐκεῖνος ;), θέλουσιν 
καὶ αὐτοὶ φιλοσοφεῖν. ἄνθρωπε, σκέψαι πρῶτον 
τί ἐστὶ τὸ πρᾶγμα, εἶτα καὶ τὴν σαυτοῦ φύσιν, τί 
δύνασαι βαστάσαι. εἰ παλαιστής, ἰδού σου 
τοὺς ὦμους, τοὺς μηρούς, τὴν ὀσφύν. ἄλλος γὰρ 
πρὸς ἄλλο Te πέφυκεν. δοκεῖς ὅτι ταῦτα 
ποιῶν δύνασαι φιλοσοφεῖν ; δοκεῖς ὅτε δύνασαι 
ὡσαύτως ἐσθίειν, ὡσαύτως πίνειν, ὁμοίως ὀργίξε- 
σθαι, ὁμοίως δυσαρεστεῖν; ἀγρυπνῆσαι δεῖ, 
πονῆσαι, νικῆσαί τινας ἐπιθυμίας, ἀπελθεῖν ἀπὸ 
τῶν οἰκείων, ὑπὸ παιδαρίου καταφρονηθῆναι, ὑπὸ 
τῶν ἀπαντώντων καταγελασθῆναι, ἐν παντὶ 
ἔλασσον ἔχειν, ἐν ἀρχῇ, ἐν τιμῇ, ἐν δίκη. ταῦτα 
περισκεψάμενος, εἴ σοι δοκεῖ, προσέρχου, εἰ θέλεις 
ἀντικαταλλάξασθαι τούτων ἀπάθειαν, ἐλευθερίαν, 
ἀταραξίαν. εἰ δὲ μή, μὴ πρόσαγε, μὴ ὡς τὰ 





se 


1 Although The expression (lit. ‘‘ with cold desire”) seems 
a bit strange, because the fault seems to lie especially fn the 
lack of forethought and circumspection, still it is supported 
by the version in the Hnchetridion, and particularly by the 
phrase, “ yet with your whole soul nothing,” in §6 above. 
Mere desire, without reason and deliberation, is apparently 
regarded by Epictetus as a weak thing. 


IO2 


BOOK ITI. xv. 6-12 


an athlete, now a gladiator, then a philosopher, 
after that a rhetorician, yet with your whole soul 
nothing, but like an ape you imitate whatever you 
see, and one thing after another is always striking 
your fancy, but what you are accustomed to bores 
you. For you have never gone out after anything 
with circumspection, nor after you have examined 
the whole matter all over and tested it, but you act 
at haphazard and half-heartedly.1 

In the same way, when some people have seen a 
philosopher and heard someone speaking like 
Euphrates? (though, indeed, who can speak like 
him ἢ), they wish to be philosophers themselves. 
Man, consider first what the business is, and then 
your own natural ability, what you can bear. If 
you wish to be a wrestler, look to your shoulders, 
your thighs, your loins. For oné man has a natural 
talent for one thing, another for another. Do you 
suppose that you can do the things you do now, and 
yet bea philosopher? Do you suppose that you can 
eat in the same fashion, drink in the same fashion, give 
way to anger and to irritation, just as you do now? 
You must keep vigils, work hard, overcome certain 
desires, abandon your own people, be despised by 
a paltry slave, be laughed to scorn by those who 
meet you, in everything get the worst of it, in 
office, in honour, in court. Look these drawbacks 
over carefully, and then, if you think best, approach 
philosophy, that is, if you are willing at the price 
of these things to secure tranquillity, freedom, and 
calm. Otherwise, do not approach; don’t act like 


2 An eminent Stoic lecturer, highly praised by Pliny 
(Zp. I. 10), and a bitter enemy of Apollonius of Tyana. 
A specimen of his eloquence is given below, IV. 8, 17-20. 


103 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


παιδία νῦν μὲν φιλόσοφος, ὕστερον δὲ τελώνης, 

13 εἶτα ῥήτωρ, εἶτα ἐπίτροπος Καίσαρος. ταῦτα οὐ 
συμφωνεῖ" ἕνα σε δεῖ ἄνθρωπον εἶναι ἢ ἀγαθὸν ἢ ἢ 
KQAKOV" ἢ τὸ ἡγεμονικὸν σε δεῖ ἐξεργάζεσθαι τὸ 
σαυτοῦ ἢ τὰ ἐκτός" ἢ περὶ τὰ ἔσω φιλοπονεῖν] ἢ 

‘ \ a9 ΄ ,ὕ ” 

περὶ τὰ ἔξω' τοῦτ᾽ ἔστι φιλοσόφου στάσιν ἔχειν 
ἢ ἰδιώτου. 


14 Ῥούφῳ τις ἔλεγεν Γάλβα σφαγέντος OTE 
“Νῦν προνοίᾳ. ὃ κόσμος διοικεῖται ; 5” ὁ δὲ “Μὴ 
παρέργως ποτ᾽, ᾿ ἔφη, “ἀπὸ Γάλβα κατεσκεύασα, 
ὅτι προνοίᾳ ὁ κόσμος διοικεῖται ; ἢ 


is’. Ὅτι εὐλαβῶς δεῖ συγκαθιέναι εἰς 
συμπεριφοράν. 

l ᾿Ανάγκη τὸν συγκαθιέντα τισὶν ἐπιπλέον ἢ εἰς 
λαλιὰν ἢ εἰς συμπόσια ἢ ἁπλῶς εἰς συμβίωσιν ἢ ἢ 
αὐτὸν ἐκείνοις ἐξομοιωθῆναι ἢ ἐκείνους μετα- 

2 θεῖναι € ἐπὶ τὰ αὑτοῦ. καὶ γὰρ ἄνθρακα ἀπεσβεσ- 
μένον ἂν γῇ παρὰ τὸν καιόμενον, ἢ ἢ αὐτὸς ἐκεῖνον 

8 ἀποσβέσει" ἢ ἐκεῖνος τοῦτον ἐκκαύσει. τηλι- 
κούτου οὖν τοῦ κινδύνου ὄντος εὐλαβῶς δεῖ τοῖς 
ἰδιώταις συγκαθίεσθαι εἰς τὰς τοιαύτας συμπερι- 
φορὰς μεμνημένους, ὅτι ἀμήχανον τὸν συνανατρι- 

1 Meibom: φιλοπόνει 8, 
2 ἀποσβέσει supplied by the Salamanca edition, after 
Schegk. 





1 See note on III, 13, 20. 
* The Roman emperor ; the incident took place in a.p. - 69, 


104 


BOOK III. xv. r2—xvu 3 


a child—now a philosopher, later on a tax-gatherer, 
then a rhetorician, then a procurator of Caesar. 
These things do not go together. You must be 
one person, either good or bad; you must labour to 
improve either your own governing principle or 
externals; you must work hard either on the inner 
man, or on things outside; that is, play the τό] 
of a philosopher, or else that of a layman. 


When Galba* was assassinated, someone said to 
Rufus,’ “Is the universe governed now by Provi- 
dence?”” But he replied, “Did I ever, even in 
passing, take the case of Galba as the basis for an 
argument that the universe is governed by Provi- 
dence?” 


CHAPTER XVI 
That one should enter cautiously into social intercourse 


Tae man who consorts frequently with one person 
or another either for conversation, or for banquets, 
or for social purposes in general, is compelled either 
to become like them himself, or else to bring them 
over to his own style of living; for if you put by 
the side of a live coal one that has gone out, either 
the dead coal will put the live one out, or the latter 
will kindle the former. Since the risk, then, is so 
great, we ought to enter cautiously into such social 
intercourse with the laymen, remembering that it 
is irhpossible for the man who brushes up against 


* Musonius Rufus, the distinguished philosopher and 
teacher of Epictetus, to whom the latter was greatly indebted. 
See the indices to the two vols. of this translation, and Vol. I, 
Introduction, p. viii. 


105 


cr 


10 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


se TO NOG Sora mere μὴ καὶ αὐτὸν ἀπολαῦσαι 
τῆς ἀσβόχλης. τί γὰρ ποιήσεις, ἂν περὶ μονο- 
ἐ λαλῇ ἂν περὶ ἵππων, ἂν περὶ ἀθλητῶν, 
ἂν τὸ ἔτι τούτων χεῖρον περὶ ἀνθρώπων" “ ὁ δεῖνα 
κακός, ὃ δεῖνα ἀγαθός: τοῦτο καλῶς ἐγένετο, 
τοῦτο κακῶς" ἔτε ἂν σκώπτῃ, ἂν yerotatn, ἂν 
κακοηθίζηται ; ἔχει τις ὑμῶν παρασκευὴν οἵαν ὁ 
[110 Ae τὴν λύραν λαβών, ὥστ᾽ εὐθὺς 
ἁψάμενος τῶν χορδῶν γνῶναι πὰς ἀσυμφώνους 
καὶ ἁρμόσασθαι τὸ ὄργανον ; οἵαν εἶχεν δύναμιν 
Σωκράτης, ὥστ᾽ ἐν πάσῃ συμπεριφορᾷ " ἄγειν ἐπὶ 
τὸ αὑτοῦ τοὺς συνόντας ; ; πόθεν ὑμῖν; ἀλλ᾽ 
ἀνάγκη ὑπὸ τῶν ἰδιωτῶν ὃ ὑμᾶς περιάγεσθαι. 

Διὰ τί οὖν ἐκεῖνοι ὑμῶν ἰσχυρότεροι ; ὅτι 
ἐκεῖνοι μὲν τὰ σαπρὰ ταῦτα ἀπὸ δογμάτων 
λαλοῦσιν, ὑμεῖς δὲ τὰ κομψὰ ἀπὸ τῶν χειλῶν' 
διὰ τοῦτο ἄτονά ἐστι καὶ νεκρώ, καὶ σικχᾶναι 
ἔστιν ἀκούοντα ὑμῶν τοὺς προτρεπτικοὺς καὶ τὴν 
ἀρετὴν τὴν ταλαίπωρον, ἣ ἄνω κάτω θρυλεῖται. 
οὕτως ὑμᾶς οἱ ἰδιῶται νικῶσιν. πανταχοῦ γὰρ 
ἰσχυρὸν τὸ δόγμα, ἀνίκητον τὸ δόγμα. μέχρις 
ἂν οὖν παγῶσιν ἐν ὑμῖν αἱ κομψαὶ ὑπολήψεις 
καὶ δύναμίν τινα ᾿περιποιήσησθε πρὸς ἀσφάλειαν, 
συμβουλεύω ὑμῖν εὐλαβῶς τοῖς ἰδιώταις συγ- 
καταβαίνειν" εἰ δὲ μή, καθ᾽ ἡμέραν ὡς κηρὸς ἐν 
ἡλίῳ διατακήσεται, ὑμῶν εἴ τινα ἐν TH σχολῇ 
ἐγγράφετε. μακρὰν οὖν ἀπὸ τοῦ ἡλίου πού ποτε 
ὑπάγετε, μέχρις ἂν κηρίνας τὰς ὑπολήψεις ἔχητε. 


11 διὰ τοῦτο καὶ τῶν πατρίδων συμβουλεύουσιν 


1 Schweighiuser: λαλῆις 8. 
δ Wolf, after Schegk: συμφορᾷ 8, 


τού 


BOOK III. χνι. 3-11 


the person who is covered with soot to keep from 
getting some soot on himself. For what are you 
going to do if he talks about gladiators, or horses, 
or athletes, or, worse still, about people: “ So-and- 
so is bad, So-and-so is good; this was well done, 
this ill”; or again, if he scoffs, or jeers, or shows 
an ugly disposition? Has any of you the capacity 
of the expert lyre-player when he takes up his lyre, 
which enables him, the instant he touches the strings, 
to recognize the ones which are off pitch, and to 
tune the instrument? Or the power that Socrates 
had, which enabled him in every kind of social inter- 
course to bring over to his own side those who were 
in his company? How could you have? But you 
must necessarily be converted by the laymen. 

Why, then, are they stronger than you are? 
Because their rotten talk is based on judgements, but 
your fine talk comes merely from your lips; that’s 
why what you say is languid and dead, and why a 
man may well feel nausea when he hears your exhor- 
tations and your miserable “virtue,” which you 
babble to and fro. And thus the laymen get the 
better of you; for everywhere judgement is strong, 
judgement is invincible. Therefore, until these fine 
ideas of yours are firmly fixed within you, and you 
have acquired some power which will guarantee you 
security, my advice to you is to be cautious about 
joining issue with the laymen; otherwise whatever 
you write down in the lecture-room will melt away 
by day like wax in the sun.t Retire, then, to some 
spot or other far away from the sun, so long as the 
ideas which you have are waxen. It is for this 
reason that the philosophers advise us to leave even 


1 Such lecture-notes were written on wax tablets. 
107 


13 


14 


1ὅ 


16 


1 
2 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


“ 7 Ν x 2 
ἀποχωρεῖν οἱ φιλόσοφοι, ὅτι τὰ παλαιὰ ἔθη 
a \ > dA 3 \ / θΘ \ yA 
περισπᾶ καὶ οὐκ ἐᾷ ἀρχὴν γενέσθαι τινὰ ἄχλου 
+ ral a ®\ ? \ δὴ “ λ “ 
ἐθισμοῦ, οὐδὲ φέρομεν τοὺς ἀπαντῶντας καὶ NEeyo- 
n a na ¢ a ¢ ἊΝ 3? 
ντας “ἴδ᾽ ὁ δεῖνα φιλοσοφεῖ, ὁ τοῖος καὶ ὁ τοῖος. 
A 7 
οὕτως καὶ οἱ ἰατροὶ τοὺς μακρονοσοῦντας ἐκπέμ- 
πουσιν εἰς ἄλλην χώραν καὶ ἄλλα ἀέρα καλῶς 
fe) \ o¢ Ἂ ᾽ “ 7 uf 
ποιοῦντες. καὶ ὑμεῖς ἀντεισαγάγετε ἄλλα ἔθη: 
πήξατε ὑμῶν τὰς ὑπολήψεις, ἐναθλεῖτε αὐταῖς. 
" I y3 δ ae ἢ ἢ , ’ 
οὔ" arr ἔνθεν ἐπὶ θεωρίαν, εἰς μονομαχίαν, εἰς 
f 3 7 8.» > a Θ Ν / 
ξυστόν, εἰς κίρκον" εἶτ᾽ ἐκεῖθεν ὧδε καὶ πάλιν 
2} θ 3 a e 5, ’ \ ZA \ OG 2 
ἔνθεν ἐκεῖ of avtot. καὶ ἔθος κομψὸν οὐδέν, οὔτε 
\ 5 5 ’ \ 949 ὃ; Ων \ 
προσοχὴ οὔτ᾽ ἐπιστροφὴ ἐφ᾽ αὑτὸν Kal Tapa- 
τήρησις “πῶς χρῶμαι ταῖς προσπιπτούσαις 
, \ ᾽ὔ δὴ \ - 
φαντασίαις ; κατὰ φύσιν ἢ παρὰ φύσιν; πῶς 
Ν a 3 ~ 
ἀποκρίνωμαι πρὸς αὐτάς ; ws δεῖ ἢ ὡς ov δεῖ; 
3 , n° , 2 OA \ 9 ¢ 3} 
ἐπιλέγω τοῖς ἀπροαιρέτοις, ὅτι οὐδὲν πρὸς ἐμέ; 
εἰ γὰρ μήπω οὕτως ἔχητε, φεύγετε ἔθη τὰ πρότε- 
\ 3 > 
pov, φεύγετε τοὺς ἰδιώτας, εἰ θέλετε ἄρξασθαί 
ποτέ τινες εἶναι. 


ιζ΄. Ilept προνοίας. 


f aA ? ΜᾺ 
“Ὅταν τῇ προνοίᾳ ἐγκαλῇς, ἐπιστράφηθι, καὶ 
ἢ od \ , f 

γνώσῃ, OTL κατὰ λόγον γέγονεν. “ναί, ἀλλ᾽ ὁ 





1 Where the athletes exercised in winter, or in bad 
weather. 


108 


BOOK III, xvi. r1—-xvu. 2 


our own countries, because old habits distract 
us and do not allow a beginning to be made of 
another custom, and we cannot bear to have men 
meet us and say, ‘“‘ Look, So-and-so is philosophizing, 
although he is this sort of a person or that.” 
Thus also physicians send away to a different 
region and a different climate those who are suffer- 
ing from chronic disorders, and that is well. 
Do you also introduce different habits; fix your 
ideas, exercise yourselves in them. But no, you go 
from the class-room to a show, a gladiatorial combat, 
a gymnasium-colonnade,! a circus; and then you 
come back here from these places, and you go back 
there again from here, and remain the same persons 
all the time.2 And so you acquire no fine habit; 
you pay no regard or attention to your own self; 
you do not observe: “How do I deal with the 
external impressions which befall me? In accordance 
with nature, or contrary to it? How shall I respond 
to these impressions? As I should, or as I should 
not? Do I declare to the things which lie outside 
the sphere of my moral purpose that they mean 
nothing tome?” Why, if you have not yet acquired 
this state of mind, flee from your former habits, flee 
from the laymen, if you would begin to be somebody 
some time. 


CHAPTER XVII 
᾿Ξ Of Providence 


WueENeEveR you find fault with Providence, only 
consider and you will recognize that what happens 
is in accordance with reason. “Yes,” you say, 


* Cf “ ... But evermore came out by the same door 
where in I went.”—Omar Khayyam (Fitzgerald), 27. 


ou 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


sf Ἃ / af 33 3 , 3 3 Fa Ν 
ἄδικος πλέον EXEL. ἐν TLVL; ἐν ἀργυρίῳ" πρὸς 
fa) / ς ra 
yap τοῦτό σου κρείττων ἐστίν, OTt+ κολακεύει, 
“ a ‘4 
ἀναισχυντεῖ, ἀγρυπνεῖ. τί θαυμαστόν ; adr 
κ n .- 5 
ἐκεῖνο βλέπε, εἰ ἐν τῷ πιστὸς εἶναι πλέον σου 
of > 3 “ 2 “ 3 \ ἐν ‘4 3 3 
ἔχει, εἰ ἐν τῷ αἰδήμων. οὐ γὰρ εὑρήσεις" ἀλλ, 
ὅπου κρείττων, ἐκεῖ σαυτὸν εὑρήσεις πλέον 
3 ? »" 

ἔχοντα. κἀγώ ποτ᾽ εἶπόν τινε ἀγανακτοῦντι, 
ὅτε Φιλόστοργος εὐτυχεῖ, "Heres ἂν σὺ μετὰ 
“ a \ 32) 

Σούρα κοιμᾶσθαι ;---“ Μὴ γένοιτο," φησίν, “ ἐ- 
? δ ς f 25 γ 9 b] ΩΣ Ε ᾽ 
κείνη ἡ ἡμέρα." ---ἰ οὖν ἀγανακτεῖς, εἰ λαμβάνει 

> 3 χὰ a Ἃ “ / Ν \ 
τι av? ov πωλεῖ; ἢ πῶς μακαρίξεις τὸν διὰ 
, a \ 3 7] 7 ~ 
τούτων, ἃ σὺ ἀπεύχῃ, κτώμενον ἐκεῖνα; ἢ τί 
\ a i a 
κακὸν ποιεῖ ἡ πρόνοια, εἰ τοῖς κρείττοσι τὰ 
Ὁ ld va) 
κρείττω δίδωσιν; ἢ οὐκ ἔστι κρεῖττον αἰδήμονα 
ἡ 7 € la [ 
εἶναι ἢ πλούσιον; Ὡμολόγει. Τί οὖν ἀγα- 
-“ f 2 Pe 
vaxtess, ἄνθρωπε, ἔχων TO κρεῖττον ; μέμνησθε 
f ¥ ¢ f 
ον ἀεὶ καὶ πρόχειρον ἔχετε, OTL νόμος οὗτος 
Ν Ν ’, la! 
φυσικὸς τὸν κρείττονα TOD χείρονος πλέον ἔχειν, 
, 7 \ 
ἐν ᾧ κρείττων ἐστίν, καὶ οὐδέποτ᾽ ἀγανακτήσετε. 
ἀλλ᾽ ἡ γυνή μοι κακῶς χρῆται." καλῶς, ἄν 
? 7 7 ? “~ 
tis cov πυνθάνηται, τί ἐστὶ τοῦτο, λέγε “ἡ 
/ n a ogg 5 = 204 (93 
γυνή μοι κακῶς χρῆται. ἄλλο οὖν οὐδέν; 
’ 
οὐδέν. “ὁ πατήρ μοι οὐδὲν δίδωσιν." .. 2 ὅτι 
Ἀ F fal “ rat 
δὲ κακὸν ἐστίν, τοῦτο ἔσωθεν αὐτῷ δεῖ προσ- 


1 Wolf and Upton’s ‘‘codex”: ὅ 8. 
* Lacuna observed by Wolf. 





1 Probably the Palfurius Sura who had been expelled from 
the Senate under the Flavian emperors. Suet. Lom. 13, 2. 


Tio 


BOOK III. xvi. 2-8 


“but the wicked man is better off’ In what 
respect? In money; for in respect to that he is 
superior to you, because he flatters, is shameless, 
lies awake nights. What is surprising in that? But 
look rather and see if he is better off than you 
are in being faithful, and considerate. For you will 
not find that to be the case; but where you are 
superior, there you will find that you are better off 
than he is. And so I once asked a man who was 
complaining about the prosperity of Philostorgus, 
“Would you have been willing to cohabit with Sura?” + 
‘May that day never come!” said he. Why, then, 
are you indignant if he gets something for what he 
sells? Or how can you deem him blessed who 
acquires what he has by means which you abhor? 
Or what harm does Providence do if it gives the 
better thing to the better men? Or is it not better 
to be considerate than to be rich? He agreed 
that it was. Why, then, are you indignant, man, 
when you have the better part? I would have the 
rest of you always remember, then, and be ready 
to apply the following truth: That this is a law of 
nature for the superior to have the better of the 
inferior, in the respect in which he is superior ; 
and then you will never be indignant. “But my 
wife treats me badly.”” Very well; if someone asks 
you what this amounts to, say, ‘‘My wife treats me 
badly.” “Nothing elsc, then?” Nothing. “My 
father doesn’t give me anything” .. 2 But is it 
nece§sary in your own mind to add to the preceding 
statement, that to receive nothing from your father 


2 The lacuna is probably to be filled out thus: What 
does “this amount toy Merely that your father dvesn’t give 
you anything. 

11| 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


“ , Ν a 
θεῖναι καὶ προσκαταψεύσασθαι; διὰ τοῦτο ov 
κι \ Ν f Ν 
δεῖ τὴν πενίαν ἐκβάλλειν, ἀλλὰ τὸ δόγμα τὸ 
a ¢ / 
περὶ αὐτῆς, καὶ οὕτως εὐροήσομεν. 


ra \ \ 
in’. “Ors οὐ δεῖ πρὸς Tas ἀγγελίας 
ταράσσεσθαι. 


a , λθῇ 7 3 ~ 
Οταν col τὸ προσαγγελθῇ ταρακτικὸν, ExElVO 
¢ / 
ἔχε πρόχειρον, ὅτε ἀγγελία. περὶ οὐδενὸς προαι- 
A \ 
ρετικοῦ γίνεται. μή TL yap δύναταί σοί τις 
9 σ᾿ Ψ fa) e t x fa) + Ἢ 
ἀγγεῖλαι, ὅτι κακῶς ὑπέλαβες ἢ κακῶς ὠρέχθης ; 
“ ‘ 
---Οὐδαμῶς.---Αλλ᾽ ὅτε ἀπέθανέν tis: τί οὖν 
: A / ΓῚ 
πρὸς σέ; ὅτι σε κακῶς τις λέγει" τί οὖν πρὸς 
᾿ “ e \ {ὃ \ ¢ , 33 N 
σέ; ὅτι ὁ πατὴρ τάδε τινὰ ἑτοιμάξεται' ἐπὶ 
, 
τίνα ; μή τι ἐπὶ τὴν προαίρεσιν ; πόθεν δύναται ; 
3 ’ 9 Χ \ , 2 ἃ Ν ΄ 
ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ τὸ σωμάτιον, ἐπὶ τὸ κτησείδιον" 
4 0 3 >. \ f 1 2 + .κτ Ἁ 3 ¢ 
ἐσώθης, οὐκ ἐπὶ σε ἀλλ ὁ κριτὴς ἀποφαίνεται 
" Σ f \ f 2 9 3 
ὅτι ἠσέβησας. περὶ Σωκράτους δ᾽ οὐκ ἀπε- 
᾽ὔ ‘ 
φήναντο οἱ diKagTal; μή τι σὸν ἔργον ἐστὶ τὸ 
4 a b] f 3 δ i) 3) 
ἐκεῖνον ἀποφήνασθαι ; ---- Οὔ. --- Ti οὖν ἔτι σοι 
“a , 
μέλει; ἔστι τι τοῦ πατρός σου ἔργον, ὃ ἂν μὴ 
Ἴ [4 3 ’ Ἀ 2 \ Υ͂ 
ἐκπληρώσῃ, ἀπώλεσεν τὸν πατέρα, τὸν φιλό- 
‘ 2 
στοργον, Tov ἥμερον. ἄλλο δὲ μηδὲν ζήτει 
, Ψ > Ν ? f 2 "δέ - \ 
τούτου ἕνεκα αὑτὸν ἀπολέσαι. οὐδέποτε γὰρ 
ἐν ἄλλῳ μέν τις ἁμαρτάνει, εἰς ἄλλο δὲ βλάπο- 
1 οὐκοῦν after σέ is omitted in s. 
2 Wolf: ἀπολέσθαι 8. 
Τ12 


BOOK II]. xvi. 8—xvur. 5 


is an evil, and at that to add a lie too? For this 
reason we ought not to cast out poverty, but 
only our judgement about poverty, and so we shall 
be serene. 


CHAPTER XVIII 
Lhat we ought not to allow any news to disturb us 


WHENEVER some disturbing news is reported to 
you, you ought to have ready at hand the following 
principle: News, on any subject, never falls within 
the sphere of the moral purpose. Can anyone bring 
you word that you have been wrong in an assumption 
or in a desire?-—By no means.—But he can bring 
you word that someone is dead. Very well, what 
is that to you? That someone is speaking ill of 
you. Very well, what is that to you? That your 
father is making certain preparations. Against 
whom? Surely not against your moral purpose, is 
it? Why, how can he? But against your paltry 
body, against your paltry possessions; you are safe, 
it is not against you. But the judge condemns you 
on the charge of impiety. And did not the judges 
similarly condemn Socrates? Surely it is no concern 
of yours that the judge pronounced you guilty, is it? 
—No.—Why, then, are you any further concerned? 
Your father has a certain function, and if he does not 
perform it, he has destroyed the father in him, the 
man who loves his offspring, the man of gentleness 
within him. Do not seek to make him lose anything 
else on this account. For it never happens that a 
man goes wrong in one thing, but is injured in 


113 


6 


7 


8 


9 


1 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


TéeTal. πάλιν σὸν ἔργον τὸ ἀπολογηθῆναι 
εὐσταθῶς, αἰδημόνως, ἀοργήτως. εἰ δὲ μή, 
ἀπώλεσας καὶ σὺ τὸν υἱόν, τὸν αἰδήμονα, τὸν 
γενναῖον. τί οὖν; ὁ κριτὴς ἀκίνδυνός ἐστιν ; 
οὔ" ἀλλὰ κἀκείνῳ τὰ ἴσα κινδυνεύεται. τί οὖν 
ἔτι φοβῇ, τί ἐκεῖνος κρινεῖ ;} τί σοὶ καὶ τῷ 
ἀλλοτρίῳ κακῷ; σὸν κακόν ἐστι τὸ κακῶς 
ὠπολογηθῆναι" τοῦτο φυλάσσου μόνον" κριθῆναι 
δ᾽ ἢ μὴ κριθῆναι ὥσπερ ἄλλου ἐστὶν ἔργον, 
οὕτως κακὸν ἄλλον ἐστίν. “ἀπειλεῖ σοι ὁ 
ὃ ΄΄- 33 > / ‘ LA ἐξ , 52 3 \ vw 

εἴνα. ἐμοί; ov. ψέγει σε. αὐτὸς ὄψεται, 
πῶς ποιεῖ τὸ ἴδιον ἔργον. “ μέλλει σε κατα- 
κρινεῖν ἀδίκως. ἄθλιος. 


? , 

10’, Tis στάσις ἰδιώτου καὶ φιλοσόφου ; 

Ἢ πρώτη διαφορὰ ἰδιώτου καὶ φιλοσόφου' 
ὁ μὲν λέγει “οὐαί μοι διὰ τὸ παιδάριον, διὰ τὸν 

\ ‘ 7 > ¢ 
ἀδελφόν, οὐαὶ διὰ τὸν πατέρα, ὁ δ᾽, ἄν wor 
“ n ΄ 3} 7 

εἰπεῖν ἀναγκασθῇ, “ovat por” ἐπιστήσας λέγει 


2. “δι ἐμέ. προαίρεσιν γὰρ οὐδὲν δύναται κωλῦσαι 
’ ? \ e 4 
8 ἢ βλάψαι ἀπροαίρετον εἰ μὴ αὐτὴ ἑαυτήν. ἂν 


> f \ , ο 
οὖν ἐπὶ τοῦτο ῥέψωμεν καὶ αὐτοί, ὥσθ᾽ ὅταν 


1 Koraes after Schegk: κρίνηι 5. 








1 On This point see the Introduction, Vol. I, p, xx: 
‘‘ Every man bears the exclusive responsibility himself for 
his own good or evil, since it is impossible to imagine a 
moral order in which one person does the wrong and another, 
the innocent, suffers”; or, as here, where a person might do 
wrong in the moral sphere, and yet not suffer also in the 
moral sphere. Compare also the note on I. 28, 10, in Vol, I. 


114 


BOOK III. xvi. 5-x1rx. 3 


another.1 Again, it is your function to defend your- 
self firmly, respectfully, without passion. Other- 
wise, you have destroyed within you the son, the 
respectful man, the man of honour. What then? 
Is the judge secure? No; but he too runs just as 
great a risk. Why, then, are you afraid of what 
decision he is going to render? What have you to 
do with another man’s evil? Your own evil is to 
make a bad defence; only guard against that, but 
just as being condemned or not being condemned is 
another’s function, so it is another’s evil. “So-and- 
so threatens you.” Mer No. “He blames you.” 
He himself will attend to how he is performing his 
own proper function. “He is on the point of con- 
demning you unjustly.” Poor devil! 


CHAPTER XIX 


What is the position of the layman, and what that of 
the philosopher ? 


Tue first difference between a layman and a 
philosopher: The one says, ‘Woe is me because 
of my child, my brother, woe because of my father ”’ ; 
and the other, if he can ever be compelled to say, 
“Woe is me,” adds, after a pause, “because of my- 
self.”’ For nothing outside the sphere of the moral 
purpose can hamper or injure the moral purpose; it 
alone can hamper or injure itself. If, then, we too tend 
in thistlatter direction so that, whenever we go amiss, 


This general position, which as an unverifiable postulate 
underlies the whole Stoic philosophy, and is the very starting- 
point of their whole ‘system of thinking, is what might 
be styled the πρῶτον ψεῦδος of Stoicism. 

Tis 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


δυσοδῶμεν, αὑτοὺς αἰτιᾶσθαι καὶ μεμνῆσθαι, ὅτι 
οὐδὲν ἄλλο ταραχῆς ἢ ἀκαταστασίας αἴτιόν 
ἐστιν ἢ δόγμα, ὀμνύω ὑμῖν πάντας θεούς, ὅτι 

4 προεκόψαμεν. νῦν δ ἄλλην ὁδὸν ἐξ ἀρχῆς 
ἐληλύθαμεν. εὐθὺς ἔτι παίδων ἡμῶν ὄντων ἡ 
τιτθή, εἴ ποτε προσεπταίσαμεν χάσκοντες, 
οὐχὶ ἡμῖν ἐπέπλησσεν, ἀλλὰ τὸν λίθον ἐ ἔτυπτεν. 
τί γὰρ ἐποίησεν ὁ λίθος ; διὰ τὴν τοῦ παιδίου 

ὅ σου μωρίαν ἔδει μεταβῆναι αὐτόν ; πάλιν ἂν μὴ 
εὕρωμεν. φαγεῖν ἐκ βαλανείου, οὐδέποθ' ἡμῶν 
καταστέλλει, τὴν ἐπιθυμίαν ὁ παιδαγωγός, ἀχλὰ 
δέρει τὸν μάγειρον. ἄνθρωπε, μὴ γὰρ ἐκείνου 
σε παιδαγωγὸν κατεστήσαμεν ; ἀλλὰ τοῦ παιδίου 

6 ἡμῶν' τοῦτο ἐπανόρθου, τοῦτο ὠφέλει. οὕτως 
καὶ αὐξηθέντες φαινόμεθα παιδία. παῖς yap ἐν 
μουσικοῖς ὁ ἄμουσος, ἐν γραμματικοῖς ὁ ἀγράμ- 
patos,” ἐν βίῳ ὁ ἀπαίδευτος. 


f t/ 9 \ , ~ 3 \ 3 
κ΄. “Ott ἀπὸ πάντων τῶν ἐκτὸς ἐστιν 
5 mt 
ὠφελεῖσθαι. 


1 ᾿Επὶ τῶν θεωρητικῶν φαντασιῶν πάντες 
σχεδὸν τὸ ἀγαθὸν καὶ τὸ κακὸν ἐν ἡμῖν ἀπέ- 
2 λίπον, οὐχὶ δ᾽ ἐν τοῖς ἐκτός. οὐδεὶς λέγει 
ἀγαθὸν τὸ ἡμέραν. εἶναι, κακὸν τὸ νύκτα εἶναι, 
μέγιστον δὲ κακῶν τὸ τρία τέσσαρα εἶναι. 

8 ἀλλὰ τί; τὴν μὲν ἐπιστήμην ἀγαθόν, τὴν δ᾽ 
ἀπάτην κακόν, ὥστε καὶ περὶ αὐτὸ τὸ ψεῦδος 
ἀγαθὸν συν πασθαϊ, τὴν ἐπιστήμην τοῦ ψεῦδος 


1 Wolf: προέκοψεν Κ. 2 3: ἀγραμμάτικος 8. 
116 


BOOK III. xix. 3—xx. 3 


we blame ourselves, and bear in mind that nothing 
but judgement is responsible for the disturbance of 
our peace of mind and our inconstancy, I swear to 
you by all the gods that we have been making pro- 
gress. But as it is, we have taken a different course 
from the start. Even while we were still children, 
our nurse, if ever we bumped into something, when 
we were going along with our mouths open, did not 
scold us, but used to beat the stone. Why, what 
did the stone do? Ought it to have moved out of 
the road because of your childish folly? And again, 
if we when children don’t find something to eat 
after our bath, our attendant never checks our 
appetite, but he cudgels the cook. Man, we didn’t 
make you the cook’s attendant, did we? but our 
child’s. Correct him, help him. So, even when we 
have grown up, we look like children. For it is 
being a child to be unmusical in things musical, to 
be unlettered in things literary, to be uneducated in 
life. 


CHAPTER XX 


That it is possible to derive advantage from everything 
external 


In the case of our intellectual impressions practi- 
cally all men have agreed that the good and the 
evil are in ourselves, and not in externals. Nobody 
calls the statement that it is day, good, or that it is 
night; bad, and the greatest of evils, the statement 
that three is four. But what? They call knowledge 
good, and error evil; so that even in regard to what 
is false there arises a good, that is, the knowledge 


3 Schweighiuser : ἀπάτην S. 
117 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


oy 3 xv > e \ Le a) ? 
εἶναι αὐτό. ἔδει οὖν οὕτως καὶ ἐπὶ τοῦ βίου. 
¢ / > a ΄ δὲ “ A » θ 
ὑγεία ἀγαθόν, νοσος δὲ κακόν; οὔ, ἄνθρωπε. 
J % “ Ν “ e ? 3 f Ν “~ 
ἀλλὰ τί; TO καλῶς ὑγιαίνειν ἀγαθὸν, TO κακῶς 
, tf \ 3 Ν / 27 > 
κακόν. ---- Ὥστε καὶ ἀπὸ νόσου ἔστιν ὠφελη- 
θῇ Te θ ͵ t > \ θ ἤ \ 3 
ναι ;---[ὃν θεὸν σοι ἀπὸ θανάτου γὰρ οὐκ 
\ 
ἔστιν; ἀπὸ πηρώσεως yap οὐκ ἔστιν; μικρά 
΄ [4 \ Pa “~ de 3 3 7 
σοι δοκεῖ ὁ Μενοικεὺς ὠφεληθῆναι, ὅτ᾽ ἀπέ- 
: Τ » / 3 \ ᾿] , μὴ Φ 
θνῃσκεν ;---[οιαῦτά τις εἰπὼν ὠφεληθείη 5. οἷα 
4 “ > f Vv 2 3 > + 
ἐκεῖνος @beAnbn.— Ea, ἄνθρωπε, οὐκ ἐτήρησεν 
τὸν φιλόπατριν, τὸν μεγαλόφρονα, τὸν πιστόν, 
Ν Ἂ ‘ ? f δὲ > nN 3 b 7 
Tov γενναῖον ; ἐπιζήσας δὲ οὐκ av? ἀπώλλυεν 
ταῦτα πάντα; οὐ περιεποιεῖτο τὰ ἐναντία; τὸν 
δειλὸν οὐκ ἀνελάμβανεν, τὸν ἀγεννῆ, τὸν μισό- 
\ val 
πατριν, τὸν φιλόψυχον ; ἄγε δοκεῖ cor μικρὰ 
a 3 “ 
ὠφεληθῆναι ἀποθανών ; οὔ' ἀλλ᾽ ὁ τοῦ ᾿Αδμήτον 
Ἀ / 5 ) , ed 3 ran 
πατὴρ μεγάλα ὠφελήθη Orcas οὕτως ἀγεννῶς 
καὶ ἀθλίως ; ὕστερον γὰρ οὐκ ἀπέθανεν; παύ- 
A n 
σασθε, τοὺς θεοὺς ὑμῖν, τὰς ὕλας θαυμάζοντες, 
᾿] \ , fa) “~ ων 
παύσασθ' ἑαυτοὺς δούλους ποιοῦντες πρῶτον τῶν 
πραγμάτων, εἶτα δι’ αὐτὰ καὶ τῶν ἀνθρώπων 
τῶν ταῦτα περιποιεῖν ἢ ἀφαιρεῖσθαι δυνα- 
μένων. 
Ἔστιν οὖν ἀπὸ τούτων ὠφεληθῆναι ;---Απὸ 
πάντων.--[Καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ δοιδοροῦντος ;—Ti δ᾽ 
Ἵ " ‘ 3 \ t ἔ ‘\ 
ὠφελεῖ τὸν ἀθλητὴν ὁ προσγυμναζόμενος; τὰ 
1 Bentley: σου 3, : 
5. # after this word is deleted by 8. 
3 ἄν added by Upton, after Schegk.. 
* Bentley and Shaftesbury, about the same time: 
ὑμῶν 5. 
ττὸ 


BOOK III. xx. 3-9 


that the false zs false. So it ought to be, then, also 
with our life. Is health a good, and illness an evil? 
No, man. What then? To be well for a good end 
is good, to be well for an evil end is evil.—So that it 
is possible to derive advantage even from illness, you 
mean ?—Whry, I call God to witness, isn’t it possible 
to derive advantage from death? Why, isn’t it 
possible from lameness?! Do you think that Me- 
noeceus? derived but little good when he died --- 
May the one who says anything like that derive the 
same sort of good that he did!—Ho, there, man, 
did he not maintain the patriot that he was, the 
high-minded man, the man of fidelity, the man of 
honour? And had he lived on, would he not have 
lost all these? Would he not have won the very 
opposite? Would he not have acquired the character 
of the coward, the ignoble man, the disloyal, the 
lover of his own life? Come now, do you think that 
Menoeceus derived but little good by his death? 
Oh, no! But the father of Admetus derived great 
good from living so ignobly and wretchedly, did 
he? Why, didn’t he die later? Make an end, I 
adjure you by the gods, of admiring material things, 
make an end of turning yourselves into slaves, in 
the first place, of things, and then, in the second 
place, on their account, slaves also of the men who 
are able to secure or to take away these things. 

Is it possible, then, to derive advantage from 
these things?—Yes, from everything.—Even from 
the inan who reviles me ?—And what good does his 
wrestling-companion do the athlete? The very 


i Perhaps a reference to his owncase. See Introd. p. ix. ἢν, 
in Vol. I. 
* Who gave his life to save his native city, Thebes. 


119 


10 


11 


18 


14 


15 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


μέγιστα. καὶ οὗτος ἐμοῦ προγυμναστὴς γίνεται" 
τὸ ἀνεκτικὸν μου γυμνάζει, τὸ ἀόργητον, τὸ 
πρᾷον. οὔ" ἀλλ᾽ ὁ μὲν τοῦ τραχήλου καθάπτων 
καὶ τὴν ὀσφύν μου καὶ τοὺς ὥμους καταρτίξων 
ὠφελεῖ με καὶ ὁ ἀλείπτης καλῶς ποιῶν λέγει 
“ἄρον ὕπερον ἀμφοτέραις," 1 καὶ ὅσῳ βαρύτερός 
ἐστιν ἐκεῖνος, τοσούτῳ μᾶνλον ὠφελοῦμαι eyo" 
εἰ δέ τις πρὸς ἀοργησίαν με γυμνάζει, οὐκ 
ὠφελεῖ με; τοῦτ᾽ ἔστι τὸ μὴ εἰδέναι ἀπ 
ἀνθρώπων ὠφελεῖσθαι. κακὸς γείτων; αὑτῷ: 
ἀλλ᾽ ἐμοὶ ἀγαθός" γυμνάξει μου τὸ εὔγνωμον, 
τὸ ἐπιεικές. κακὸς πατήρ; αὑτῷ' ἀλλ᾽ ἐμοὶ 
ἀγαθός. τοῦτ᾽ ἔστι τὸ τοῦ Ἑρμοῦ, ῥαβδίον" 
“οὗ θέλεις," pacity,” “ἅψαι καὶ χρυσοῦν ἔσται. 
ov’ GAN ὃ θέλεις φέρε κἀγὼ αὐτὸ ἀγαθὸν 
ποιήσω. φέρε νόσον, φέρε θάνατον, φέρε ἀπο- 
ρίαν, φέρε λοιδορίαν, δίκην τὴν περὶ τῶν ἐσχά- 
των" πάντα ταῦτα τῷ ῥαβδίῳ τοῦ “Ἑρμοῦ 
ὠφέλιμα ἔσται. “τὸν θάνατον τί ποιήσεις ; 

τί γὰρ ado ἢ ἵνα σε κοσμήσῃ ἢ ἵνα δείξῃς 3 

ἔργῳ δι’ αὐτοῦ, τί ἐστὶν ἄνθρωπος τῷ βουλήματι 
τῆς , φύσεως παρακολουθῶν ; τὴν νόσον τί 
ποιήσεις ; δείξω αὐτῆς τὴν φύσιν, διαπρέψω 
ἐν αὐτῇ, εὐσταθήσω, εὐροήσω, τὸν ἰατρὸν οὐ 
κολακεύσω, οὐκ εὔξομαι ἀποθανεῖν. τί ἔτι 
ἄλλο ἌΞΕΙ πᾶν ὃ ἂν δῷς, ἐγὼ αὐτὸ ποιήσω 
μακάριον, εὐδαιμονικόν, σεμνόν, ζηλωτόν. 


Ζ Schweighauser : : ὑπὲρ ἀμφοτέρας S. 

2 Upton: φησίν 8. Cicero, Of. 1. 158: Quod si omnia 
nobis... quasi virguia divina, ut avunt, suppeditarent, shows 
clearly that this is a proverbial saying. 

3. Reiske: δείξῃ σε δ. 


120 


BOOK III. xx. 9-15 


greatest. So also my reviler becomes one who 
prepares me for my contest; he exercises my 
patience, my dispassionateness, my gentleness. You 
say: No. But the man who lays hold of my neck 
and gets my loins and my shoulders into proper 
shape helps me, and the rubber does well when 
he says, “ Lift the pestle with both hands,’’+ and 
the heavier it is, the more good I get out of doing 
so; whereas, if a man trains me to be dispassionate, 
does he do me no good? Your attitude means that 
you do not know how to derive advantage from 
men. Is your neighbour bad? Yes, for himself; 
but for me he is good; he exercises my good dis- 
position, my fair-mindedness. Is your father bad? 
Yes, for himself; but for me he is good. This is 
the magic wand of Hermes. “Touch what you 
will,” the saying goes, “and it will turn into gold.” 
Nay, but bring whatever you will and J will turn it 
into a good. Bring disease, bring death, bring poverty, 
reviling, peril of life in court; all these things will 
become helpful at a touch from the magic wand of 
Hermes. “ What will you make of death?’’ Why, 
what else but make it your glory, or an opportunity 
for you to show in deed thereby what sort of person 
a man is who follows the will of nature. ‘ What 
will you make of disease?” 1 will show its char- 
acter, I will shine in it, I will be firm, I will be 
serene, I will not fawn upon my physician, I will 
not pray for death. What else do you still seek? 
Everything that you give I will turn into some- 
thing blessed, productive of happiness, august, 
enviable. 


1 The physical exercise referred to in ITI. 12, 9. 


I2TI 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


16 Ov ἀλλὰ “ βλέπε μὴ νοσήσῃς" κακόν ἐστιν." 
οἷον εἴ τίς ἔλεγεν ὼ βλέπε μὴ λάβῃς ποτὲ φαντα- 
σίαν τοῦ τὰ τρία τέσσαρα εἶναι" κακόν ἐστιν. 
ἄνθρωπε, πῶς κακὸν ; ; ἂν ὃ δεῖ περὶ αὐτοῦ 
ὑπολάβω, πῶς ἔτι με βλάψει; ; οὐχὶ δὲ μᾶλλον 

17 καὶ ὠφελήσει ; ; ἂν οὖν περὶ πενίας ὃ δεῖ ὑπολάβω, 
ἂν περὶ νόσου, ἂν περὶ ἀναρχίας, οὐκ ἀρκεῖ μοι; 
οὐκ ὠφέλιμα ἔσται ; πῶς οὖν ἔτι ἐν τοῖς ἐκτὸς 
τὰ κακὰ καὶ τἀγαθὰ δεῖ με ζητεῖν ; ; 

ig ᾿Αλλὰ τί; ταῦτα μέχρι, ὧδε, εἰς οἶκον δ᾽ οὐδεὶς 
ἀποφέρει" ἀλλ᾽ εὐθὺς πρὸς τὸ παιδάριον πόλε- 
μος, πρὸς τοὺς γείτονας, πρὸς τοὺς TKOWAVTAS, 

19 πρὸς TOUS καταγελάσαντας. καλῶς γένοιτο 
Λεσβίῳ, ὅτι με καθ᾽ ἡμέραν ἐξελέγχει μηδὲν 
εἰδότα. 


͵ἴἵ \ \ 3 Κα, 3 oN \ ΄ 
κα΄. Πρὸς τοὺς εὐκόλως ἐπὶ τὸ σοφιστεύειν 
ἐρχομένους. 


1 Ὅτι οἱ 1 τὰ θεωρήματα ἀναλαβόντες ψιλὰ 
εὐθὺς αὐτὰ ἐξεμέσαι θέλουσιν ὡς οἱ στομαχικοὶ 
2 τὴν τροφήν. πρῶτον. αὐτὰ 3 πέψον, εἶθ᾽ οὕτως 
οὐδ μὴ ἐξεμέσῃς' εἰ δὲ μή, ἔμετος τῷ ὄντι 
8 γίνεται, πρᾶγμ᾽ ἀκάθαρτον ὦ καὶ ἄβρωτον. ἀλλ᾽ 


1 οἱ added by Schenkl. | 2 Richards: αὐτό 8, 
3 Kronenberg: οὕτω μή ὃ. 
4 Wolf: καθαρ ὄν S. But possibly the reading can be 
retained (with Schegk) in the sense: ‘‘ What was clean 
food becomes mere vomit and unfit to eat.” 





1 That is, no farther than the class-room. 

* Presumably some scoffer or irritating person known to 
the audience, 
122 


BOOK III, xx. 16-xx1. 3 


Not so you; but, “ Watch out that you don’t get 
ill; it’s bad.” Just as if someone said, “ Watch out 
that you never get the impression that three are 
four; it’s bad.” Man, how do you mean “bad”’? 
If I get the right idea of it, how is it going to hurt 
me any more? Will it not rather even do me good? 
If, then, I get the right idea about poverty, or 
disease, or not holding office, am I not satisfied? 
Will they not be helpful tome? How, then, would 
you have me seek any longer amongst externals for 
things evil and things good? 

But what? These things go thus far,+ but nobody 
takes them home with him; nay, as soon as we 
leave here, there is war on with our slave attendant, 
our neighbours, those that mock, and those that 
laugh at us. Blessed be Lesbius,? because he con- 
victs me every day of knowing nothing ! 


CHAPTER XXI 


To those who enter light-heartedly upon the profession 
of lecturing 


Tuose who have learned the principles and nothing 
else are eager to throw them up immediately,? just 
as persons with a weak stomach throw up their food. 
First digest your principles, and then you will surely 
not throw them up this way. Otherwise they are 
mere vomit, foul stuff and unfit to eat. But after 


3 Compare Schiller: 
‘Was sie gestern gelernt, das wollen sie heute schon 
lehren ; 
Ach, was haben die Herrn doch fiir ein kurzes 
Ged&arm,” 
123 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν ἀναδοθέντων δεῖξόν τίνα ἡμῖν μετα- 
βολὴν τοῦ ἡγεμονικοῦ τοῦ σεαυτοῦ, ὡς οἱ ἀθληταὶ 
τοὺς «ὦμους, ἀφ᾽ ὧν ἐγυμνάσθησαν καὶ ἔφαγον, 
ὡς οἱ τὰς τέχνας ἀναλαβόντες, ἀφ᾽ ὧν ἔμαθον. 
4 οὐκ ἔρχεται ὁ τέκτων καὶ λέγει “ ἀκούσατέ μου 
διαλεγομένου περὶ τῶν τεκτονικῶν," ἀλλ᾽ ἐκμισ- 
θωσάμενος. οἰκίαν ταύτην κατασκευάσας δείκ- 
5 uot, ὅτι ἔχει τὴν τέχνην. τοιοῦτόν TL καὶ σὺ 
ποίησον" φάγε ὡς ἄνθρωπος, πίε ὡς ἄνθρωπος, 
κοσμήθητι, γάμησον, παιδοποίησον, πολίτευσαι" 
ἀνάσχου λοιδορίας, ἔνεγκε ἀδελφὸν ἀγνώμονα, 
6 ἔνεγκε “πατέρα, ἔνεγκε υἱόν, “γείτονα, σύνοδον. 
ταῦτα ἡμῖν δεῖξον, ἵ ἵν᾽ ἴδωμεν, ὅτε μεμάθηκας ταῖς 
ἀληθείαις τι τῶν φιλοσόφων. οὔ' ἀλλ᾽ ὡ ἐλθόν- 
τες ἀκούσατέ μου σχόλια "λέγοντος." ὕπαγε, 
ζήτει τίνων κατεξεράσεις. “ καὶ μὴν ἐγὼ ὑμῖν 
ἐξηγήσομαι τὰ Χρυσίππεια ὡς οὐδείς, τὴν λέξιν 
ιαλύσω καθαρώτατα, προσθήσω ἄν που καὶ 
᾿Αντιπάτρου καὶ ᾿Αρχεδήμου φοράν. 
8. Εἶτα τούτου ἕνεκα ἀπολίπωσιν οἱ νέοι τὰς 
πατρίδας καὶ τοὺς γονεῖς τοὺς αὑτῶν, ἵν᾿ ἐλθόντες 
9 λεξείδιά σου ἐξηγουμένου ἀκούσωσιν; οὐ δεῖ 
αὐτοὺς ὑποστρέψαι ἀνεκτικούς, συνεργητικούς, 
ἀπαθεῖς, d ἀταράχους, ἔχοντάς τι ἐφόδιον τοιοῦτον 
εἰς τὸν βίον, ad οὗ ὁρμώβενοι φέρειν δυνήσονται 
τὰ συμπίπτοντα καλῶς καὶ κοσμεῖσθαι ὑπ᾽ 
10 αὐτῶν ; καὶ πόθεν σοι μεταδιδόναι τούτων ὧν 
οὐκ ἔχεις ; αὐτὸς γὰρ ἄλλο τι ἐποίησας ἐξ ἀρχῆς 





1 Called principes dialecticorum by Cicero, Acad. II. 


te 


124 


BOOK IIT, χχι, 3-10 


you have digested these principles, show us some 
change in your governing principle that is due to 
them; as the athletes show their shoulders as the 
results of their exercising and eating, and as those 
who have mastered the arts can show the results of 
their learning. The builder does not come forward 
and say, “ Listen to me deliver a discourse about the 
art of building”; but he takes a contract for a 
house, builds it, and thereby proves that he possesses 
the art. Do something of the same sort yourself 
too; eat as a man, drink as a man, adorn yourself, 
marry, get children, be active as a citizen; endure 
revilings, bear with an unreasonable brother, father, 
son, neighbour, fellow-traveller. Show us that you 
can do these things, for us to see that in all truth 
you have learned something of the philosophers. 
No, but “Come and listen to me deliver my com- 
ments,” you say. Go to! Look for people on 
whom to throw up! “Yes, but I will set forth to 
you the doctrines of Chrysippus as no one else can ; 
his language I will analyse so as to make it perfectly 
clear; possibly I will throw in a bit of the vivacity of 
Antipater and Archedemus.”’ } 

And then it’s for this, is it, that the young men 
are to leave their fatherlands and their own parents, 
—to come and listen to you interpreting trifling 
phrases? Ought they not to be, when they return 
home, forbearing, ready to help one another, tranquil, 
with a mind at peace, possessed of some such provision 
for the journey of life, that, starting out with it, 
they will be able to bear well whatever happens, and 
to derive honour from it? And where did you get 
the ability to impart to them these things which you 
do not possess yourself? Why, from the first did 


11 


12 


13 


14 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ἢ περὶ ταῦτα κατετρίβης, πῶς οἱ συλλογισμοὶ 
ἀναλυθήσονται, πῶς οἱ μεταπίπτοντες, πῶς οἱ 
τῷ ἠρωτῆσθαι περαίνοντες; “ GND ὁ δεῖνα 
σχολὴν ἔχει" διὰ τί μὴ κἀγὼ σχῶ ;᾽ οὐκ εἰκῆ 
ταῦτα γίνεται, ἀνδράποδον, οὐδ᾽ ὡς ἔτυχεν, ἀλλὰ 
καὶ ἡλικίαν εἶναι δεῖ καὶ βίον καὶ θεὸν ἡγεμόνα. 
οὔ" ἀλλ᾽ ἀπὸ λιμένος 1 μὲν οὐδεὶς ἀνάγεται μὴ 
θύσας τοῖς θεοῖς καὶ παρακαλέσας αὐτοὺς βοη- 
θοὺς οὐδὲ σπείρουσιν ἄλλως οἱ ἄνθρωποι εἰ μὴ 
τὴν Δήμητρα ἐπικαλεσάμενοι: τηλικούτου δ᾽ 
ἔργου ἁψάμενός τις ἄνευ θεῶν ἀσφαλῶς ἅψεται 
καὶ οἱ τούτῳ προσιόντες εὐτυχῶς προσελεύσον- 
ται; τί ἄλλο ποιεῖς, ἄνθρωπε, ἢ τὰ μυστήρια 
ἐξορχῇ καὶ λέγεις “ οἴκημά ἐστι καὶ ἐν ᾿Ελευσῖνι, 
ἰδοὸὸ καὶ ἐνθάδε. ἐκεῖ ἱεροφάντης: καὶ ἐγὼ 
ποιήσω ἱεροφάντην. ἐκεῖ κῆρυξ' κἀγὼ κήρυκα 
καταστήσω. ἐκεῖ δαᾳαδοῦχος" κἀγὼ δᾳδοῦχον. 
ἐκεῖ δᾷδες" καὶ ἐνθάδε. αἱ φωναὶ αἱ αὐταί" τὰ 
γινόμενα τί διαφέρει ταῦτα ἐκείνων ;"; ἀσε- 
βέστατε ἄνθρωπε, οὐδὲν διαφέρει ; καὶ παρὰ 
τόπον ταὐτὰ3 ὠφελεῖ καὶ παρὰ καιρόν; οὐ" 
ἀλλὰ καὶ μετὰ θυσίας δὲ καὶ per εὐχῶν καὶ 
προηγνευκότα καὶ προδιακείμενον τῇ γνώμῃ, ὅτι 


1 Wolf: ἀπολιπόμενος S. 

2 Oldfather: καὶ παρὰ τόπον ταῦτα ὠφελεῖ καὶ παρὰ καιρόν' 
καὶ μετὰ θυσίας S and all editors, except Upton, who saw 
that the passage was corrupt, but not how to heal. it. 
ταῦτα is ambiguous and misses the obvious point. Besides, 


within eight lines, to have exactly the same phrases, παρὰ 
aentr ὅπ πυρὰ καιρόν, in a diametrically opposite sense, 
where the text is certainly sound, seems to me intolerable. 
The plain sense of the entire context appears to require 


these changes, the first of which is the slightest imaginable, 
and the second, not absolutely necessary perhaps, in the 


BOOK III. xxi. 10-14 


you ever do anything but wear yourself out over the 
question how solutions can be found for syllogisms, 
for the arguments that involve equivocal premisses, 
and those which derive syllogisms by the process 
of interrogation?! “ But So-and-so lectures; why 
shouldn’t I too?’ Slave, these things are not done 
recklessly, nor at random, but one ought to be of a 
certain age, and lead a certain kind of life, and have 
God as his guide. You say: No. But no man sails 
out of a harbour without first sacrificing to the gods 
and invoking their aid, nor do men sow hit-or-miss, 
but only after first calling upon Demeter; and yet 
will a man, if he has laid his hand to so great a task 
as this without the help of the gods, be secure in so 
doing, and will those who come to him be fortunate 
in so coming? What else are you doing, man, but 
vulgarizing the Mysteries, and saying, “There is a 
chapel at Eleusis; see, there is one here too. There 
is a hierophant there; I too will make a hierophant. 
There is a herald there; I too will appoint a herald. 
There is a torch-bearer there; I too will have a 
torch-bearer. There are torches there ; and here too. 
The words said are the same; and what is the 
difference between what is done here and what is 
done there?”? Most impious man, is there no 
difference? Are the same acts helpful, if they are 
performed at the wrong place and at the wrong time? 
Nay, but a man ought to come also with a sacrifice, 
and with prayers, and after a preliminary purification, 
and with his mind predisposed to the idea that he 


1 See note on I. 7, 1. 


abrupt and dramatic style of Epictetus, but probably what 
would have been written, had he been writing instead of 
speaking. 

; {27 


16 


18 


19 


21 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


“- Ἀ ἴα, ΝᾺ ἢ 
ἱεροῖς προσελεύσεται καὶ ἱεροῖς παλαιοῖς. οὕτως 
- 3 
ὠφέλιμα γίνεται Ta μυστήρια, οὕτως εἰς φαντα- 
σίαν ἐρχόμεθα, ὅτι ἐπὶ παιδείᾳ καὶ ἐπανορθώσει 
τοῦ βίον κατεστάθη πάντα ταῦτα ὑπὸ τῶν πα- 
λαιῶν. σὺ δ᾽ ἐξαγγέλλεις αὐτὰ καὶ ἐξορχῇ παρὰ 
καιρόν, παρὰ τόπον, ἄνευ θυμάτων, ἄνευ ayretast 
οὐκ ἐσθῆτα ἔχεις ἣν δεῖ τὸν ἱεροφάντην, οὐ κόμην, 
> id ω a 3 4 3 ¢ a > 
οὐ στρόφιον οἷον δεῖ, οὐ φωνήν, οὐχ ἡλικίαν, οὐχ 
φΦ ¢ > nm > 3 | το f Ν x 
ἥγνευκας WS ἐκεῖνος, ἄλλ AVTAS μόνας Τὰς φωνᾶς 
2 \ f t 4 3 ς 4 by \ 
ἀνειληφὼς λέγεις. ἱεραί εἰσιν αἱ φωναὶ αὐταὶ 
καθ᾽ αὑτάς ; 
uv ,ὔ a 7 \ “ , na Va 
Αλλον τρόπον δεῖ ἐπὶ ταῦτα ἐλθεῖν' μέγα 
ἐστὶ τὸ πρᾶγμα, μυστικόν ἐστιν, οὐχ ὡς ἔτυχεν 
οὐδὲ τῷ τυχόντι δεδομένον. ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ σοφὸν 
Ν an (os 
εἶναι τυχὸν ἐξαρκεῖ πρὸς TO ἐπιμεχηθῆναι νέων' 
δεῖ δὲ καὶ προχειρότητά τινὰ εἶναι καὶ ἐπιτὴ- 
nan \ nw 
δειότητα πρὸς τοῦτο, νὴ τὸν Δία, Kal σῶμα ποιὸν 
καὶ πρὸ πάντων τὸν θεὸν συμβουλεύειν ταύτην 
τὴν χώραν κατασχεῖν, ὡς Σωκράτει συνεβού- 
λευεν τὴν ἐλεγκτικὴν χώραν ἔχειν, ὡς Διογένει 
τὴν βασιλικὴν καὶ ἐπιπληκτικήν, ὧς Ζήνωνι τὴν 
\ 2 » 
διδασκαλικὴν καὶ δογματικήν, σὺ δ᾽ ἰατρεῖον 
ἀνοίγεις ἄλλο οὐδὲν ἔχων ἢ φάρμακα, ποῦ δὲ ἢ 
πῶς ἐπιτίθεται ταῦτα, μήτε εἰδὼς μήτε πολυ- 
πραγμονήσας. “ἰδοὺ ἐκεῖνος ταῦτα τὰ ἢ, κολ- 
, 3 Ν 5d 32 7 5 Ν \ / 
λύρια' κἀγὼ ἔχω. μὴ τι οὖν καὶ THY δύναμιν 
‘ s 
τὴν χρηστικὴν αὐτοῖς ; μή TL οἷδας καὶ πότε 
1 s(and Bentley): ὑγιείας 8. 
2 τά added by Koraes. 
128 


BOOK III. xxi. 14-21 


will be approaching holy rites,and holy rites of great 
antiquity. Only thus do the Mysteries become 
helpful, only thus do we arrive at the impression 
that all these things were established by men of 
old time for the purpose of education and for the 
amendment of our life. But you are publishing the 
Mysteries abroad and vulgarizing them, out of time, 
out of place, without sacrifices, without purification ; 
you do not have the dress which the hierophant 
ought to wear, you do not have the proper head of 
hair, nor head-band, nor voice, nor age; you have 
not kept yourself pure as he has, but you have 
picked up only the words which he utters, and 
recite them, Have the words a sacred force all by 
themselves ? 

One ought to approach these matters in a different 
fashion ; the affair is momentous, it is full of mystery, 
not a chance gift, nor given to all comers. Nay, it 
may be that not even wisdom is all that is needed 
for the care of the young; one ought also to have a 
certain readiness and special fitness for this task, by 
Zeus, and a particular physique, and above all the 
counsel of God advising him to occupy this office, 
as God counselled Socrates to take the office of 
examining and confuting men, Diogenes the office of 
rebuking men in a kingly manner, and Zeno that of 
instructing men and laying down doctrines. But you 
are opening up a doctor’s office although you possess 
no equipment other than drugs, but when or how 
these drugs are applied you neither know nor have 
ever taken the trouble to learn. “See,’’ you say, 
“that man has these eye-salves, and so have J.” 
Have you, then, at all the faculty of using them 
aright? Do you know at all when and how and for 


9% 


23 


24 


1 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


Kal πῶς ὠφελήσει καὶ τίνα ; τί οὖν ,κυβεύεις ἐν 
τοῖς μεγίστοις, τί ῥᾳδιουργεῖς, τί ἐπιχειρεῖς 
πράγματι μηδέν σου προσήκοντι ; ; ἄφες αὐτὸ τοῖς 
δυναμένοις, τοῖς κοσμοῦσι. μὴ προστρίβου καὶ 
αὐτὸς αἶσχος φιλοσοφίᾳ διὰ σαυτοῦ, μηδὲ γίνου 
μερος τῶν διαβαλλόντων τὸ ἔργον. ἀλλὰ εἴ σε 
ψυχαγωγεῖ τὰ θεωρήματα, καθήμενος αὐτὰ 
στρέφε αὐτὸς ἐπὶ σεαυτοῦ" φιλόσοφον δὲ μη- 
δέποτ᾽ εἴπης σεαυτὸν μηδ᾽ ἄλλον ἀνάσχῃ λέγον»- 
τος, ἀλλὰ λέγε “πεπλάνηται' ἐγὼ γὰρ οὔτ᾽ 
9. κ», 5) a ’ 203) ¢ a 3 5. κ᾽ 
ὀρέγομαι ἄλλως ἢ πρότερον οὐδ᾽ ὁρμῶ ἐπ᾽ ἄλλα 
ὮΝ , a +O? ὧ > f 
οὐδὲ συγκατατίθεμαι ἄλλοις οὐδ᾽ ὅλως ἐν χρήσει 
φαντασιῶν παρήλλαχά τι ἀπὸ τῆς πρότερον 
καταστάσεως. ταῦτα φρόνει καὶ λέγε περὶ 
σεαυτοῦ, εἰ θέλεις τὰ κατ᾽ ἀξίαν φρονεῖν" εἰ δὲ 
μή, κύβενε καὶ ποίει ἃ ποιεῖς. ταῦτα γάρ σοι 
7 
πρέπει. 


κβ΄. Ἰερὶ ἹΚυνισ μοῦ. 


Πυθομένου δὲ τῶν γνωρίμων τινὸς αὐτοῦ, ὃς 
ἐφαίνετο ἐπιρρεπῶς ἔχων πρὸς τὸ κυνίσαι, Lordy 
τινα εἶναι δεῖ τὸν κυνίζοντα καὶ τίς ἡ πρό- 
Anis ἡ τοῦ πράγματος, Σκεψόμεθα κατὰ 


2 σχολήν" τοσοῦτον δ᾽ ἔχω σοι εἰπεῖν, ὅτι ὁ δίχα 





1 The Cynics were the intransigent and uncompromising 
moralists, resembling the holy men, ascetics, and dervishes 
of the Orient. Epictetus idealizes them somewhat in this 
discourse, regarding them as a kind of perfected wise men, 


1:0 


BOOK III. xxi. 21—xxil. 2 


whom they will do good? Why, then, do you play 
at hazard in matters of the utmost moment, why do 
you take things lightly, why do you put your hand 
to a task that is altogether inappropriate for you? 
Leave it to those who are able to do it, and do it 
with distinction. Do not yourself by your own 
actions join the number of those who bring disgrace 
upon philosophy, and do not become one of those 
who disparage the profession. If, however, you find 
the principles of philosophy entertaining, sit down 
and turn them over in your mind all by yourself, 
but don’t ever call yourself a philosopher, and don’t 
allow anyone else to say it of you, but say, rather, 
“ He is mistaken; for my desire is no different from 
what it used to be, nor my choice, nor my assent, 
nor, in a word, have I changed at all, in my use of 
external impressions, from my former state.” Think 
this and say this about yourself, if you wish to think 
aright. If not, keep on playing at hazard and doing 
what you are doing now; for it becomes you. 


CHAPTER XXII 
On the calling of a Cynic 


Wuewn one of his acquaintances, who seemed to 
have an inclination to take up the calling of a Cynic, 
asked him what sort of a man the Cynic ought to 
be, and what was the fundamental conception of his 
calling, Epictetus said : We will consider it at leisure ; 
but I can tell you this much, that the man who lays 


like some of the early Christian anchorites, but points out 
very clearly that their style of life was not practicable for 
every man, indeed not even for one so humble and frugal as 
he himself was. 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


θεοῦ τηλικούτῳ πράγματι ἐπιβαλλόμενος θεο- 
χόλωτός ἐστι καὶ οὐδὲν ἄλλο ἢ δημοσίᾳ θέλει 
8 ἀσχημονεῖν. οὐδὲ γὰρ ἐν οἰκίᾳ καλῶς οἰκουμένῃ 
παρελθών τις αὐτὸς ἑαυτῷ λέγει “ἐμὲ δεῖ οἶκο- 
νόμον εἶναι." εἰ δὲ μή, ἐπιστραφεὶς ὁ κύριος 
καὶ ἰδὼν αὐτὸν σοβαρῶς διατασσόμενον, ἑλκύσας 
4 ἔτεμεν. οὕτως γίνεται καὶ ἐν τῇ μεγάλῃ ταύτῃ 
πόλει. ἔστι γάρ τις καὶ ἐνθάδ᾽ οἰκοδεσπότης 
δ ἕκαστα ὁ διατάσσων. “σὺ ἥλιος εἶ' δύνασαι 
περιερχόμενος ἐνιαυτὸν ποιεῖν καὶ ὥρας καὶ τοὺς 
καρποὺς αὔξειν καὶ τρέφειν καὶ ἀνέμους κινεῖν 
καὶ ἀνιέναι καὶ τὰ σώματα τῶν ἀνθρώπων θερ- 
μαίνειν συμμέτρως" ὕπαγε, περιέρχου καὶ οὕτως 
διακίνει ἀπὸ τῶν μεγίστων ἐπὶ τὰ μικρότατα. 
6 σὺ μοσχάριον εἶ: ὅταν ἐπιφανῇ λέων, τὰ σαυτοῦ 
πρᾶσσε" εἰ δὲ μή, οἰμώξεις. σὺ ταῦρος εἶ, προ- 
σελθὼν μάχου' σοὶ γὰρ τοῦτο ἐπιβάλλει καὶ 
1 πρέπει καὶ δύνασαι αὐτὸ ποιεῖν. σὺ δύνασαι 
ἡγεῖσθαι τοῦ στρατεύματος ἐπὶ "ἵλιον' ἴσθι 
᾿Αγαμέμνων. σὺ δύνασαι τῷ “Ἑκτορι μονο- 
8 μαχῆσαι' ἴσθι ᾿Αχιλλεύς." εἰ δὲ Θερσίτης 
παρελθὼν ἀντεποιεῖτο τῆς ἀρχῆς, ἢ οὐκ ἂν 
ἔτυχεν ἢ τυχὼν ἂν ἠσχημόνησεν ἐν πλείοσι 
μάρτυσι. 
9 Kai σὺ βούλευσαι ἱ περὶ tov? πράγματος ἐπι- 
10 μελῶς: οὐκ ἔστιν οἷον δοκεῖ σοι. “τριβώνιον 
καὶ νῦν φορῶ καὶ τόθ᾽ ὃ ἕξω,: κοιμῶμαι καὶ νῦν 
σκληρῶς καὶ τότε κοιμήσομαι, πηρίδιον προσ- 
λήψομαι καὶ ξύλον καὶ περιερχόμενος αἰτεῖν 
1 Upton from his “codex” ; συμβουλεῦσαι 3. 


2 rot added by Reiske. 3 Schenkl: τότ᾽ 8. 
4 Salmasius: ἔζω 9, | , 


132 


BOOK III. xxi, 2-10 


his hand to so great a matter as this without God, 
is hateful to Him, and his wish means nothing else 
than disgracing himself in public. For in a well- 
ordered house no one comes along and says to 
himself, “I ought to be manager of this house’; 
or if he does, the lord of the mansion, when he 
turns around and sees the fellow giving orders in 
a high and mighty fashion, drags him out and gives 
him a dressing down. So it goes also in this great 
city, the world; for here also there is a Lord of the 
Mansion who assigns each and every thing its place. 
« You are the sun; you have the power, as you make 
the circuit of the heavens, to produce the year and 
the seasons, to give increase and nourishment to the 
fruits, to stir and to calm the winds, and to give 
warmth in moderation to the bodies of men; arise, 
make the circuit of the heavens, and so set in motion 
all things from the greatest to the least. You area 
calf; when a lion appears, do what is expected of 
you; otherwise you will smart for it. You are a 
bull; come on and fight, for this is expected of you, 
it befits you, and you are able to do it. You are 
able to lead the host against Ilium; be Agamemnon. 
You are able to fight a duel with Hector; be 
Achilles.” But if Thersites came along and claimed 
command, either he would not have got it, or if he 
had, he would have disgraced himself in the presence 
of a multitude of witnesses. 

So do you also think about the matter carefully ; 
it is not what you think it is. “I wear a rough 
cloak even as it is, and J shall have one then; I 
have a hard bed even now, and so 1 shall then; I 
shall take to myself a wallet and a staff, and I shall 


1 Quite like modern dervishes. 


13 


14 


16 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ἄρξομαι τοὺς ἀπαντῶντας, λοιδορεῖν: κἂν ἴδω 
τινὼ δρωπακιζόμενον, ἐπιτιμήσω αὐτῷ, κἂν 
3 / 
TO κόμιον πεπλακότα ἢ ἐν κοκκίνοις περίπα- 
τοῦντα. εἰ τοιοῦτόν τε φαντάζῃ τὸ πρᾶγμα, 
a“ ‘ 4 / 
μακρὰν ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ" μὴ προσέλθῃς, οὐδέν ἐστι 
A ΄ 3 + eT " f 4 
πρὸς σέ. εἰ 6 οἷόν ἐστι φανταζόμενος οὐκ 
n ,ὔ 
ἀπαξιοῖς σεαυτόν, σκέψαι ἡλίκῳ πράγματι 
ἐπιχειρεῖς. 
ΜᾺ 2 a \ \ 3 7 “ 
Πρῶτον ἐν τοῖς κατὰ σαυτὸν οὐκέτι δεῖ σε 
id 2 3 \ 7 e “ a 3 Ὰ 
ὅμοιον ἐν οὐδενὶ φαίνεσθαι οἷς νῦν ποιεῖς, οὐ θεῷ 
> nn 3 bf θ , a μὴ , 1 ὃ ~ 
ἐγκαλοῦντα, οὐκ ἀνθρώπῳ" ὄρεξιν apat oe δεῖ 
παντελῶς, ἔκκλισιν ἐπὶ μόνα μεταθεῖναι τὰ 
προαιρετικά; σοὶ μὴ ὀργὴν εἶναι, μὴ μῆνιν, μὴ 
φθόνον, μὴ ἔλεον' μὴ κοράσιόν σοι φαίνεσθαι 
, \ 7 4 ΄ \ 
καλόν, μὴ δοξάριον, μὴ παιδάριον, μὴ πλακουν- 
; 3 a \ 5Ὁ 7 “ ef ἔ ΜΨ 
τάριον. ἐκεῖνο γὰρ εἰδέναι oe δεῖ, ὅτι οἱ ἄλλοι 
5» \ , f Ν \ 
ἄνθρωποι τοὺς τοίχους προβέβληνται Kai τὰς 
Ν {ν n 
οἰκίας καὶ τὸ σκότος, ὅταν τὶ τῶν τοιούτων 
n \ \ 4 Ν 27 
ποιῶσιν, καὶ τῶ κρύψοντα πολλὰ ἔχουσιν. 
κέκλεικε τὴν θύραν, ἕστακέν"5 τινα πρὸ τοῦ 
nw .« 6 wv er0 λέ Φ 3) 3 ,ὔ 3 
κουτῶνος" “ἂν τις ἔλθῃ, λέγε OTL ἔξω ἐστίν, οὐ 
7 "3 © ἈΝ 3 ? \ 7 ra 
σχολάζει. ὁ Κυνικὸς δ᾽ ἀντὶ πάντων τούτων 
ὀφείλει τὴν αἰδῷ προβεβλῆσθαι" εἰ δὲ μή, γυμνὸς 
\ ΄ / ἴω 
καὶ ἐν ὑπαίθρῳ ἀσχημονήσει. τοῦτο οἰκία ἐστὶν 
αὐτῷ, τοῦτο θύρα, τοῦτο οἱ ἐπὶ τοῦ κοιτῶνος, 
a la \ ~ 
τοῦτο σκότος. οὔτε yap θέλειν τι δεῖ ἀποκρύπτειν 
> Ν " e¢ ἴω 3 » 7 3 “~ 3 Fd 
αὐτὸν τῶν ἑαυτοῦ (εἰ δὲ μή, ἀπῆλθεν, ἀπώλεσε 
1 Wolf: ἀρέσαι 8. 2 Wolf: ἔστακέν 8. 
134 


BOOK [1]. xxu. 10-16 


begin to walk around and beg from those I meet, 
and revile them; and if I see someone who is getting 
rid of superfluous hair by the aid of pitch-plasters, 
or has a fancy cut to his hair, or is strolling about 
in scarlet clothes, I will come down hard on him.” If 
you fancy the affair to be something like this, give 
it a wide berth; don’t come near it, it is nothing for 
you. But if your impression of it is correct, and you 
do not think too meanly of yourself, consider the 
magnitude of the enterprise that you are taking in 
hand. ; 

First, in all that pertains to yourself directly 
you must change completely from your present 
practices, and must cease to blame God or man; 
you must utterly wipe out desire, and must turn 
your aversion toward the things which lie within 
the province of the moral purpose, and these only ; 
you must feel no anger, no rage, no envy, no pity ; 
no wench must look fine to you, no petty reputation, 
no boy-favourite, no little sweet-cake. For this 
you ought to know: Other men have the protection 
of their walls and their houses and darkness, when 
they do anything of that sort, and they have many 
things to hide them. A man closes his door, 
stations someone at the entrance to his bedroom: 
“If anyone comes, tell him ‘He is not at home, 
he is not at leisure.’”” But the Cynic, instead of 
all these defences, has to make his self-respect his 
protection; if he does not, he will be disgracing 
himself naked and out of doors. His self-respect 
is his house, his door, his guards at the entrance 
to his bedroom, his darkness. For neither ought 
he to wish to keep concealed anything that is his 
(otherwise he is lost, he has destroyed the Cynic 


125 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


τὸν Κυνικόν, τὸν ὕπαιθρον, τὸν ἐλεύθερον, ἦρκται 
τι τῶν ἐκτὸς φοβεῖσθαι, ἦρκται χρείαν ἔχειν 
τοῦ ἀποκρύψοντος) οὔτε ὅταν θέλῃ δύναται. ποῦ 


11 γὰρ αὑτὸν ἀποκρύψῃ ἢ πῶς ; ἂν δ᾽ ἀπὸ τύχης 5 
t 


18 


19 
20 


ἐμπέσῃ ὁ παιδευτὴς ὁ κοινός, O παιδαγωγός, οἷα 
πάσχειν ἀνάγκη ; ταῦτ᾽ οὖν δεδοικότα ἐπιθαρρεῖν 
οἷόν τ᾽ ἔτι ἐξ ὅλης ψυχῆς ἐπιστατεῖν τοῖς ἄλλοις 
ἀνθρώποις ; ἀμήχανον, ἀδύνατον. 

Πρῶτον οὖν τὸ ἡγεμονικὸν oe δεῖ τὸ σαυτοῦ 
καθαρὸν ποιῆσαι καὶ τὴν ἔνστασιν ταύτην" “νῦν 
ἐμοὶ ὕλη ἐστὶν ἡ ἐμὴ διάνοια, ὡς τῷ τέκτονι τὰ 
ξύλα, ὡς τῷ σκυτεῖ τὰ δέρματα" ἔργον δ᾽ ὀρθὴ 

\ 


21 χρῆσις τῶν φαντασιῶν. τὸ σωμάτιον δὲ οὐδὲν 


‘ > f+ \ ᾽ ‘4 Oe Ν > 94 7 
πρὸς ἐμέ: τὰ τούτου μέρη οὐδὲν πρὸς ἐμέ. θάνα- 
7 ¢ ti 
τος ; ἐρχέσθω, ὅταν θέλῃ, εἴτε ὅλου εἴτε μέρους 
, \ “a o~ 
τινός. φυγή ; ὃ καὶ ποῦ δύναταί τις ἐκβαλεῖν ; 
wn f 5 
ἔξω τοῦ κόσμου οὐ δύναται. ὅπου δ᾽ ἂν ἀπέλθω, 
ἐκεῖ ἥλιος, ἐκεῖ σελήνη, ἐκεῖ ἄστρα, ἐνύπνια, 
οἰωνοί, ἡ πρὸς θεοὺς ὁμιλία. 
+ s 
Eid’ οὕτως παρασκευασάμενον οὐκ ἔστι τούτοις 
Ἅ fal \ » 3 la 7 3 ? 
ἀρκεῖσθαι τὸν ταῖς ἀληθείαις Κυνικόν, ἀλλ 


3 


a i A 
εἰδέναι δεῖ, ὅτε ἄγγελος ἀπὸ τοῦ Διὸς ἀπέσταλται 


1 Wolf: ἐντός 8. 2 σύχηις S. 
3 Upton: φεῦγε S. 





1 That is, the trusted servant who attended constantly the 
boys of the well-to-do families, and in particular watched 
over their deportment and morals, 

2 ἐμπεσεῖν seems to me to be used as in 171, 7, 12. This is 
a rare meaning, indeed, but supported to some extent also 
by the gloss in Hesychius: ἐμπεσεῖν: eis δεσμωτήριον ἀχθῆναι. 
The word is also used of getting caught in a trap, Xenophon 
Mem. II. 1, 4: rots θηράτροις ἐμπίπτουσι, That is probably the 


136 


BOOK III, xxi. 16-23 


within him, the man of outdoor life, the free man ; 
he has begun to fear something external, he has 
begun to need something to conceal him), nor can 
he keep it concealed when he wishes to do so. For 
where will he conceal himself, or how? And if 
this instructor of us all, this “ pedagogue,” + chance 
to get caught,? what must he suffer! Can, then, a 
man who is afraid of all this continue with all his 
heart to supervise the conduct of other men? It 
cannot be done, it is impossible. 

In the first place, then, you must make your 
governing principle pure, and you must make 
the following your plan of life: “ From now on my 
mind is the material with which I have to work, as 
the carpenter has his timbers, the shoemaker his 
hides; my business is to make the right use of my 
impressions. My paltry body is nothing to me; 
the parts of it are nothing to me. Death? Let 
it come when it will, whether it be the death of 
the whole or some part. Exile? And to what place 
can anyone thrust me out? Outside the universe he 
eannot. But wherever I go, there are sun, moon, 
stars, dreams, omens, my converse with gods.” 

In the next place, the true Cynic, when he is 
thus prepared, cannot rest contented with this, but 
he must know that he has been sent by Zeus to men, 


original form of expression from which the intransitive use 
derives. Schenkl (not Schweighiuser, to whom I owe the 
above references to Hesychius and Xenophon) appears to me 
to be wrong in rendering the word ‘‘decipior,” although 
Matheson is inclined to follow him. Capps suggests that 
‘the κοινὸς παιδευτής is God,” and that ἐμπέσῃ means ‘* break 
in upon.” But that might be somewhat inconsistent with 
ἀπὸ τυχῆς, which seems hardly appropriate of an action on 
the part of God. 


137 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


καὶ πρὸς τοὺς ἀνθρώπους περὶ ἀγαθῶν καὶ κακῶν 
ὑποδείξων αὐτοῖς, ὅτε πεπλάνηνται καὶ ἀλλαχοῦ 
ξητοῦσι THY οὐσίαν τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ καὶ τοῦ κακοῦ, 
ὅπου οὐκ ἔστιν, ὅπου δ᾽ ἔστιν, οὐκ ἐνθυμοῦνται, 


24 καὶ ὡς ὁ Διογένης ἀπαχθεὶς πρὸς Φίλμιιτπον μετὰ 


> fal 

τὴν ἐν Χαιρωνείᾳ μάχην κατάσκοπος εἶναι. τῷ 
3 e 

γὰρ ὄντι κατάσκοπός ἐστιν ὁ Κυνικὸς τοῦ τίνα 


25 ἐστὶ τοῖς ἀνθρώποις φίλα καὶ τίνα πολέμια" 


26 


27 


καὶ δεῖ αὐτὸν ἀκριβῶς κατασκεψάμενον ἐλθόντ᾽ 
Ὁ δ ἃ \ ,ὔ 
ἀπαγγεῖλαι τἀληθῆ μήθ᾽ ὑπὸ φόβου ἐκπλαγέντα, 
ὥστε τοὺς μὴ ὄντας πολεμίους δεῖξαι, μήτε τινὰ 
\ A [οἷ 
ἄλλον τρόπον ὑπὸ τῶν φαντασιῶν παραταραχ- 
f 
θέντα ἢ συγχυθέντα. 
.: ἣν » \N 7 3 ? x 
Δεῖ οὖν αὐτὸν δύνασθαι ἀνατεινάμενον, ἂν 
οὕτως τύχῃ, καὶ ἐπὶ σκηνὴν τραγικὴν ἀνερχό- 
ῇ \ 5; Σ / ες ζὼ ἄνθ 1 
μενον λέγειν τὸ τοῦ Φιωκράτους “iw ἄνθρωποι, 
ποῖ φέρεσθε; τί ποιεῖτε, ὦ ταλαίπωροι; ὡς 
τυφλοὶ ἄνω καὶ κάτω κυλίεσθε' ἄλλην ὁδὸν 
ἀπέρχεσθε τὴν οὖσαν ἀπολελοιπότες, ἀλλαχοῦ 
ζητεῖτε τὸ εὔρουν καὶ τὸ εὐδαιμονικόν,3 ὅπου οὐκ 
“ 0 "Ψ 2 7 7 > \ 
ἔστιν, οὐδ᾽ ἄλλου δεικνύοντος πιστεύετε. τί αὐτὸ 
ἔξω ξητεῖτε; ἐν σώματι οὐκ ἔστιν. εἰ ἀπιστεῖτε, 
ἔδετε Μύρωνα, ἴδετε ᾿Οφέλλιον. ἐν κτήσει οὐκ 
v > 02 9 a » a + 8 
ἔστιν. εἰ δ᾽ ἀπιστεῖτε, ἴδετε Ἰζροῖσον, ἴδετε τοὺς 
νῦν πλουσίους, ὅσης οἰμωγῆς ὁ Bios αὐτῶν 
μεστὸς ἐστιν. ἐν ἀρχῇ οὐκ ἔστιν. εἰ δὲ μή γε, 
1 Schweighiuser: ζώνθρωποι Κ' : ὥνθρωποι Leopold, 
3. Shaftesbury : ἡγεμονικόν 8, 
138 


BOOK ΠῚ, xxu. 23-27 


partly as a messenger, in order to show them that 
in questions of good and evil they have gone astray, 
and are seeking the true nature of the good and 
the evil where it is not, but where it is they never 
think ; and partly, in the words of Diogenes, when 
he was taken off to Philip, after the battle of 
Chaeroneia, as a scout.4 For the Cynic is truly a 
scout, to find out what things are friendly to men 
and what hostile; and he must first do his scouting 
accurately, and on returning must tell the truth, not 
driven by fear to designate as enemies those who 
are not such, nor in any other fashion be distraught 
or confused by his external impressions. 

He must, accordingly, be able, if it so chance, 
to lift up his voice, and, mounting the tragic stage, 
to speak like Socrates: “ Alas! men, where are you 
rushing ?2 What are you doing, O wretched people? 
Like blind men you go tottering all around. You 
have left the true path and are going off upon 
another ; you are looking for serenity and happiness 
in the wrong place, where it does not exist, and 
you do not believe when another points them out 
to you. Why do you look for it outside? It does 
not reside in the body. If you doubt that, look 
at Myron, or Ophellius.2 It is not in possessions. 
If you doubt that, look at Croesus, look at the rich 
nowadays, the amount of lamentation with which 
their life is filled. It is not in office. Why, if it 


1 Compare I. 24, 3-10. The philosopher is a sort of spy 
sent on in advance into this world, to report to the rest of us 
what things are good and what evil. 

2 [Plato], Cleitophon, 407 A—B. 

8 Probably famous athletes or gladiators of the day ; 
otherwise unknown, 


139 


28 


29 


30 


31 


32 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ἔδει τοὺς δὶς καὶ τρὶς ὑπάτους, εὐδαίμονας εἶναι" 
οὐκ εἰσὶ δέ. τίσιν περὶ τούτου πιστεύσομεν ; 
ὑμῖν τοῖς ἔξωθεν τὰ ἐκείνων βλέπουσιν καὶ ὑπὸ 
τῆς φαντασίας περιλαμπομένοις 7 ἢ αὐτοῖς ἐκείνοις; 
τί λέγουσιν ; ; ἀκούσατε αὐτῶν, ὅταν οἰμώξωσιν, 
ὅταν στένωσιν, ὅταν δι αὐτὰς τὰς ὑπατείας καὶ 
τὴν δόξαν καὶ τὴν ἐπιφάνειαν ἀθλιώτερον οἴωνται 
καὶ ἐπικινδυνότερον ἔχειν. ἐν βασιλείᾳ οὐκ 
ἔστιν. εἰ δὲ μή, Νέρων ἃ ἂν εὐδαίμων ἐ ἐγένετο καὶ 
Σαρδανάπαλλος. ἀλλ᾽ οὐδ᾽ ᾿Αγαμέμνων εὐδαίμων 
ἣν καΐτοι κομψότερος ὧν Σαρδαναπάλλου καὶ 
Νέ ἐρωνος, ἀλλὰ τῶν ἄλλων ῥεγκόντων ἐκεῖνος τί 
ποιεῖ; 


πολλὰς ἐκ κεφαλῆς προθελύμνους ἔλκετο χαίτας. 
\ 7 4 id / 
καὶ αὐτὸς TL λέγει; 
πλάξζξομαι ὧδε, 
φησίν, καὶ 


ἀλαλύκτημαι' κραδίη δέ μοι ἔξω 
στηθέων ἐκθρῴσκει. 


τάλας, τί τῶν σῶν ἔχει κακῶς ; ; ἡ ατῆσις; οὐκ 
ἔχει" ἀλλὰ πολύχρυσος εἶ καὶ πολύχαλκος. τὸ 


σῶμα; οὐκ ἔχει," τί οὖν σοι κακόν ἐστιν ; ἐκεῖνο, 

ὅ τί ποτε > ἠμέληται σου καὶ κατέφθαρται, @ 

ὀρεγόμεθα, ᾧ ἐκκλίνομεν, ᾧ ὁρμῶμεν καὶ ἀφορ- 
3 


μῶμεν. πῶς ἠμέληται; ἀγνοεῖ τὴν οὐσίαν τοῦ 


1 Capps transfers to this position τὸ σῶμα; οὐκ ἔχει, which 
in 5 precede ἀλλὰ. . . πολύχαλκος. 
2 τὸ τίποτε Blass, perhaps rightly. 





1 Tliad, X. 15. 
140 


BOOK ΠῚ. xxu. 27-32 


were, then those who have been consul two or three 
times ought to be happy men, but they are not. 
Whom are we going to believe about this question ? 
You who look upon their estate from the outside 
and are dazzled by the external appearance, or the 
men themselves? What do they say? Listen to 
them when they lament, when they groan, when they 
think that their condition is more wretched and 
dangerous because of these very consulships, and 
their own reputation, and their prominence. It is 
not in royalty. Otherwise Nero would have been 
a happy man, and Sardanapalus. Nay, even 
Agamemnon was not a happy man, though a much 
finer fellow than Sardanapalus or Nero; but while 
the rest are snoring what is he doing? 


“ Many a hair did he pluck, by the roots, from 
his forehead.” 1 


And what are his own words? 
“Thus do I wander,”’ 2 
he says, and 


“To and fro am I tossed, and my heart is 
Leaping forth from my bosom.” 8 


Poor man, what about you is in a bad state? Your 
possessions? No, it is not; rather you “are possessed 
of much gold and of mach bronze.””4 Your body? 
No, itis not. What, then, is wrong with you? Why, 
this ἡ You have neglected and ruined whatever that 
is within you by which we desire, avoid, choose, and 
refuse. How neglected? It remains ignorant of 


2 v. 9]. 3 vy, 94 f, 
4 Iliad, XVIII. 289. 


141 


33 


94 


30 


36 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ἀγαθοῦ πρὸς ἣν πέφυκε καὶ τὴν τοῦ κακοῦ καὶ 
τί ἴδιον ἔχει καὶ τί ἀλλότριον. καὶ ὅταν τι τῶν 
ἀλλοτρίων κακῶς ἔχῃ, λέγει “οὐαί μοι, οἱ γὰρ 
“Ἕλληνες κινδυνεύουσι. ταλαίπωρον ἡγεμονικὸν 
καὶ μόνον ἀτημέλητον καὶ ἀθεράπευτον. “μέλλου- 
σιν ἀποθνήσκειν ὑπὸ τῶν Τρώων ἀναιρεθέντες." 
ἂν δ᾽ αὐτοὺς οἱ Τρῶες μὴ ἀποκτείνωσιν, οὐ μὴ 
ἀποθάνωσιν ; “ναί, GAN οὐχ ὑφ᾽ ἕν πάντες." τί 
οὖν διαφέρει ; εἰ γὰρ κακόν ἐστι τὸ ἀποθανεῖν, ἄν 
τε ὁμοῦ ἂν τε καθ᾽ ἕνα ὁμοίως κακόν ἐστιν. μή 
TL ἄλλο τι μέλλει γίνεσθαι ἢ τὸ σωμάτιον χωρίξε- 
σθαι καὶ ἡ ψυχή; “ οὐδέν." σοὶ δὲ ἀπολλυ- 
μένων τῶν ᾿Βλλήνων ἡ θύρα κέκλεισται; οὐκ 
ἔξεστιν ἀποθανεῖν ; “ ἔξεστιν." τί οὖν πενθεῖς ; 
οὐαί, βασιλεὺς καὶ τὸ τοῦ Διὸς σκῆπτρον ἔχω!" 
ἀτυχὴς βασιλεὺς οὐ γίνεται" οὐ μᾶλλον ἢ 
ἀτυχὴς θεός. τί οὖν εἶ; ποιμὴν ταῖς ἀληθείαις" 
οὕτως γὰρ κλάεις ὡς οἱ ποιμένες, ὅταν λύκος 
ἁρπάσῃ τι τῶν προβάτων αὐτῶν" καὶ οὗτοι δὲ 
πρόβατά εἶσιν οἱ ὑπὸ σοῦ ἀρχόμενοι. τί δὲ καὶ 
1 Oldfather: oda 5. 

1 Specifically alluding to the position of Agamemnon in 
the situation referred to above. 

2 This is a distinct over-statement of the case. Obviously 
it makes a great deal of difference for a State (and it is in 


his capacity as head of a State that Agamemnon is here 
appearing), whether its fighting men are killed all at once, 





or die one at a time in the course of nature. 


3 Presumably a king is expected to commit suicide before 
becoming ‘‘ unfortunate,” as suggested in ὃ 34. If he sur- 
vived under the circumstances here described, he certainly 
must be ‘‘ unfortunate,” at least as a man, in any ordinary 
sense of the term. Capps, however, thinks the meaning of 
Epictetus to be that a king qua king, that is, while really 
holding the sceptre of Zeus, is blessed of fortune. If ‘ un- 


BOOK III, xx. 32~36 


the true nature of the good, to which it was 
born, and of the true nature of the evil, and 
of what is its own proper possession, and what 
is none of its own concern. And whenever 
some one of these things that are none of its 
own concern is in a bad way, it says, “ Woe is me, for 
the Greeks are in danger.” + Ah, miserable govern- 
ing principle, the only thing neglected and uncared 
for! “They are going to perish, slain by the 
Trojans.” But if the Trojans do not kill them, will 
they not die anyway? “Yes, but not all at once.” 
What difference does it make, then? For if death 
is an evil, whether they die all at once, or die one 
at a time, it is equally an evil.2 Nothing else is 
going to happen, is it, but the separation of the 
paltry body from the soul? * Nothing.” And is 
the door closed for you, if the Greeks perish? Are 
you not permitted to die? “Iam.” Why, then, do 
you grieve? ‘‘ Woe is me, a king, and holding the 
sceptre of Zeus!” A king does not become un- 
fortunate any more than a god becomes unfortunate.? 
What are you, then? Truly a shepherd! 4 for you 
wail as the shepherds do when a wolf carries off one 
of their sheep; and these men over whom you rule 
are sheep. But why did you come here ὅ in the first 


would be similar to the well-known argument concerning the 
‘‘ruler gua ruler,” in the first book of Plato’s Republic. The 
more common-sense view of the case is well expressed by the 
Scholiast on Homer’s Odyssey XI. 438, thus: ‘‘A king is 
unfortunate when his subjects fare ill.” 

4 Referring to the common Homeric designation of a ruler 
as the ‘‘ shepherd of the folk.” 

5 Capps proposes the novel view that ἤρχον 15 from ἄρχομαι, 
and ‘‘ takes up ἀρχόμενοι [35] . . . Agamemnon, by allowing 
himself to be dominated by an ἀλλότριον πρᾶγμα, has become 
a subject, a sheep.” 


37 


38 


39 


40 


41 ‘ 


$2 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ἤρχου ; μή TE «ὄρεξις ὑμῖν ee μή τι 
ἔκκλισις, μή τι ὁρμή, μή τι ἀφ ορμῆ ; ; ν᾽ φησίν, 
“ ἀλλὰ τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ μου τὸ ΠΥ ἡ, doen 
οὐκ οὖν 1 κέρδος μέγα στερηθῆναι μοιχικοῦ γυναι- 
Kapton , ΣΝ καταφρονηθῶμεν οὖν ὑπὸ τῶν Τρώων ; ᾿ 
τίνων ὄντων ; φρονίμων ἢ ἀφρόνων ἡ εὐ i φρονίμων, 
τί αὐτοῖς πολεμεῖτε ; ; εἰ ἀφρύνων, τί ὑμῖν μέλεϊ ; 
ὴ Ἔν τίνι οὖν ἔστι τὸ ἀγαθόν, ἐπειδὴ ἐν τούτοις 
οὐκ ἔστιν ; ; εἰπὲ ἡμῖν, κύριε ἄγγελε καὶ κατά- 
σκοπε. “ὅπου οὐ δοκεῖτε οὐδὲ θέλετε ζητῆσαι 
αὐτό. εἰ yap ἠθέλετε, εὕρετε ἂν αὐτὸ ἐν ὑμῖν ὃν 
οὐδ᾽ ἂν ἔξω ἐπλάξεσθε οὐδ᾽ ἂν ἐξητεῖτε τὰ 
ἀχλότρια ὡς ἴδια. ἐπιστρέψατε. αὐτοὶ ἐφ᾽ ἑαυ- 
τούς, καταμάθετε τὰς προλήψεις ἃ ἃς ἔχετε. ποῖόν 
Τί φαντάζεσθε τὸ ἀγαθόν ; τὸ εὔρουν, τὸ εὐδαι- 
μονικόν, τὸ ἀπαραπόδιστον. ἄγε, μέγα 3 δ᾽ αὐτὸ 
φυσικῶς οὐ φαντάξεσθε, ; ἀξιόλογον οὐ φαν- 
τάξεσθε ; ᾿ ἀβλαβὲς οὐ φαντάξεσθε ; ἐν ποίᾳ οὖν 
ὕλῃ δεῖ ζητεῖν τὸ εὔρουν καὶ ἀπαραπόδιστον ; ; ἐν 
τῇ δούλῃ ἢ ἢ ἐν τῇ ἐλευθέρᾳ ; ᾿ “ἐν τῇ ἐλευθέρᾳ." 
“τὸ σωμάτιον οὖν ἐλεύθερον ἔχετε ἢ δοῦλον 5” 
“οὐκ ἴσμεν “οὐκ ἴστε ὅτι πυρετοῦ δοῦλόν 
ἐστιν, ποδάγρας, ὀφθαλμίας, δυσεντερίας, τυρᾶν- 
νοῦ, πυρός, σιδήρου, παντὸς τοῦ ἰσχυροτέρου ;" 
‘yat δοῦλον. “πῶς οὖν ἔτι ἀνεμπόδιστον εἶναί 
TL δύναται τῶν τοῦ σώματος ; πῶς δὲ μέγα ἢ 
ἀξιόλογον τὸ φύσει νεκρόν, ἡ γῆ, ὁ πηλός ; τί οὖν ; ; 
οὐδὲν ἔχετε ἐλεύθερον ; " “μήποτε οὐδέν. “καὶ 


1 οὐκοῦν 8. 2 Wolf: μετά J. 





1 See sections 24 and 25 above, and note there. 


144 


BOOK III. xxu. 36-42 


place? Your desire was not in danger, was it, or 
your avoidance, your choice, or your refusal? “ No,”’ 
he answers, “but my brother’s frail wife was carried 
off.” Was it not, then, a great gain to lose a frail 
and adulterous wife? “Shall we, then, be despised 
by the Trojans?’’ Who are they? Wise men or 
foolish? If wise, why are you fighting with them? 
If foolish, why do you care? 

“In what, then, is the good, since it is not in 
these things? Tell us, Sir messenger and scout.” 1 
«It is where you do not expect it, and do not wish 
to look for it. For if you had wished, you would 
have found it within you, and you would not now 
be wandering outside, nor would you be seek- 
ing what does not concern you, as though it were 
your own possession. Turn your thoughts upon 
yourselves, find out the kind of preconceived ideas 
which you have. What sort of a thing do you 
imagine the good to be? Serenity, happiness, 
freedom from restraint. Come, do you not imagine 
it to be something naturally great? Something 
precious? Something not injurious? In what kind 
of subject-matter for life ought one to seek serenity, 
and freedom from restraint? In that which is slave, 
or in that which is free?’’ ‘In the free.”’ “Is the 
paltry body which you have, then, free or is it a 
slave?” “We know not.” “You do not know 
that it is a slave of fever, gout, ophthalmia, 
dysentery, a tyrant, fire, iron, everything that is 
stronger?” “Yes, it is their servant.” “ How, 
then, can anything that pertains to the body be 
unhampered? And how can that which is naturally 
lifeless, earth, or clay, be great or precious? What 
then? Have you nothing that is free?’  Per- 


43 


44, 


45 


46 
41 


48 


49 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


τίς ὑμᾶς ἀναγκάσαι δύναται συγκαταθέσθαι τῷ 
δεῖ / wo (( ὑδεί "Ὁ «εἰς δὲ 4 
ψευδεῖ φαινομένῳ ; “οὐδείς. “τὶς δὲ μὴ συγκα- 
“ “ / 
ταθέσθαι τῷ φαινομένῳ ἀληθεῖ; " “ οὐδείς." 
τ 5 a? 9 con Ψ , > con , 
ἐνθάδ᾽ οὖν ὁρᾶτε, ὅτι ἔστι TL ἐν ὑμῖν ἐλεύθερον 
f 3 4 +H 2 / ΝΣ: “A ὌΝ] 
φύσει. ὀρέγεσθαι δ᾽ ἢ ἐκκλίνειν ἢ ὁρμᾶν ἢ ἀφορ- 
cay Ἂ ’ ΜᾺ 
μᾶν ἢ παρασκευάζεσθαι ἢ προτίθεσθαι τίς ὑμῶν 
7 \ \ / a) A \ 
δύναται μὴ λαβὼν φαντασίαν λυσιτελοῦς ἢ μὴ 
, . 33 fas 18 51 «Υ cm Ν > 
καθήκοντος ; οὐδεὶς. ἔχετε οὖν καὶ ἐν 
, 3 ’ f 1 \ 3 40 ? 
τούτοις ἀκώλυτόν TL! καὶ ἐλεύθερον. ταλαίπω- 
pot, τοῦτο ἐξεργάξεσθε, τούτου ἐπιμέλεσθε, ἐνταῦ- 
θα ζητεῖτε τὸ ἀγαθόν." 
Καὶ πῶς ἐνδέχεται μηδὲν ἔχοντα, γυμνόν, 
2 3 / > ἕω PLAN yA 3 
ἄοικον, ἀνέστιον, αὐχμῶντα, ἄδουλον,, ἄπολιν 
ἢ ra 
διεξάγειν evpows ; ἰδοὺ ἀπέσταλκεν ὑμῖν ὁ θεὸς 
\ ὃ 7 δ ef Ἅ δέ «ΕΥ̓ ’ 
τὸν δείξοντα ἔργῳ, ὅτι ἐνδέχεται. ““ἴδετέ με, 
37 tf 2 of ᾽ ΄ Eu ‘ 
GOLKOS εἰμι, ἄπολις, ἀκτήμων, ἄδουλος" χαμαὶ 
κοιμῶμαι" οὐ γυνή, οὐ παιδία, οὐ πραιτωρίδιον, 
3 nn i \ > \ VN ἃ rd 
ἀλλὰ γῆ μόνον καὶ οὐρανὸς καὶ ἕν τριβωνάριον. 
καὶ τί μοι λείπει; οὔκ εἰμι ἄλυπος, οὔκ εἶμι 
ἄφοβος, οὔκ εἰμι ἐλεύθερος ; πότε ὑμῶν εἶδέν μέ 
τις ἐν ὀρέξει ἀποτυγχάνοντα, πότ᾽ ἐν ἐκκλίσει 
περιπίπτοντα ; πότ᾽ ἐμεμψάμην ἢ θεὸν ἢ ἄνθρω- 
πον, πότ᾽ ἐνεκάλεσά τινε; μή τις ὑμῶν ἐσκυθρω- 
πακότα pe εἶδεν ; πῶς δ᾽ ἐντυγχάνω τούτοις, οὗς 
ὑμεῖς φοβεῖσθε καὶ θαυμάξετε ; οὐχ ὡς ἀνδρα- 
f 4 IAN > \ N / Ν μη ~ 
πόδοις 3 τίς με ἰδὼν οὐχὶ τὸν βασιλέα τὸν ἑαυτοῦ 
ὁρᾶν οἴεται καὶ δεσπότην ; ἢ 


τι δἰ θα by Wolf, after Schegk. 
2 Upton: δοῦλον 8. 


146. 


BOOK III. xxu. 42-49 


haps nothing.” “And who can compel you to 
assent to that which appears to you to be false?” 
“No one.” ‘And who to refuse assent to that 
which appears to you to be true?” “No one.” 
“ Here, then, you see that there zs something within 
you which is naturally free. But to desire, or to 
avoid, or to choose, or to refuse, or to prepare, 
or to set something before yourself—what man 
among you can do these things without first con- 
ceiving an impression of what is profitable, or what 
is not fitting?” “No one.” “You have, there- 
fore, here too, something unhindered and free. 
Poor wretches, develop this, pay attention to this, 
seek here your good.” 

And how is it possible for a man who has nothing, 
who is naked, without home or hearth, in squalor, 
without a slave, without a city, to live serenely? 
Behold, God has sent you the man who will show in 
practice that it is possible. ‘“ Look at me,” he says, “I 
am without a home, without a city, without property, 
without a slave ; I sleep on the ground ; I have neither 
wife nor children, no miserable governor’s mansion, 
but only earth, and sky, and one rough cloak. Yet 
what do I lack? Am I not free from pain and fear, 
am I not free? When has anyone among you seen 
me failing to get what I desire, or falling into” what 
I would avoid? When have I ever found fault with 
either God or man? When have I ever blamed any- 
one? Has anyone among you seen me with a gloomy 
face? And how do I face those persons before 
whom you stand in fear and awe? Do I not face 
them as slaves? Who, when he Jays eyes upon 
me, does not feel that he is seeing his king and his 
master?” 


147 
LQ 


50 


δὶ 


52 


53 


54 


55 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


Ἴδε κυνικαὶ φωναί, ἴδε χαρακτήρ, | ἴδ᾽ ἐπιβολή. 
οὔ' ἀλλὰ πηρίδιον καὶ ξύλον καὶ γνάθοι μεγάλαι: 
καταφαγεῖν πᾶν ὃ dv! δῷς ἢ ἀποθησαυρίσαι ἢ 
τοῖς ἀπαντῶσι λοιδορεῖσθαι, ἀκαίρως ἢ καλὸν 
τὸν ὦμον δεικνύειν, τηλικούτῳ πράγματι ὁρᾷς 
πῶς μέλλεις ἐγχειρεῖν ; ; ἔσοπτρον. πρῶτον λάβε, 
ἴδε σου τοὺς ὦμους, κατάμαθε τὴν ὀσφύν, τοὺς 
μηρούς. Ὀλύμπια μέλλεις ἀπογράφεσθαι, ἄν- 
θρωπε, οὐχί τινά ποτε ἀγῶνα ψυχρὸν Kae ταλαΐί- 
TW pov. οὐκ ἔστιν ἐν ᾿Ολυμπίοις νικηθῆναι 
μόνον καὶ ἐξελθεῖν, ἀλλὰ πρῶτον μὲν ὅλης τῆς 
οἰκουμένης βλεπούσης δεῖ ἀσχημονῆσαι, οὐχὶ 
᾿Αϑηναίων μόνον ἢ Λακεδαιμονίων ἢ Νικοπολι- 
τῶν, εἶτα καὶ δέρεσθαι δεῖ τὸν εἰκῇ ἐξελθόντα,3 
πρὸ δὲ τοῦ δαρῆναι, διψῆσαι, καυματισθῆναι, 
πολλὴν ἁφὴν καταπιεῖν. 

Βούλευσαι ἐπιμελέστερον, γνῶθι σαυτόν, ἀνά- 
κρίνον τὸ δαιμόνιον, δίχα θεοῦ μὴ ἐπιχειρήσῃς. 
ἂν γὰρ συμβουλεύσῃ, ἴσθι ὅτε μέγαν σε éhet 
γενέσθαι ἢ πολλὰς πληγὰς λαβεῖν. καὶ γὰρ 
τοῦτο λίαν κομψὸν τῷ Κυνικῷ παραπέπλεκται" 
δέ εσθαι αὐτὸν δεῖ ὡς ὄνον καὶ δερόμενον φιλεῖν 
αὐτοὺς τοὺς δέροντας ὡς πατέρα πάντων, ὡς 
ἀδελφόν. οὔ: ἀλλ’ dv τίς σε δέρῃ, κραύγα ζε 
στὰς ἐν τῷ μέσῳ “ὦ Καῖσαρ, ἐν τῇ σῇ εἰρήνῃ 


1 Schenkl: ἐάν & 
2 εἰσελθόντα Meibom. Compare explanatory note. 





1 Meibom’s conjecture, εἰσελθόντα, which is sometimes 
accepted, would mean, ‘‘ The man who carelessly enters the 
contest.” But the punishment of flogging would probably be 
reserved for the person who failed to appear finally in the 
lists, since everyone had to have a month’s preliminary 


148 


BOOK III. xx. 50-55 


Lo, these are words that befit a Cynic, this is his 
character, and his plan of life. But no, you say, 
what makes a Cynic is a contemptible wallet, a staff, 
and big jaws; to devour everything you give him, 
or to stow it away, or to revile tactlessly the people 
he meets, or to show off his fine shoulder. Do you 
see the spirit in which you are intending to set your 
hand to so great an enterprise? First take a mirror, 
look at your shoulders, find out what kind of loins 
and thighs you have. Man, it’s an Olympic contest 
in which you are intending to enter your name, not 
some cheap and miserable contest or other. In the 
Olympic games it is not possible for you merely to 
be beaten and then leave; but, in the first place, 
you needs must disgrace yourself in the sight of the 
whole civilized world, not merely before the men of 
Athens, or Lacedaemon, or Nicopolis; and, in the 
second place, the man who carelessly gets up and 
leavest must needs be flogged, and before he is 
flogged he has to suffer thirst, and scorching heat, 
and swallow quantities of wrestler’s sand. 

Think the matter over more carefully, know your- 
self, ask the Deity, do not attempt the task without 
God. For if God so advises you, be assured that He 
wishes you either to become great, or to receive 
many stripes. For this too is a very pleasant strand 
woven into the Cynic’s pattern of life; he must 
needs be flogged like an ass, and while he is being 
flogged he must love the men who flog him, as 
though he were the father or brother of them all. 
But that is not your way. If someone flogs you, go 
stand in the midst and shout, “ O Caesar, what do 1 


training on the spot, during which time those who had 
entered would suffer the inconveniences described below. 


149 


58 


59 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


3 Ἵ 


οἷα πάσχω; ἄγωμεν ἐπὶ τὸν ἀνθύπατον. 
Κυνικῷ δὲ Καῖσαρ τί ἐστὶν ἢ ἀνθύπατος ἢ ἄλλος 
ἢ ὁ καταπεπομφὼς αὐτὸν καὶ ᾧ λατρεύει, ὁ 
Ζεύς; ἄλλον τινὰ ἐπικαλεῖται ἢ ἐκεῖνον ; οὐ 
πέπεισται δ᾽, ὅ τε ἂν πάσχῃ τούτων, ὅτι ἐκεῖνος 
αὐτὸν γυμνάζει; ἀλλ᾿ ὁ μὲν Ἡρακλῆς ὑπὸ 
Ἐὐρυσθέως γυμναζόμενος οὐκ ἐνόμιζεν ἄθλιος 
εἶναι, GAN ἀόκνως ἐπετέλει πάντα τὰ προστατ- 
τόμενα" οὗτος δ᾽ ὑπὸ τοῦ Διὸς ἀθλούμενος 
καὶ γυμναζόμενος μέλλει κεκραγέναι καὶ ἀγανακ- 
τεῖν, ἄξιος φορεῖν τὸ σκῆπτρον τὸ Διογένους ; 
ἄκουε, τί λέγει ἐκεῖνος πυρέσσων πρὸς τοὺς 
παριόντας" “ κακαί, ἔφη, “ κεφαλαί, οὐ μενεῖτε ; 
ἀλλ᾽ ἀθλητῶν μὲν ὀλέθρων 5 μάχην ὀψόμενοι 
ἄπιτε ὁδὸν τοσαύτην εἰς ᾿Ολυμπίαν" πυρετοῦ δὲ 
καὶ ἀνθρώπου μάχην ἰδεῖν οὐ βούλεσθε 5” ταχύ 
y ἂν ὁ τοιοῦτος ἐνεκάλεσεν τῷ θεῷ καταπεπομ- 

6Tt αὐτὸν ὡς παρ᾽ ἀξίαν αὐτῷ χρωμένῳ, ὅς 
γε ἐνεκαλλωπίζετο ταῖς περιστάσεσι καὶ θέαμα 
εἶναι ἠξίου τῶν παριόντων. ἐπὶ τίνι γὰρ ἐγκα- 
λέσει ; ὅτι εὐσχημονεῖ; ti? κατηγορεῖ; ὅτι 
λαμπροτέραν ἐπιδείκνυται τὴν ἀρετὴν τὴν éav- 


1 Meibom: πραττόμενα Κ, 
2 Blass: ὄλεθρον ἢ μάχην 5. 3 Elter: ὅτι &. 





1 Referred to also by Jerome, Adv. Jovianum, 2, 14. 

2 An ancient scholiast, probably Arethas (cf. Schenkl?, 
Ὁ. lxxx), remarks at this point, that Epictetus had probably 
read the Gospels and Jewish literature. But this particular 
passage does not furnish any very cogent argument, for the 
evidence adduced, namely the injunctions about ‘ turning 
the other cheek” and ‘‘ loving your enemies” (Ma/th. 5, 39 
and 44), has nothing in common with the somewhat vain- 


150 


BOOK III. xxi. 55-59 


have to suffer under your peaceful rule? let us go 
before the Proconsul.” But what to a Cynic is 
Caesar, or a Proconsul, or anyone other than He 
who has sent him into the world, and whom he 
serves, that is, Zeus? Does he call upon anyone 
but Zeus? And is he not persuaded that whatever 
of these hardships he suffers, it is Zeus that is exer- 
cising him? Nay, but Heracles, when he was being 
exercised by Eurystheus, did not count himself 
wretched, but used to fulfil without hesitation every- 
thing that was enjoined upon him: and yet is this 
fellow, when he is being trained and exercised by 
Zeus, prepared to cry out and complain? Is he a 
man worthy to carry the staff of Diogenes? Hear his 
words to the passers-by as he lies ill of a fever:1 
“Vile wretches,” he said, “are you not going to 
stop? Nay, you are going to take that long, long 
journey to Olympia, to see the struggle of worthless 
athletes; but do you not care to see a struggle 
between fever and a man?”’* No doubt a man of 
that sort would have blamed God, who had sent him 
into the world, for mistreating him! Nay, he took 
pride in his distress, and demanded that those who 
passed by should gaze upon him. Why, what will 
he blame God for? Because he is living a decent 
life? What charge does he bring against Him? 
The charge that He is exhibiting his virtue in a more 


glorious speech of Diogenes. Probably, however, the 
scholium actually belongs at § 54, where there is, indeed, a 
certain resemblance. Fairly apposite, also, is the citation 
of James 1, 2: πᾶσαν χαρὰν ἡγήσασθε, ἀδελφοί, ὅταν πειρασμοῖς 
περιπέσητε ποικίλοις, In connection with the next sentence. 
But even at the best, these words from the New Testament 
are only parallels, certainly not sources. On the general 
question, see Introd., Vol. L., p. xxvif. 


ΤΌΤ 


60 


61 


62 


63 


64 


65 


66 


67 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


τοῦ ; ἄγε, περὶ πενίας δὲ τί λέγει, περὶ θανάτου, 
περὶ πόνου; “πῶς συνέκρινεν τὴν εὐδαιμονίαν 
THY αὑτοῦ τῇ μεγάλου βασιλέως ; μᾶλλον δ᾽ 
οὐδὲ συγκριτὸν BETO εἶναι. ὅπου γὰρ ταραχαὶ 
καὶ λῦπαι καὶ φόβοι καὶ ὀρέξεις ἀτελεῖς καὶ 
ἐκκλίσεις “περιπίπτουσαι καὶ φθόνοι καὶ ξηλοτυ- 
πίαι, ποῦ ἐκεῖ πάροδος εὐδαιμονίας ; ὅπου δ᾽ 
ἂν a σαπρὰ δόγματα, ἐκεῖ πάντα ταῦτα εἶναι 
ἀνάγκη. 

Πυθομένου. δὲ τοῦ νεανίσκου, εἰ νοσήσας ἀξιοῦν- 
τος φίλου πρὸς αὐτὸν ἐλθεῖν ὥστε νοσοκομηθῆναι 
ὑπτακούσει, Ποῦ δὲ φίλον μοι δώσεις Kuverod ; 
ἔφη. δεῖ γὰρ αὐτὸν ἄλλον εἶναι τοιοῦτον, ἵν᾽ 
ἄξιος ἦ φίλος αὐτοῦ ἀριθμεῖσθαι. κοινωνὸν 
αὐτὸν εἶναι δεῖ τοῦ σκήπτρου καὶ τῆς βασιλείας 
καὶ διάκονον ἄξιον, εἰ μέλλει φιλίας ἀξιωθή- 
σεσθαι, ὡς Διογένης ᾿Αντισθένους ἐγένετο, ὡς 
Κράτης Διογένους. H+ δοκεῖ σοι, ὅτι, ἂν χαίρειν 
αὐτῷ λέγῃ προσερχύμενος, φίλος. ἐστὶν αὐτοῦ 
κἀκεῖνος αὐτὸν ἄξιον ἡγήσεται τοῦ πρὸς αὐτὸν 
εἰσελθεῖν; ὥστε ἄν σοι δοκῇ καὶ ἐνθυμηθῇς τι3 
τοιοῦτον, κοπρίαν μᾶλλον περιβλέπου κομψήήν, 
ἐν ἦ πυρέξεις,3 ἀποσκέπουσαν τὸν βορέαν, ἵνα 
μὴ περιψυγῇς. σὺ δέ μοι δοκεῖς θέλειν εἰς οἶκόν 
τινος ἀπελθὼν διὰ χρόνου χορτασθῆναι. τί οὖν 
σοι καὶ ἐπιχειρεῖν πράγματι τηλικούτῳ ; ; 

Γάμος δ᾽, ἔφη, καὶ παῖδες προηγουμένως παρα- 


1 Schegk: ἢ 8, 2 Reiske: ἐνθυμήθητι 5. 
* Schweighiuser: πῦρ ἕξεις S, 





1 Of Persia. 
2 The word means also ‘‘ staff,” as in 57, 


152 


BOOK III. xxi. 60-67 


brilliant style? Come, what says Diogenes about 
poverty, death, hardship? How did he habitually 
compare his happiness with that of the Great King ?+ 
Or rather, he thought there was no comparison 
between them. For where there are disturbances, 
and griefs, and fears, and ineffectual desires, and 
unsuccessful avoidances, and envies, and jealousies 
—where is there in the midst of all this a place for 
happiness to enter? But wherever worthless judge- 
ments are held, there all these passions must neces- 
sarily exist. 

And when the young man asked whether he, as a 
Cynic, should consent, if, when he had fallen ill, a 
friend asked him to come to his house, so as to 
receive proper nursing, Epictetus replied: But 
where will you find me a Cynic’s friend? For such 
a person must be another Cynic, in order to be 
worthy of being counted his friend. He must share 
with him his sceptre? and kingdom, and be a worthy 
ministrant, if he is going to be deemed worthy of 
friendship, as Diogenes became the friend of Antis- 
thenes, and Crates of Diogenes. Or do you think 
that if a man as he comes up greets the Cynic, he is 
the Cynic’s friend, and the Cynic will think him 
worthy to receive him into his house? So if that is 
what you think and have in mind, you had much 
better look around for some nice dunghill, on which 
to have your fever, one that will give you shelter 
from the north wind, so that you won't get chilled 
But you give the the impression.of wanting to go 
into somebody's house for a while and getting filled 
up. Why, then, are you even laying your hand to 
so great an enterprise? 

But, said the young man, will marriage and children 

153 


68 


69 


71 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ληφθήσονται ὑ ὑπὸ τοῦ Κυνικοῦ ; -—Ap μοι σοφῶν, 
ἔφη, δῷς πόλιν, τάχα μὲν cee ἥξει τις ῥᾳδίως 
ἐπὶ τὸ κυνίξειν. τίνων γὰρ ἕνεκα ἀναδέξηταιϊ 
ταύτην τὴν διεξαγωγήν ; ὅμως δ᾽ ἂν ὑποθώμεθα, 
οὐδὲν κωλύσει καὶ γῆμαι αὐτὸν καὶ “αιδοποιή- 
σασθαι. καὶ γὰρ ἡ γυνὴ αὐτοῦ ἔσται ἄλλη 
τοιαύτη καὶ ὁ πενθερὸς ἄλλος τοιοῦτος καὶ τὰ 
παιδία οὕτως ἀνατραφήσεται. τοιαύτης δ᾽ οὔσης 
καταστάσεως, οἵα νῦν ἔστιν, ὡς ἐν παρατάξει, 
μή wor ἀπερίσπαστον εἶναι δεῖ τὸν Κυνικόν, 
ὅλον πρὸς τῇ διακονίᾳ τοῦ θεοῦ, ἐπιφοιτᾶν ἀνθρώ- 
ποις δυνάμενον, οὐ “προσδεδεμένον καθήκουσιν 
ἰδιωτικοῖς οὐδ᾽ ἐμπεπλεγμένον σχέσεσιν, ἃς 
παραβαίνων οὐκέτι σώσει τὸ τοῦ καλοῦ καὶ 
ἀγαθοῦ πρόσωπον, τηρῶν δ᾽ ἀπολεῖ τὸν ἄγγελον 
καὶ κατάσκοπον καὶ κήρυκα τῶν θεῶν; ὅρα γάρ, 
ὅτι αὐτὸν ἀποδεικνύναι δεῖ 3 τινὰ τῷ πενθερῷ, 
ἀποδιδόναι τοῖς ἄλλοις συγγενέσι τῆς γυναικὸς, 
αὐτῇ τῇ γυναικί" εἰς “Ῥοσοκομίας λοιπὸν ἐκκλείε- 
ται, εἰς πορισμόν. ἵνα τἄλλα ἀφῶ, δεῖ αὐτὸν 
κουκκούμιον, ὅπου θερμὸν ποιήσει τῷ παιδίῳ, 
iv αὐτὸ λούσῃ εἰς σκάφην' ἐρίδια τεκούσῃ τῇ 
γυναικί, ἔλαιον, κραβάττιον, ποτήριον (γώεται 
ἤδη πλείω σκευάριαλ' τὴν ἄλλην ἀσχολίαν, 
τὸν περισπασμόν. ποῦ μοι λοιπὸν ἐκεῖνος ὁ 
βασιλεὺς ὁ τοῖς κοινοῖς προσευκαιρῶν, 


f 
ᾧ λαοΐ τ᾽ ἐπιτετράφαται καὶ τόσσα μέμηλεν" 


1 Schenkl ς ἂν δξηται 5, 
3. δεῖ added by Schenkl; Se (?) has it after ὅτι, 





1 Homer, Nid, ΤΙ, 25. 
154 


BOOK III. xxi. 67-72 


be undertaken by the Cynic as a matter of prime 
importance ?—~If, replied Epictetus, you grant me a 
city of wise men, it might very well be that no one 
will lightly adopt the Cynic’s profession. For in 
whose interest would he take on this style of life? 
If, nevertheless, we assume that he does so act, there 
will be nothing to prevent him from both marrying 
and having children; for his wife will be another 
person like himself, and so will his father-in-law, and 
his children will be brought up in the same fashion. 
But in such an order of things as the present, which 
is like that of a battle-field, it is a question, perhaps, 
if the Cynic ought not to be free from distraction, 
wholly devoted to the service of God, free to go 
about among men, not tied down by the private 
duties of men, nor involved in relationships which 
he cannot violate and still maintain his réle as 
a good and excellent man, whereas, on the other 
hand, if he observes them, he will destroy the 
messenger, the scout, the herald of the gods, that 
he is. For see, he must show certain services to 
his father-in-law, to the rest of his wife’s relatives, 
to his wife herself; finally, he is driven from his 
profession, to act as a nurse in his own family and to 
provide for them. To make a long story short, he 
must get a kettle to heat water for the baby, for 
washing it in a bath-tub; wool for his wife when 
she has had a child, oil, a cot, a cup (the vessels get 
more and more numerous); not to speak of the rest 
of his business, and his distraction, Where, I beseech 
you, is left now our king, the man who has leisure 
for the public interest, 


Who hath charge of the folk and for many a thing 
must be watchful ὃ 1 


155 


13 


74 


75 
76 


17 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ὃν δεῖ τοὺς ἄλλους ἐπισκοπεῖν, TOUS γεγωμηκότας, 
τοὺς πεπαιδοποιημένους, τίς κωλῶς χρῆται τῇ 
αὑτοῦ γυναικί, τίς κακῶς, τίς διαφέρεται, ποία 
οἰκία εὐσταθεῖ, ποία οὔ, ὡς ἰατρὸν περιερχόμενον 
καὶ τῶν σφυγμῶν ἁπτόμενον; “σὺ πυρέττεις, 
σὺ κεφαλαλγεῖς, σὺ ποδαγρᾷς" σὺ ἀνάτεινον, σὺ 
φάγε, σὺ ἀλούτησον' σὲ δεῖ τμηθῆναι, σὲ δεῖ 
καυθῆναι. ποῦ σχολὴ τῷ εἰς τὰ ἰδιωτικὰ 
καθήκοντα ἐνδεδεμένῳ ; ἄγε, οὐ δεῖ αὐτὸν πορίσαι 
ἱματίδια τοῖς παιδίοις ; πρὸς γραμματιστὴν ἀπτο- 
στεῖλαι πινακίδια ἔχοντα, γραφεῖα, τιτλάρια," 
κἀπὶ τούτοις κραβάττιον ἑτοιμάσαι; οὐ γὰρ 
ἐκ τῆς κοιλίας ἐξελθόντα δύναται Kuvind εἶναι"" 
εἰ δὲ μή, κρεῖσσον ἣν αὐτὰ γενόμενα ῥῖψαι ἢ 

ὃ 3 a“ “ ? 
οὕτως ἀποκτεῖναι. σκόπει, TOU κατάγομεν TOV 
Κυνικόν, πῶς αὐτοῦ τὴν βασιλείαν ἀφαιρούμεθα. 
--Ναί' ἀλλὰ Κράτης ἔγημεν.---Περίστασίν μοι 
λέγεις ἐξ ἔρωτος γενομένην καὶ γυναῖκα τιθεῖς 
ἄλλον Κράτητα. ἡμεῖς δὲ περὶ τῶν κοινῶν γάμων 
καὶ ἀπεριστάτων ζητοῦμεν καὶ οὕτως ζητοῦντες 
οὐχ εὑρίσκομεν év* ταύτῃ τῇ καταστάσει 
προηγούμενον τῷ Κυνικῷ τό πρᾶγμα. 

Πῶς οὖν ἔτι, φησίν, διασώσει τὴν κοινωνίαν ; 


—Tov θεόν σοι δ μείζονα δ᾽ εὐεργετοῦσιν ἀνθρώ- 


1 Transposed to this position by Upton from the beginning 


of the next sentence. 


= Du Cange: τιλλάρια 8. 

5. Elter, after Schegk: καί S. 
4 ἐν added by Upton. 

5 Upton: σου 8. 





* That ancient marriages (which would appear to have 
been quite: as successful as any other) were very seldom con- 


156 


BOOK III. xx. 72=77 


Where, pray, is this king, whose duty it is to over- 
see the rest of men; those who have married; 
those who have had children; who is treating 
his wife well, and who ill; who quarrels; what 
household is stable, and what not; making his 
rounds like a physician, and feeling pulses? “You 
have a fever, you have a headache, you have the 
gout. You must abstain from food, you must eat, you 
must give up the bath ; you need the surgeon's knife, 
you the cautery.” Where is the man who is tied 
down to the duties of everyday life going to find 
leisure for such matters? Come, doesn’t he have to 
get little cloaks for the children? Doesn't he have 
to send them off to a school-teacher with their little 
tablets and writing implements, and little note- 
books; and, besides, get the little cot ready for them? 
For they can’t be Cynics from the moment they leave 
the womb. And if he doesn’t do all this, it would 
have been better to expose them at birth, rather 
than to kill them in this fashion. See to what straits 
we are reducing our Cynic, how we are taking away 
his kingdom from him.—Yes, but Crates married.— 
You are mentioning a particular instance which 
arose out of passionate love, and you are assuming a 
wife who is herself another Crates, But our inquiry 
is concerned with ordinary marriage apart from 
special circumstances,! and from this point of view 
we do not find that marriage, under present con- 
ditions, is a matter of prime importance for the Cynic. 

How, then, said the young man, will the Cynic 
still be able to keep society going ?>—-In the name of 
God, sir, who do mankind the greater service? 


cerned with romantic passion, is well known, but seldom so 
explicitly stated as here, 


157 


78 


79 


80 


81 


82 


83 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


e Sf δύ XK , δί 3 θ᾽ 
mous οἱ 7) δύο ἢ τρία κακόρυγχα παιδία av 
αὑτῶν εἰσάγοντες ἢ οἱ ἐπισκοποῦντες πάντας 
κατὰ δύναμιν ἀνθρώπους, τί ποιοῦσιν, πῶς 
διάγουσιν, τίνος ἐπιμελοῦνται, τίνος ἀμελοῦσι 
παρὰ τὸ προσῆκον ; ; καὶ Θηβαίους μείζονα ὠφέ- 
λησαν ὅσοι τεκνία αὐτοῖς κατέλιπον Ἔπαμι- 
νώνδου τοῦ ἀτέκνου ἀποθανόντος ; καὶ Ὁμήρου 
πλείονα τῇ κοινωνίᾳ συνεβάλετο Πρίαμος ὁ 
πεντήκοντα γεννήσας ᾿ περικαθάρματα ἢ Δαναὸς 

ἢ Αἴολος ; εἶτα στρατηγία μὲν ἢ σύνταγμά τιψᾶ 
ἀπείρξοι γάμου ἢ παιδοποιίας καὶ οὐ δόξει οὗτος 
ἀντ᾽ οὐδενὸς ἠχλλάχθαι τὴν ἀτεκνίαν, ἡ δὲ τοῦ 
Κυνικοῦ βασιλεία οὐκ ἔσται ἀνταξία ; μήποτε 
οὐκ αἰσθανόμεθα τοῦ μεγέθους αὐτοῦ οὐδὲ 
φανταζόμεθα κατ᾽ ἀξίαν τὸν χαρακτῆρα τὸν 
Διογένους, ἀλλ᾽ εἰς τοὺς νῦν ἀποβλέπομεν, τοὺς 
τραπεζῆας ἢ πυλαωροῦς, οὗ οὐδὲν μιμοῦνται 
ἐκείνους ἢ εἴ τι" ἄρα πόρδωνες γίνονται, ἄλλο 
δ᾽ οὐδέν ; ἐπεὶ οὐκ ἂν ἡμᾶς ἐκίνει, ταῦτα οὐδ᾽ 
ἂν ἐπεθαυμάζομεν, εἰ μὴ γαμήσει ἢ παιδοποιή- 
σεται. ἄνθρωπε, πάντας ἀνθρώπους πεπαιίδο- 
ποίηται, τοὺς ἄνδρας. υἱοὺς ἔχει, τὰς γυναῖκας 
θυγατέρας" πᾶσιν οὕτως προσέρχεται, οὕτως 
πάντων κήδεται. ἢ σὺ δοκεῖς ὑπὸ περιεργίας 
λοιδορεῖσθαι τοῖς ἀπαντῶσιν ; ὡς πατὴρ αὐτὸ 
ποιεῖ, ὡς ἀδελφὸς καὶ τοῦ κοινοῦ πατρὸς ὑπηρέ- 
τὴς τοῦ Διός. 

"Av σοι δόξῃ, πυθοῦ μου καὶ εἰ πολιτεύσεται. 


1 Upton: τραπεζη5 S. 
2 Schenkl: ὅτι 9. 





1 Homer, Iltad, XXII, 69. 
158 


BOOK III. xxn. 77-83 


Those who bring into the world some two or three 
ugly-snouted children to take their place, or those 
who exercise oversight, to the best of their ability, 
over all mankind, observing what they are doing, 
how they are spending their lives, what they are 
careful about, and what they undutifully neglect? 
And were the Thebans helped more by all those 
who left them children than by Epaminondas who 
died without offspring? And did Priam, who begot 
fifty sons, all rascals, or Danaus, or Aeolus, contribute 
more to the common weal than did Homer? What? 
Shall high military command or writing a book pre- 
vent a man from marrying and having children, while 
such a person will not be regarded as having ex- 
changed his childlessness for naught, and yet shall 
the Cynic’s kingship not be thought a reasonable 
compensation? Canit be that we do not perceive the 
greatness of Diogenes, and have nd’ adequate con- 
ception of his character, but have in mind the present- 
day representatives of the profession, these “dogs 
of the table, guards of the gate,” ! who follow the 
masters not at all, except it be in breaking wind in 
public, forsooth, but in nothing else? Otherwise such 
points as these you have been raising would never 
have disturbed us, we should never have wondered 
why a Cynic will never marry or have children. 
Man, the Cynic has made all mankind his children ; 
the men among them he has as sons, the women as 
daughters ; in that spirit he approaches them all and 
cares for them all. Or do you fancy that it is in the 
spirit of idle impertinence he reviles those he meets? 
It is as a father he does it, as a brother, and as a 
servant of Zeus, who is Father of us all. 

If you will, ask me also if he is to be active in 


84 


85 


86 


87 


88 


89 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


σαννίων, μείζονα πολιτείαν ζητεῖς, ἧς πολιτεύε- 
rat; ἢ1 ἐν ᾿Αθηναίοις παρελθὼν ἐρεῖ τις περὶ 
προσόδων ἢ πόρων, ὃν δεῖ πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις 
διαλέγεσθαι, ἐπίσης μὲν ᾿Αθηναίοις, ἐπίσης δὲ 
Κορινθίοις, ἐπίσης δὲ “Ῥωμαίοις οὐ περὶ πόρων 
οὐδὲ περὶ προσόδων οὐδὲ περὶ εἰρήνης ἢ πο- 
λέμου, ἀλλὰ περὶ εὐδαιμονίας καὶ κακοδαιμονίας, 
περὶ εὐτυχίας καὶ δυστυχίας, περὶ δουλείας καὶ 
ἐλευθερίας; τηλικαύτην πολιτείαν πολιτευο- 
μένου ἀνθρώπου σύ μου πυνθάνῃ εἰ πολιτεύσεται; 
πυθοῦ μου καί, εἰ ἄρξει" πάλιν ἐρῶ σοι" μωρέ, 
ποίαν ἀρχὴν μεΐξονα, ἧς ἄρχει; 

Χρεία μέντοι καὶ σώματος ποιοῦ τῷ τοιούτῳ. 
ἐπεί ,τοῦ ἂν φθισικὸς προέρχηταιυ, λεπτὸς καὶ 
ὠχρός, οὐκέτι ὁμοίαν ἔμφασιν ἡ μαρτυρία αὐτοῦ 
ἔχει. δεῖ yap αὐτὸν οὐ μόνον τὰ τῆς ψυχῆς 
ἐπιδεικνύοντα παριστάνειν τοῖς ἰδιώταις ὅτι 
ἐνδέχεται δίχα τῶν θαυμαζομένων ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν 

5 2 ‘\ \ 3 , 3 \ \ \ a 
eivar? καλὸν καὶ ἀγαθόν, ἀλλὰ καὶ διὰ τοῦ 
σώματος ἐνδείκνυσθαι, ὅτε ἡ ἀφελὴς καὶ λιτὴ 
καὶ ὕπαιθρος δίαιτα οὐδὲ τὸ σῶμα λυμαίνεται" 
“ἰδοὺ καὶ τούτου μάρτυς εἰμὶ ἐγὼ καὶ τὸ σῶμα 
τὸ ἐμόν." ὡς Διογένης ἐποίει' στίλβων yap 
περιήρχετο καὶ κατ᾽ ὃ αὐτὸ τὸ σῶμα ἐπέστρεφε 
τοὺς πολλούς. ἐλεούμενος δὲ Κυνικὸς ἐπαίτης 


1 Schweighauser: εἰ 8, 
2 The Salamanca ed., Wolf, and Salmasius: εἶναι ὑπ᾽ 
αὐτῶν S, 


3 Wolf: καθ᾽ ΚΑ. 


1 Said by the Scholiast to be a reference to the otherwise 
unknown philosopher Sannio; but this note certainly, as 
Capps suggests, belongs back at § 84, and is there a false. 


160 





BOOK III. xx. 84~89 


politics. You ninny, are you looking for any nobler 
politics than that in which he is engaged? Or 
would you have someone in Athens step forward and 
discourse about incomes and revenues, when he is 
the person who ought to talk with all men, 
Athenians, Corinthians, and Romans alike, not about 
revenues, or income, or peace, or war, but about 
happiness and unhappiness, about success and failure, 
about slavery and freedom? When a man is en- 
gaging in such exalted politics, do you ask me if he 
is to engage in politics? Ask me also, if he will hold 
office. Again I will tell you: Fool, what mobler 
office will he hold than that which he now has? 

And yet such a man needs also a certain kind of 
body, since if a consumptive comes forward, thin 
and pale,' his testimony no longer carries the same 
weight. For he must not merely, by exhibiting the 
qualities of his soul, prove to the laymen that it is 
possible, without the help of the things which they 
admire, to be a good and excellent man, but he 
must also show, by the state of his body, that his 
plain and simple style of life in the open air does 
not injure even his body: “ Look,” he says, “ both 
Ι and my body are witnesses to the truth of my 
contention.’ That was the way of Diogenes, for 
he used to go about with a radiant complexion,? 
and would attract the attention of the common 
people by the very appearance of his body. But 
a Cynic who excites pity is regarded as a beggar ; 


inference from the word σαννίων, which is addressed to the 
young man. Tor a similar dislocation of a scholium, see the 
note on § 58, 

ἡ Due in part at least to his regular use of oil for anointing. 
Diogenes Laertius, 6, 81. 


161 
VOL. Il. M 


$0 


91 


93 


94 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


δοκεῖ: πάντες ἀποστρέφονται, πάντες MpooKoT- 
τουσιν. οὐδὲ γὰρ ῥυπαρὸν αὐτὸν δεῖ φαίνεσθαι, 
ὡς μηδὲ κατὰ τοῦτο τοὺς ἀνθρώπους ἀποσοβεῖν, 
ἀλλ᾽ αὐτὸν τὸν αὐχμὸν αὐτοῦ δεῖ καθαρὸν εἶναι 
καὶ ἀγωγόν. 

Δεῖ δὲ καὶ χάριν πολλὴν προσεῖναι φυσικὴν 
τῷ Κυνικῷ καὶ ὀξύτητα (εἰ δὲ μή, μύξα γίνεται, 
3 » “see οὶ c+ " \ 
ἄλλο δ᾽ οὐδέν), ἵνα ἑτοΐμως δύνηται καὶ παρα- 
κειμένως πρὸς τὰ ἐμπίπτοντα ἀπαντᾶν. ὡς 
Διογένης πρὸς τὸν εἰπόντα “σὺ εἶ ὁ Διογένης 
ὃ μὴ οἰόμενος εἶναε θεούς ;" “καὶ πῶς," ἔφη, 
«σὲ θεοῖς ἐχθρὸν νομίξω ;" πάλιν ᾿Αλεξάν- 
δρῳ ἐπιστάντι αὐτῷ κοιμωμένῳ καὶ εἰπόντι 

“οὐ χρὴ παννύχιον εὕδειν βουληφόρον ἄνδρα" 
ἔνυπνος ἔτι ὧν ἀπήντησεν 
“ᾧ λαοί τ᾽ ἐπιτετράφαται καὶ τόσσα μέμηλεν." 


Πρὸ πάντων δὲ τὸ ἡγεμονικὸν αὐτοῦ καθαρώ- 
τερον εἶναι τοῦ ἡλίου: εἰ δὲ μή, κυβευτὴν ἀνάγκη 
καὶ ῥᾳδιουργόν, ὅστις ἐνεχόμενός τινε αὐτὸς 
κακῷ ἐπιτιμήσει τοῖς ἄλλοις. ὅρα γάρ, οἷόν 
ἐστιν. τοῖς βασιλεῦσι τούτοις καὶ τυράννοις οἱ 
δορυφόροι καὶ τὰ ὅπλα παρεῖχε τὸ ἐπιτιμᾶν 


1 Schweighduser: παρείχετο S. 





1 See Diogenes Laertius, 6, 42; the same joke appears 
already in Aristophanes (ig. 32-4), as Capps remarks. 

2 The same account in Theon, Progymn. 5 (Stengel, 17, 
Ῥ. 98). The famous meeting of these two men is pretty 
clearly apocryphal, at least in certain details, See Natorp 
in the Real-Encyclopidie*, V. 767. 


162 


BOOK JII. xxu. 89-94 


everybody turns away from him, everybody takes 
offence at him. No, and he ought not to look dirty 
either, so as not to scare men away in this respect 
also; but even his squalor ought to be cleanly and 
attractive. 

Furthermore, the Cynic ought to possess great 
natural charm and readiness of wit—otherwise he 
becomes mere snivel, and nothing else—so as to be 
able to meet readily and aptly whatever befalls ; 
as Diogenes answered the man who said: “ Are you 
the Diogenes who does not believe in the existence 
of the gods?” by saying, ‘And how can that be? 
You I regard as hated by the gods!’’1 Or again, 
when Alexander? stood over him as he was sleeping 
and said, 


Sleeping the whole night through beseems not 
the giver of counsel, 


he replied, still half asleep, 


Who hath charge of the folk, and for many a 
thing must be watchful.® 


But above all, the Cynic’s governing principle 
should be purer than the sun; if not, he must 
needs be a gambler and a man of no principle, 
because he will be censuring the rest of mankind, 
while he himself is involved .in some vice. For see | 
what this means, To the kings and tyrants of this 
world their bodyguards and their arms used to 


3 Homer, J@iad, II. 24 and 25. The only point in the 
anecdote seems to be that Diogenes could say something 
more or less apposite even when only half awake; for the 
completion of the quotation is in no sense a real answer to 
the reproach. 


95 


96 


97 


98 


99 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


τισὶν καὶ! δύνασθαι καὶ κολάζειν τοὺς ἁμαρ- 
TAVOVTAS καὶ αὐτοῖς οὗσι κακοῖς, τῷ δὲ 
Κυνικῷ ἀντὶ τῶν ὅπλων καὶ τῶν δορυφόρων 
τὸ συνειδὸς τὴν ἐξουσίαν ταύτην παραδίδωσιν. 
ὅταν ἴδῃ,3 ὅτι ὑπερηγρύπνηκεν ὑπὲρ ἀνθρώπων 
καὶ πεπόνηκεν καὶ καθαρὸς μὲν κεκοίμηται, 
καθαρώτερον δ' αὐτὸν ἔτι ὁ ὕπνος ἀφῆκεν, 
ἐντεθύμηται δ᾽, ὅσα ἐντεθύμηται ὡς φίλος τοῖς 
θεοῖς, ὡς ὑπηρέτης, ὡς “μετέχων τῆς ἀρχῆς τοῦ 
Διός, πανταχοῦ δ᾽ αὐτῷ πρόχειρον τὸ 


ἄγου δέ μ᾽, ὦ Ζεῦ, καὶ σύ γ᾽ ἡ Πεπρωμένη, 


καὶ ὅτι εἰ ταύτῃ τοῖς θεοῖς φίλον, ταύτῃ γινέσθω" 
διὰ τί μὴ θαρρήσῃ παρρησιάξεσθαι πρὸς τοὺς 
ἀδελφοὺς τοὺς ἑαυτοῦ, πρὸς τὰ τέκνα, ἁπλῶς 
πτρὸς τοὺς συγγενεῖς ; ; 

Διὰ τοῦτο οὔτε περίεργος οὔτε πολυπράγμων 
ἐστὶν ὁ οὕτω διακείμενος" οὐ γὰρ τὰ ἀλλότρια 

πολυπραγμονεῖ, ὅταν τὰ ἀνθρώπινα ἐπισκοπῇ, 
ἀλλὰ τὰ ἴδια. εἰ δὲ μή, λέγε καὶ τὸν στρατηγὸν 
πολυπράγμονα, ὅταν τοὺς στρατιώτας ἐπισκοπῇ 
καὶ ἐξετάξῃ καὶ παραφυλάσσῃ καὶ τοὺς ἄκοσ- 
μοῦντας κολάζῃ. ἐὰν δ᾽ ὑπὸ μάλης ἔχων 
πλακουντάριον ἐπιτιμᾷς ἄλλοις, ἐρῶ σοι ov 
θέλεις μᾶλλον ἀπελθὼν εἰς γωνίαν καταφαγεῖν 
ἐκεῖνο ὃ κέκλοφας ; τί δὲ σοὶ καὶ τοῖς ἀλλοτρίοις ; 

1 Blass very reasonably suspected this word, although the 
text as it stands can be translated after a fashion. 


* δέ added by Upton from his ‘‘ codex.” 
5. Upton from his ‘‘codex”: ἴδηις 5. 





1 The rather curious imperfect tense here (at which several 
scholars have taken offence) may be due to an attempt to 


164 


BOOK III. xxtr. 94-99 


afford} the privilege of censuring certain persons, 
and the power also to punish those who do wrong, 
no matter how guilty they themselves were ; whereas 
to the Cynic it is his conscience which affords him 
this power, and not his arms and his bodyguards. 
When he sees that he ‘has watched over men, and 
toiled in their behalf; and that he has slept in 
purity, while his sleep leaves him even purer than 
he was before; and that every thought which he 
thinks is that of a friend and servant to the gods, 
of one who shares in the government of Zeus; and 
has always ready at hand the verse 


Lead thou me on, O Zeus, and Destiny,’ 


and “If so it pleases the gods, so be it,’ ? why 
should he not have courage to speak freely to his 
own brothers, to his children, in a word, to his 
kinsmen ? 

That is why the man who is in this frame ot 
mind is neither a busybody nor a meddler; for he 
is not meddling in other people’s affairs when he 
is overseeing the actions of men, but these are his 
proper concern. Otherwise, go call the general a 
meddler when he oversees and reviews and watches 
over his troops, and punishes those who are guilty 
of a breach of discipline. But if you censure other 
men while you are hiding a little sweet-cake under 
your arm, 11] say to you: Wouldn't you rather go 
off into a corner and eat up what you have stolen? 
What have you to do with other people’s business? 


avoid the suggestion that the Roman emperors might also be 


evil men themselves. 
2 See note on 11. 23, 42, in Vol. I. 
8 Plato, Crito, 43 Ὁ), 


165 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


τίς γὰρ εἶ; ὁ ταῦρος εἶ ἢ ἡ βασίλισσα τῶν 
μελισσῶν ; δεῖξόν μοι τὰ σύμβολα τῆς ἡγεμονίας, 
οἷα ἐκείνη ἐκ φύσεως ἔχει. εἰ δὲ κηφὴν εἶ ἐπι- 
δικαξόμενος τῆς βασιλείας τῶν μελισσῶν, οὐ 
δοκεῖς ὅτι καὶ σὲ καταβαλοῦσιν οἱ συμπολι- 
τευόμενοι, ὡς αἱ μέλισσαι τοὺς κηφῆνας ; 

100 Τὸ μὲν γὰρ ἀνεκτικὸν τοσοῦτον ἔχειν δεῖ τὸν 
Κυνικόν, dor αὐτὸν ἀναίσθητον δοκεῖν τοῖς 
πολλοῖς καὶ λίθον" οὐδεὶς αὐτὸν λοιδορεῖ, οὐδεὶς 
τύπτει, οὐδεὶς ὑβρίζει: τὸ σωμάτιον δ᾽ αὐτοῦ 
δέδωκεν αὐτὸς χρῆσθαι τῷ θέλοντι ὡς βούλεται. 

101 μέμνηται γάρ, OTL τὸ χεῖρον ἀνάγκη νικᾶσθαι 
ὑπτὸ τοῦ κρείττονος, ὅπου χεῖρόν ἐστιν, πὸ δὲ 
σωμάτιον τῶν πολλῶν χεῖρον, τὸ ἀσθενέστερον 

102 τῶν ἰσχυροτέρων. οὐδέποτ᾽ οὖν εἰς τοῦτον κατα- 
βαίνει τὸν ἀγῶνα, ὅπου δύναται νικηθῆναι, ἀλλὰ 
τῶν ἀλλοτρίων εὐθὺς ἐξίσταται, τῶν δούλων οὐκ 

103 ἀντιποιεῖται. ὅπου δὲ προαίρεσις καὶ Χρῆσις 
τῶν φαντασιῶν, ἐκεῖ ὄψει, ὅσα ὄμματα ἔχει, ἵν' 
εἴπῃς, ὅτε “Apyos τυφλὸς ἣν πρὸς αὐτόν. 

104 μή που συγκατάθεσις προπετής, μή που ὁρμὴ 
εἰκαίΐα, μή που ὄρεξις, ἀποτευκτική, μή που 
ἔκκλισις περυπτωτική, μή mou* ἐπιβολὴ ἀτελής, 
μή που μέμψις, μή που ταπείνωσις ἢ φθόνος ; 

105 ὧδε ἡ πολλὴ προσοχὴ καὶ σύντασις, τῶν δ᾽ 
ἄλλων ἕνεκα ὕπτιος ῥέγκει: εἰρήνη πᾶσα. 
λῃστὴς προαιρέσεως οὐ γίνεται, τύραννος οὐ 

106 γίνεται. σωματίου δέ; vai. καὶ κτησειδίου; 


1 μή που supplied by Schenkl. 





πα 


+ That is, actually or effectually, for the mere act without 
any effect is as nothing. 


166 


BOOK IIT. xx. 99-106 


Why, who are you? Are you the bull in the herd, 
or the queen bee of the hive? Show me the tokens 
of your leadership, like those which nature gives 
the queen bee. But if you are a drone and lay 
claim to the sovereignty over the bees, don’t you 
suppose your fellow-citizens will overthrow you, just 
as the bees so treat the drones? 

Now the spirit of patient endurance the Cynic must 
have to such a degree that common people will think 
him insensate and a stone; nobody reviles! him, 
nobody beats him, nobody insults him; but his body 
he has himself given for anyone to use as he sees 
fit. For he bears in mind that the inferior, in that 
respect in which it is inferior, must needs be 
overcome by the superior, and that his body is 
inferior to the crowd—the physically weaker, that 
is, inferior to the physically stronger. Therefore, 
he never enters this contest where he can be 
beaten, but immediately gives up what is not his 
own; he makes no claim to what is slavish? But 
in the realm of the moral purpose, and the use 
of his sense-impressions, there you will see he 
has so many eyes that you will say Argus was blind 
in comparison with him, Is there anywhere rash 
assent, reckless choice, futile desire, unsuccessful 
aversion, incompleted purpose, fault-finding, self- 
disparagement, or envy? Here is concentrated his 
earnest attention and energy; but, as far as other 
things go, he lies flat on his back and snores; he is 
in perfect peace. There rises up no thief of his 
moral purpose, nor any tyrant over it. But of his 
body? Certainly. And of his paltry possessions ? 


3 Like the body, his own or that of another. His rule is 
over the mind and the moral purpose. 7 


167 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


vat καὶ ἀρχῶν καὶ τιμῶν. τί οὖν αὐτῷ TOU- 
TOV μέλει ; ὅταν οὖν τὶς διὰ τούτων αὐτὸν 
ἐκφοβῇ, λέγει αὐτῷ “ὕπαγε, ζήτει τὰ παιδία. 
ἐκείνοις τὰ προσωπεῖα φοβερά ἐστιν, ἐγὼ δ᾽ 
οἶδα, ὅτι ὀστράκινά ἐστιν, ἔσωθεν δὲ οὐδὲν 
vy 

107 Περὶ τοιούτου πράγματος βουλεύῃ. ὥστε ἐάν 
σοι δόξῃ, τὸν θεὸν σοι, ὑπέρθου καὶ ἰδού σοὶ 

108 πρῶτον τὴν παρασκευήν. ἰδοὺ γάρ, τί καὶ ὁ 
"Exrop λέγει τῇ ᾿Ανδρομάχῃ" ‘ “ὕπαγε, φησίν, 
“μᾶλλον εἰς οἶκον καὶ ὕφαινε" 


πόλεμος δ᾽ ἄνδρεσσι μελήσει 
πᾶσι, μάλιστα δ᾽ ἐμοί. 1 


109 οὕτως καὶ τῆς ἰδίας παρασκενῆς συνήσθετο καὶ 
τῆς ἐκείνης ἀδυναμίας. 


κγ΄. Πρὸς τοὺς ᾿ἀναγιγνώσκοντας καὶ διαλςεγο- 
μένους ἐπιδεικτεκῶς. 


1 Τίς εἶναι θέλεις, σαυτῷ πρῶτον εἰπέ εἶθ᾽ 
οὕτως ποίει ἃ ποιεῖς. καὶ γὰρ ἐπὶ τῶν ἄλλων 
2 σχεδὸν ἁπάντων οὕτως ὁρῶμεν γινόμενα. οἱ 
ἀθλοῦντες πρῶτον κρίνουσιν, τίνες εἶναι θέλουσιν, 
εἶθ᾽ ο ὕτως τὰ ἑξῆς ποιοῦσιν. εἰ δολεχοδρόμος, 
τοιαύτη τροφή, τοιοῦτος περίπατος, τοιαύτη 
τρῖψις, τοιαύτη γυμνασία" εἰ σταδιοδρόμος, 
πάντα ταῦτα ἀλλοῖα" εἰ πένταθλος, ἔτε ἀλλοιό- 


1 πᾶσιν, ἐμοὶ δὲ μάλιστα the MSS. of Homer. 





1 Homer, liad, VI. 492-3. 
168 


BOOK IIL xxi. ro6-xxin. 2 


Certainly ; and of his offices and honours. Why, 
then, does he pay any attention to these? So 
when anyone tries to terrify him by means of these 
things, he says to him, “Go to, look for children ; 
they are scared by masks; but I know that they 
are made of earthenware, and have nothing in- 
side.” 

Such is the nature of the matter about which you 
are deliberating. Wherefore, in the name of God 
I adjure you, put off your decision, and look first 
at your endowment. For see what Hector says to 
Andromache. “Go,” says he, “rather into the 
house and weave; 


but for men shall war, be the business, 
Men one and all, and mostly for me.” } 


So did he recognize not only his own special 
endowment, but also her incapacity. 


CHAPTER XXIII 


To those who read and discuss for the purpose of 
display 


ΤΕ, yourself, first of all, what kind of man you 
want to be; and then go ahead with what you 
are doing. For in practically every other pursuit 
we see this done. The athletes first decide what 
kind of athletes they want to be, and then they 
act accordingly. If a man wants to be a distance- 
runner, he adopts a suitable diet, walking, rub- 
bing, and exercise; if he wants to be a sprinter, 
all these details are different ; if he wants to con- 
tend in the pentathlon, they are still more different 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


TEpa. οὕτως εὑρήσεις καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν τεχνῶν. εἰ 
τέκτων, τοιαῦτα ἕξεις" εἰ χαλκεύς, τοιαῦτα. 
ἕκαστον γὰρ τῶν γινομένων ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν ἂν μὲν 
ἐπὶ μηδὲν ἀναφέρωμεν, εἰκῆ ποιήσομεν' ἐὰν ᾿ 
ἐφ᾽ ὃ μὴ δεῖ, διεσφαλμένως. λοιπὸν ἡ μέν τίς 
ἐστι κοινὴ ἀναφορά, ἡ δ᾽ ἰδία. πρῶτον ἵν᾿ ὡς 
ἄνθρωπος. ἐν τούτῳ τί περιέχεται ; μὴ ὡς 
πρόβατον, εἰκῇ 3 ἐπιεικῶς" μὴ βλαπτικῶς " ὡς 
θηρίον. ἡ δ᾽ ἰδία πρὸς τὸ ἐπιτήδευμα ἑκάστου 
καὶ τὴν προαίρεσιν. ὃ κιθαρῳδὸς ὡς κιθαρῳδός, 
0 τέκτων ὡς τέκτων, δ φιλόσοφος ὡς φιλόσοφος, 
ὸ ῥήτωρ ὡς ῥήτωρ. ὅταν οὖν λέγῃς “ δεῦτε καὶ 
ἀκούσατέ μου ἀναγιγνώσκοντος. ὑμῖν," σκέψαι 
πρῶτον μὴ εἰκῆ αὐτὸ ποιεῖν. εἶτ᾽ ἂν εὕρῃς, ὅτι 
ἀναφέρεις, σκέψαι, εἰ ἐφ᾽ ὃ δεῖ. ὠφελῆσαι 
θέλεις ἢ ἐπαινεθῆναι ; εὐθὺς ἀκούεις λέγοντος 
“ἐμοὶ δὲ τοῦ παρὰ τῶν πολλῶν ἐπαίνου τίς 
λόγος 5 καὶ καλῶς λέγει. οὐδὲ γὰρ τῷ 
μουσικῷ, καθὸ μουσικός ἐστιν, οὐδὲ τῷ γεώμε- 
τ LKQ. οὐκοῦν , ὠφελῆσαι θέλεις ; πρὸς τί; 
εἰπὲ καὶ ἡμῖν, ἵνα καὶ αὐτοὶ τρέχωμεν εἰς τὸ 
ἀκροατήριόν σου. νῦν δύναταί τις ὠφελῆσαι 
ἄλλους μὴ αὐτὸς ὠφελημένος ; οὔ. οὐδὲ γὰρ 
εἰς τεκτονικὴν ὁ μὴ τέκτων οὐδ᾽ εἰς σκυτικὴν 
0 μὴ σκυτεύς. 

Θέλεις οὖν γνῶναι, εἰ ὠφέλησαι; φέρε σου 
τὰ δόγματα, φιλόσοφε. τίς ἐπαγγελία ὀρέξεως ; 


1 εἰκῆ added by Reiske. Compare 8 6. 
5. Schenk] : πρόβατον, εἰ βλαπτικῶς καὶ ἐπιεικῶς, ὡς S. 





1 See on I. 29, 59, in Vol. I, 
170 


BOOK III. xxi. 2-9 


You will find the same thing in the arts. If you 
want to be a carpenter, you will have such and 
such exercises; if a blacksmith, such and such other. 
For in everything that we do, if we do not refer 
it to some standard, we shall be acting at random ; 
but if we refer it to the wrong standard, we shall 
make an utter failure. Furthermore, there are two 
standards to go by, the one general, the other 
individual. First of 411,1 must act asa man. What 
is included in this? Not to act as a sheep, gently 
but without fixed purpose; nor destructively, like 
a wild beast. The individual standard applies to 
each man’s occupation and moral purpose. The 
citharoede is to act as a citharoede,! the carpenter 
as a carpenter, the philosopher as a philosopher, 
the rhetor as a rhetor. When, therefore, you say, 
“Come and listen to me as I read you a lecture,” 
see to it first that you are not acting without fixed 
purpose, And then, if you find that you are using 
a standard of judgement, see if it is the right one. 
Do you wish to do good or to be praised ? you ask. 
Immediately you get the answer, “ What do I care 
for praise from the mob?” And that is an excellent 
answer. Neither does the musician, in so far as he 
is a musician, nor the geometrician. Do you wish 
to do good, then? To what end? men reply. Tell 
- us, also, that we too may run to your lecture-room. 
Now can anybody do good to others unless he has 
received good himself? No more than the non- 
carpenter can help others in carpentry, or the non- 
cobbler in cobbling. 

Do you wish, then, to know whether you have 
received any good? Produce your judgements, 
philosopher. What does desire promise? Not to 


171 


10 


ll 


13 


14 


1ὅ 


16 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ἈΝ , 
μὴ ἀποτυγχάνειν. τίς ἐκκλίσεως ; μὴ περυπίπ- 
rat " \ 7 
τειν. ἄγε, πληροῦμεν αὐτῶν τὴν ἐπαγγελίαν ; 
-Ο 3 / ἴων ft 
εἰπέ μοι τἀληθῆ" ἂν δὲ ψεύσῃ, ἐρῶ σοι “πρῴην 
A a ld 4 
ψυχρότερόν σου THY ἀκροατῶν συνελθόντων καὶ 
μὴ ἐπιβοησάντων σοι τεταπεινωμένος ἐξῆλθες" 
πρῴην ἐπαινεθεὶς περιήρχου καὶ πᾶσιν ἔλεγες 
‘ rd ξὸ Η > ¢ θ a / \ 3 7 
τί σοὶ ἔδοξα ; αυμαστῶς, κύριε, τὴν ἐμήν 
σοι σωτηρίαν ‘ads δ᾽ εἶπον ἐκεῖνο; “τὸ 
ποῖον ;᾿ “ὅπου διέγραψα τὸν Πᾶνα καὶ τὰς 
Νύμφας. “ὑπερφυῶς. " εἶτά μοι λέγεις, ἐν 
> καὶ \ > / \ 7 3 / 
ὀρέξει καὶ ἐκκλίσει κατὰ φύσιν avactpédy ; 
ὕπαγε, ἄλλον πεῖθε. τὸν δεῖνα δὲ πρῴην οὐκ 
> 7 \ \ \ , ᾿ Ν a ) 
ἐπήνεις παρὰ τὸ σοὶ φαινόμενον ; τὸν δεῖνα ὃ 
ὔ \ 
οὐκ ἐκολάκευες τὸν συγκλητικόν ; ἤθελές σου 
\ ’, 4 ἴω \ f / 
τὰ παιδία εἶναι τοιαῦτα ;—Mn γένοιτο.--- Τίνος 
Ὁ 3 f \ ral 3 7 3 ‘\ 
οὖν ἕνεκα ἐπήνεις καὶ περιεῖπες αὐτόν ;—Evduns 
ἤ “ 
νεανίσκος καὶ λόγων ἀκουστικός.---Πόθεν τοῦτο; 
--- μὲ θαυμάζξει.----ἜΕἴρηκας τὴν ἀπόδειξιν. 
Εἶτα τί δοκεῖ σοι; αὐτοί cov οὗτοι οὐ κατα- 
φρονοῦσιν λεληθότως; ὅταν οὖν ἄνθρωπος συ- 


\ e A \ 3 \ a , 
vedas ἑαυτῷ μηθὲν ἀγαθὸν μήτε πεποιηκότι 


μήτ᾽ ἐνθυμουμένῳ εὕρῃ φιλόσοφον τὸν λέγοντα 
“ \ So. a \ sf 29 , 
peyahoduns καὶ ἁπλοῦς καὶ ἀκέραιος, τί 
δοκεῖς ἄλλο αὐτὸν λέγειν ἢ “οὗτός τινά ποτέ 
7} ¥ 33 x 3 ? 7 “ 
μου χρείαν ἔχει; ἢ εἰπέ μοι, TL μεγαλοφνοῦς 
ἔργον ἐπιδέδεικται; ἰδοὺ σύνεστί σοι τοσούτῳ 
χρόνῳ, διαλεγομένου σου ἀκήκοεν, ἀναγιγνώσ- 
172 


BOOK III. xxi. 9-16 


fail in getting. What does aversion? Not to fall 
into what we are avoiding. Well, do we fulfil their 
promise? Tell me the truth; but if you lie, [ will 
say to you: “ The other day, when your audience 
gathered rather coolly, and did not shout applause, 
you walked out of the hall in low spirits. And 
again the other day, when you were received with 
applause, you walked around and asked everybody, 
‘What did you think of me?’ ‘It was marvellous, 
sir, 1 swear by my life.” ‘How did I render that 
particular passage?’ ‘Which one?’ ‘WhereI drew 
a picture of Pan and the Nymphs?’ ‘It was 
superb.’” And after all this you tell me that you 
follow nature in desire and aversion? Go to; try 
to get somebody else to believe you! Didn’t you, 
just the other day, praise So-and-so contrary to your 
honest opinion? And didn’t you flatter So-and-so, 
the senator? Did you want your children to ΡῈ. 
like that ?—Far from it !—Why then did you praise 
him and palaver over him ?—He is a gifted young 
man and fond of listening to discourses.—How do 
you know that ?>—He is an admirer of mine.—There 
you gave your proof ! 

After all, what do you think? . Don’t these very 
same persons secretly despise you? When, there- 
fore, a person who is conscious of never: having 
either thought or done a good thing finds a 
philosopher who tells him, “You are a genius, 
straightforward and unspoiled,” what else do you 
suppose the man says to himself but, “ This man 
wants to use me for something or other’? Or else 
tell me; what work of genius has he displayed ? 
Look, he has been with you all this time, he has 
listened to your discourse, he has heard you lecture. 


173 


17 


18 


19 


20 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


κοντος ἀκήκοεν. κατέσταλται, ἐπέστραπται ἐφ᾽ 
αὑτόν ; ἤσθηται, ἐν οἵοις κακοῖς ἐστίν ; ἀπο- 
βέβληκεν οἴησιν ; ζητεῖ τὸν διδάξοντα ;--- Ζητεῖ, 

, ‘ 7 lan “ “ >” f 
φησί.---ὸν διδάξοντα, πῶς δεῖ βιοῦν ; οὔ, μωρέ' 
ἀλλὰ πῶς δεῖ φράζξειν' τούτου γὰρ ἕνεκα καὶ 
σὲ θαυμάζει. ἄκουσον αὐτοῦ, τίνα λέγει. 
“οὗτος ὁ ἄνθρωπος πάνυ τεχνικώτατα γράφει, 
Δίωνος: πολὺ κάλλιον." ὅλον ἄλλο ἐστίν. μή 
τι λέγει “ ὁ ἄνθρωπος αἰδήμων ἐστίν, οὗτος πιστός 
ἐστιν, οὗτος ἀτάραχός ἐστιν"; εἰ δὲ καὶ ἔλεγεν, 
εἶπον ἂν αὐτῷ “ἐπειδὴ οὗτος πιστός ἐστιν, 
οὗτος ὁ πιστὸς τί ἐστίν ; καὶ εἰ μὴ εἶχεν εἰπεῖν, 
προσέθηκα ἂν ὅτι “ πρῶτον μάθε, τί λέγεις, εἶθ᾽ 
οὕτως λέγε." 

Οὕτως οὖν κακῶς διακείμενος καὶ χάσκων περὶ 
τοὺς ἐπαινέσοντας καὶ ἀριθμῶν τοὺς ἀκούοντάς 
σου θέλεις ἄλλους ὠφελεῖν ; “ σήμερόν μου πολλῷ 
πλείονες ἤκουσαν. “vai, πολλοί." “δοκοῦμεν 
ὅτι πεντακόσιοι. “οὐδὲν λέγεις" θὲς αὐτοὺς 
χιλίους." “Δίωνος οὐδέποτ᾽ ἤκουσαν τοσοῦτοι." 
“πόθεν αὐτῷ ; “καὶ κομψῶς αἰσθάνονται λό- 
you. “τὸ καλόν, κύριε, καὶ λίθον κινῆσαι 
δύναται." ἰδοὺ φωναὶ φιλοσόφου, ἰδοὺ διάθεσις 
ὠφελήσοντος ἀνθρώπους" ἰδοὺ ἀκηκοὼς ἄνθρωπος 





1 Probably the famous lecturer of the day, Dio Chrysostom, 
of Prusa. 

2 To be taken as intended for a serious compliment, and 
probably a popular saying (as Upton suggested) like our 
‘Music hath charms,” or, ‘‘ The very stones would ery out.” 
The idea behind it would be familiar from the story of how 
the trees followed Orpheus, in order to hear his beautiful 
music, or the stones arranged themselves in the walls of” 
Dhebes, to the strains of Amphion. Capps, however, thinks 


174 


BOOK III. xxut. 16-20 


Has he settled down? Has he come to himselr 
Has he realized the evil plight in which he is? 
Has he cast aside his self-conceit? Is he looking 
for the man who will teach him ?—He zs looking, 
the man says.—The man who will teach him how he 
ought to live? No, fool, but only how he ought 
to deliver a speech ; for that is why he admires even 
you. Listen to him,and hear what he says. “ This 
fellow has a most artistic style; it is much finer 
than Dio’s.”+ That’s altogether different. He 
doesn’t say, does he, “ The man is respectful, he 
is faithful and unperturbed”? And even if he had 
said this, I would have replied: “Since this man is 
faithful, what is your definition of the faithful man?” 
And if he had no answer to give, I would have added: 
“First find out what you are talking about, and 
then do your talking.” * . 

When you are in such a sorry state as this, then, 
gaping for men to praise you, and counting the 
number of your audience, is it your wish to do good 
toothers? “ To-day 1 had a much larger audience.” 
“Yes, indeed, there were great numbers.” “ Five 
hundred, I fancy.” ‘Nonsense, make it a thou- 
sand.” ‘ Dio never had so large an audience.” 
« How could you expect him to?” “ Yes, and they 
are clever at catching the points.” “ Beauty, sir, can 
move even a stone.” * There are the words of a 
philosopher for you! That’s the feeling of one who 
is on his way to do good to men! There you have 


that “τὸ καλόν means ‘honour’” here, and that the remark 
is ‘‘cynical.” He would translate: ‘Talk of honour, sir,’ 
etc., adding the explanatory note: ‘“‘That is, the speaker 
would have had no success with his audience if he had 
preached honour and virtue (as the true philosopher should),” 


175 


21 


22 


23 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


λόγου, ἀνεγνωκὼς τὰ Σωκρατικὰ ws Σωκρατικά, 
οὐχὶ δ᾽ ὡς Λυσίου καὶ ᾿Ισοκράτους. “ πολλάκις 
ἐθαύμασα, τίσιν ποτὲ λόγοις. οὔ ἀλλὰ τίνι 
ποτὲ λόγῳ' τοῦτ᾽ ἐκείνου λειότερον." μὴ γὰρ 
ἄλλως αὐτὰ ἀνεγνώκατε ἢ ὡς ᾧδάρια; ὡς εἴ 
γε ἀνεγυγνώσκετε ὡς δεῖ, οὐκ ἂν πρὸς τούτοις 
ἐγίνεσθε, ἀλλ᾽ ἐκεῖνο μᾶλλον ἐβλέπετε “ἐμὲ δ᾽ 
ἔΑνυτος καὶ Μέλητος ἀποκτεῖναι μὲν δύυνανταΐ, 
βλάψαι δ᾽ ov,” καὶ ὅτι “ὡς ἐγὼ ἀεὶ τοιοῦτος 
οἷος μηδενὶ προσέχειν τῶν ἐμῶν ἢ τῷ λόγῳ, ὃς 
ἄν μοι σκοπουμένῳ βέλτιστος φαίνηται." διὰ 
τοῦτο τίς ἤκουσέ ποτε Σωκράτους λέγοντος ὅτι 
“««οἷδά τε καὶ διδάσκω" ; ἀλλὰ ἄλλον ἀλλαχοῦ 
ἔπεμπεν. τουγαροῦν ἤρχοντο πρὸς αὐτὸν ἀξιοῦν- 
τες φιλοσόφοις ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ συσταθῆναι κἀκεῖνος 
ἀπῆγεν καὶ συνίστανεν. οὔ" ἀλλὰ προσπέμπων 
ἔλεγεν “ἄκουσόν μου σήμερον διαλεγομένου ἐν 
τῇ οἰκίᾳ τῇ Kodpatov.” 

Τί σου ἀκούσω; ἐπιδεῖξαί μοι θέλεις, ὅτι 
κομψῶς συντιθεῖς τὰ ὀνόματα ; συντιθεῖς, ἄν- 
θρωπε' καὶ τί σοι ἀγαθὸν ἐστιν; “ἀλλ᾽ ἐπαί- 

1 Wolf: μηδέν 8. 





1 The rhetors must have disputed whether the opening 
words of Xenophon’s Memorabilia might not have been 
improved upon by using the singular λόγῳ instead of the 
plural λόγοις. 

2 Plato, Apol. 300. 

8 Slightly modified from Plato, Crito, 46 B. 

4 2,6, to different authorities on special subjects. 

5 Actual instances of such introductions are recorded in 
the Protagoras, 310 Ἐς, and the Theaetetus, 151B. Compare 
also Maximus Tyrius, 38, 4, 6. The personal relations 


between Socrates and the Sophists in general were clearly 


not strained. 
£76 


BOOK III. xx. 20-23 


a man who has listened to reason, who has read the 
accounts of Socrates as coming from Socrates, not as 
though they were from Lysias, or Isocrates! “<I 
have often wondered by what arguments ever ’—no, 
but ‘by what argument ever’—this form is smoother 
than the other!’’4 You have been reading this 
literature just as you would music-hall songs, haven’t 
you? Because, if you had read them in the right 
way, you would not have lingered on these points, 
but this is the sort of thing rather that would have 
caught your eye; “ Anytus and Meletus can kill me, 
but they cannot hurt me”’;* and: “I have always 
been the kind of man to pay attention to none of my 
own. affairs, but only to the argument which strikes 
me as best upon reflection.” 3 And for that reason 
who ever heard Socrates saying, “I know something 
and teach it’? But he used tosend one person here 
and another there. Therefore men used to go to 
him to have him introduce them to philosophers, and 
he used to take them around and introduce them, 
But no, your idea of him, no doubt;is that, as he was 
taking them along, he used to say, “ Come around 
to-day and hear me deliver a discourse in the house 
of Quadratus”’ [6 

Why should I listen to you? Do you want to 
exhibit to me the clever way in which you put words 
together? You do compose them cleverly, man; 
and what good is it to you? “But praise me,” 
᾿ 6 The practice of letting a popular or distinguished scholar 
lecture in one’s house was particularly common in Greek and 
Roman times. Several distinguished persons by the name 
of Quadratus were contemporaries of Epictetus (Prosopo- 
graphia Imperii Romant, Vol. ITI, nos. 600 ff.), but it is not 


certain that any one of them is meant, because they resided 
regularly at Rome, and this discourse was held at Nicopolis. 


177 


24 


28 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


νεσόν pie. τί λέγεις TO ἐπαΐνεσον ; “εἰπέ μοι 
‘ova’ καὶ “θαυμαστῶς." ἰδοὺ λέγω. εἰ 8 
ἐστὶν ἔπαινος ἐκεῖνο, ὅ τι ποτὲ λέγουσιν οἱ 
φιλόσοφοι τῶν ἐν τῇ! τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ κατηγορίᾳ," 
τί σε ἔχω ἐπαινέσαι ; εἰ ἀγαθόν ἐστι τὸ φράξειν 
ὀρθῶς, δίδαξόν με καὶ ἐπαινέσω. τί οὖν; ἀηδῶς 
δεῖ τῶν τοιούτων ἀκούειν ; μὴ γένοιτο. ἐγὼ μὲν 
οὐδὲ κιθαρῳδοῦ ἀηδῶς ἀκούω" μή τι οὖν τούτου 
ἕνεκα κιθαρῳδεῖν pe δεῖ στάντα; ἄκουσον, τί 
λέγειν Σωκράτης" “οὐδὲ γὰρ ἂν πρέποι, ὦ ἄνδρες, 
τῇδε τῇ ἡλικίᾳ ὥσπερ μειρακίῳ πλάττοντι λόγους 
εἰς ὑμᾶς εἰσιέναι. “ὥσπερ μειρακίῳ" φησίν. 
ἔστι γὰρ τῷ ὄντε κομψὸν τὸ τεχνίον ἐκλέξαι 
ὀνομάτια καὶ ταῦτα συνθεῖναι καὶ παρελθόντα 
εὐφυῶς ἀναγνῶναι ἢ εἰπεῖν καὶ μεταξὺ ἀναγι- 
γνώσκοντα ἐπιφθέγξασθαι ὅτι “τούτοις οὐ πολ- 
λοὶ δύνανται παρακολουθεῖν, μὰ τὴν ὑμετέραν 
σωτηρίαν." 

Φιλόσοφος δ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἀκρόασιν παρακαλεῖ ; ---- 
Οὐχὶ δ᾽ ὡς ὁ ἥλιος ἄγει αὐτὸς ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτὸν τὴν 
τροφήν, οὕτως δὲ καὶ οὗτος ἄγει τοὺς ὠφελη- 
θησομένους ; ποῖος ἰατρὸς παρακαλεῖ, ἵνα τις 
vr αὐτοῦ θεραπευθῇ ; καίτοι νῦν ἀκούω ὅτι 
καὶ οἱ ἰατροὶ παρακαλοῦσιν ἐν Ρώμῃ πλὸὺὴν ἐπ᾽ 
ἐμοῦ παρεκαλοῦντο. “παρακαλῶ σε ἐλθόντα 


1 Upton (in part after Wolf): τῶν τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ 8, 
2 κατηγορία 8. 





1 Plato, Apology, 17 C. 

? According to Stoic doctrine the so-called “rays” of the 
sun were thought to be lines of vapour drawn to the sun in 
order to feed its fires. Zeno, frag. 35 ; Cleanthes, frag. 501 ; 


178 


BOOK III, xxi. 23-28 


What do you mean by “praise”? Cry out to me, 
‘Bravo!’ or ‘Marvellous!’”’ All right, PIL say it. 
But if praise is some one of those things which the 
philosophers put in the category of the good, what 
praise can I give you? If it is a good thing to speak 
correctly, teach me and I will praise you. What 
then? Ought one to take no pleasure in listening 
to such efforts? Far from it. Ido not fail to take 
pleasure in listening to a citharoede; surely I am 
not bound for that reason to stand and sing to my 
own accompaniment on the harp, am [? Listen, 
what does Socrates say? ‘Nor would it be seemly 
for me, O men of Athens, at my time of life to 
appear before you like some Jad, and weave a 
cunning discourse.” 1 «Like some lad,” he says. 
For it is indeed a dainty thing, this small art of 
selecting trivial phrases and putting them together, 
and of coming forward and reading or reciting them 
gracefully, and then in the midst of the delivery 
shouting out, “There are not many people who can 
follow this, by your lives, I swear it!” 

Does a philosopher invite people to a lecture ?—Is 
it not rather the case that, as the sun draws its own 
sustenance to itself,? so he also draws to himself 
those to whom he is to do good? What physician 
ever invites a patient to come and be healed by him? 
Although I am told that in these days the physicians 
in Rome do advertise; however, in my time they 
were called in? by their patients. ‘I invite you to _ 


Chrysippus, frags. 579, 652, 658-663, all in Von Arnim’s | 
Stoicorum Veterum Fragmenta. | 

3 The three slightly varying translations for παρακαλεῖν, 
‘‘invite,” ‘“‘advertize,” and ‘call in,” seem to be required by 


our idiom. 


179 


30 


31 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


5 ΡᾺ e “ 3 \ \ f A 
ἀκοῦσαι, OTL TOL κακῶς ἐστὶ καὶ πάντων μᾶλλον 
ἐπιμελῇ ἢ οὗ δεῖ σε ἐπιμελεῖσθαι καὶ ὅτι ἀγνοεῖς 
τὰ ἀγαθὰ καὶ τὰ κακὰ καὶ κακοδαίμων εἶ καὶ 
δυστυχής. κομψὴ παράκλησις. καὶ μὴν ἂν 
μὴ ταῦτα ἐμποιῇ ὁ τοῦ φιλοσόφου λόγος, νεκρός 
ἐστι καὶ αὐτὸς καὶ ὁ λέγων. εἴωθε λέγειν ὁ 
Ῥοῦφος “et εὐσχολεῖτε ἐπαινέσαι με, ἐγὼ δ᾽ 
οὐδὲν λέγω." τοιγαροῦν οὕτως ἔλεγεν, ὥσθ᾽ 
ἕκαστον ἡμῶν καθήμενον οἴεσθαι, ὅτι τίς ποτε 
αὐτὸν διαβέβληκεν' οὕτως ἥπτετο τῶν γιγνο- 
μένων, οὕτως πρὸ ὀφθαλμῶν ἐτίθει τὰ ἑκάστου 
κακά. 

Ἰατρεῖόν ἐστιν, ἄνδρες, τὸ τοῦ φιλοσόφου 
σχολεῖον' οὐ δεῖ ἡσθέντας ἐξελθεῖν, ἀλλ᾽ ἀδγή- 
σαντας. ἔρχεσθε γὰρ οὐχ ὑγιεῖς, GAN ὁ μὲν 
ὧμον ἐκβεβληκώς, ὁ δ᾽ ἀπόστημα ἔχων, ὁ δὲ 
σύριγγα, ὁ δὲ κεφαλαλγῶν. εἶτ᾽ ἀγὼ καθίσας 
ὑμῖν λέγω νοημάτια καὶ ἐπιφωνημάτια, iv ὑμεῖς 
ἐπαινέσαντές με ἐξέλθητε, ὁ μὲν τὸν ὦμον 
ἐκφέρων οἷον εἰσήνεγκεν, ὁ δὲ τὴν κεφαλὴν 
ὡσαύτως ἔχουσαν, ὁ δὲ τὴν σύριγγα, ὁ δὲ τὸ 
ἀποστημα; εἶτα τούτου ἕνεκα ἀποδημήσωσιν 
ἄνθρωποι νεώτεροι καὶ τοὺς γονεῖς τοὺς αὑτῶν 
ἀπολίπωσιν καὶ τοὺς φίλους καὶ τοὺς συγγενεῖς 
καὶ τὸ κτησίδιον, ἵνα σοι “ova” φῶσιν ἐπιφωνη- 
μάτια λέγοντι; τοῦτο Σωκράτης ἐποίει, τοῦτο 
Ζήνων, τοῦτο Κλεάνθης ; 


1 Koraes: ἀπολείπουσιν S. 





1 At greater length in Gellius, 5,1, 1. . 

2 So it had, indeed, become in his time. Compare Introd. 
p. xxiv. Thus also one of the great libraries at Alexandria is 
said to have had over its portal: larpetoy τῆς ψυχῆς. If the 


180 


BOOK III. xxunz. 28-32 


come and hear that you are in a bad way, and that 
you are concerned with anything rather than what 
you should be concerned with, and that you are 
ignorant of the good and the evil, and are wretched 
and miserable.” ‘That’s a fine invitation! And yet 
if the philosopher’s discourse does not produce this 
effect, it is lifeless and so is the speaker himself. 
Rufus used to say, “If you have nothing better to 
do than to praise me, then I am speaking to no 
purpose.”! Wherefore he spoke in such a way that 
each of us as we sat there fancied someone had gone to 
Rufus and told him of our faults; so effective was his 
grasp of what men actually do, so vividly did he set 
before each man’s eyes his particular weaknesses. 
Men, the lecture-room of the philosopher is a 
hospital;? you ought not to walk out of it in 
pleasure, but in pain. For you are not well when 
you come; one man has a dislocated shoulder, 
another an abscess, another a fistula, another a head- 
ache, And then am 1 to sit down and recite to you 
dainty little notions and clever little mottoes, so that 
you will go out with words of praise on your lips, one 
man carrying away his shoulder just as it was when 
he came in, another his head in the same state, 
another his fistula, another his abscess? And so it’s 
for this, is it, that young men are to travel from 
home, and leave their parents, their friends, their 
relatives, and their bit of property, merely to cry 
“ Bravo!” as you recite your clever little mottoes? 
Was this what Socrates used to do, or Zeno, or 
Cleanthes? 
story is true (which I very much doubt), the inscription 


surely belongs to the decadence, for such was clearly not the 
conception of science which prevailed in the great days of 


Alexandria. 


33 


34 


35 


36 


37 


88 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


‘ 
Ti οὖν ; οὐκ ἔστιν ὁ προτρεπτικὸς χαρακτήρ; 
e e 
— Tis yap οὐ λέγει; ὡς O1 ἐλεγκτικός, ὡς ὁ 
, 5 
διδασκαλικός. τίς οὖν πώποτε τέταρτον εἶπεν 
f , e 
μετὰ τούτων τὸν ἐπιδεικτικόν ; Tis γάρ ἐστιν ὁ 
προτρεπτικός ; δύνασθαι καὶ ἑνὶ καὶ πολλοῖς 
δεῖξαι τὴν μάχην ἐν ἣ κυλίονται" καὶ ὅτε μᾶλλον 
πάντων φροντίζουσιν ἢ ὧν θέλουσιν. θέλουσι 
μὲν γὰρ τὰ πρὸς εὐδαιμονίαν φέροντα, ἀλλαχοῦ 
δ᾽ αὐτὰ ζητοῦσι. τοῦτο ἵνα γένηται, δεῖ τεθῆναι 
χίλια βάθρα καὶ παρακληθῆναι τοὺς ἀκουσο- 
μένους καὶ σὲ ἐν κομψῷ στολίῳ ἢ τριβωναρίῳ 
3 ᾿ 3 Ἀ 7 , * 3 
ἀναβάντα ἐπὶ πούλβινον διαγράφειν, πῶς ᾿Αχιλ- 
λεὺς ἀπέθανεν; παύσασθε, τοὺς θεοὺς ὑμῖν, 
3 
καλὰ ὀνόματα καὶ πράγματα καταισχύνοντες, 
3 “~ > 
ὅσον ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτοῖς. οὐδὲν προτρεπτικώτερον ἢ 
e , / n 
ὅταν ὁ λέγων ἐμφαίνῃ τοῖς ἀκούουσιν bre χρείαν 
2 
αὐτῶν ἔχει. ἢ εἶπέ μοι, τίς ἀκούων ἀναγιγνώσ- 
KovTOS σου ἢ διαλεγομένον περὶ αὑτοῦ ἠγωνίασεν 
x 4 f 9 ξ Ὰ x 2 \ th 
ἢ ἐπεστράφη εἰς αὑτὸν ἢ ἐξελθὼν εἶπεν ὅτι 
ἕω - 7 ἴω 
“καλῶς μου ἥψατο ὁ φιλόσοφος: οὐκέτι δεῖ 
cal Ca) 3 ~ 
ταῦτα ποιεῖν"; οὐχὶ δ᾽, ἂν λίαν εὐδοκιμῇς, λέγει 
mpos τινα “ κομψῶς ἔφρασεν τὰ περὶ τὸν Ξέρξην, 
3 ce 3 \ \ > 4 7 ὔ 35 
ἄλλος “οὔ ἀλλὰ τὴν ἐπὶ Ττύλαις μάχην"; 
τοῦτό ἐστιν ἀκρόασις φιλοσόφου; 


1 ὁ added by a modern hand in 8. 





1 That is, as a style appropriate to philosophers, for the 
epideictic, or style of display, was a well-recognized branch 
of oratory in general—and not entirely unknown, perhaps, 
among certain popular preachers even to-day. | 

* As God needs the universe in which to exercise and dis- 
play His power, so the teacher needs pupils, the speaker an 
ee There is a mutual need, therefore, each of the 
other, 


BOOK III. xxur. 33-38 


Well! But isn’t there such a thing as the right 
style for exhortation ?—-Why yes, who denies that? 
Just as there is the style for refutation, and the style 
for instruction. Who, then, has ever mentioned a 
fourth style along with these, the style of display ?+ 
Why, what zs the style for exhortation? The ability 
to show to the individual, as well as to the crowd, the 
warring inconsistency in which they are floundering 
about, and how they are paying attention to any- 
thing rather than what they truly want. For they 
want the things that conduce to happiness, but they 
are looking for them in the wrong place. To 
achieve that must a thousand benches be placed, and 
the prospective audience be invited, and you put on 
a fancy cloak, or dainty mantle, and mount the 
speaker’s stand, and paint a word-picture of—-how 
Achilles died? By the gods, I beseech you, have 
done with discrediting, as far as it is in your power to 
discredit, words and actions that are noble! There is 
nothing more effective in the style for exhortation 
than when the speaker makes clear to his audience 
that he has need of them.? Or tell me, who that 
ever heard you reading a lecture or conducting a 
discourse felt greatly disturbed about himself, or 
came to a realization of the state he was in, or on 
going out said, “ The philosopher brought it home to 
me in fine style; I must not act like this any longer ὃ 
But doesn’t he say to a companion, if you make an 
unusually fine impression, “That was beautiful 
diction in the passage about Xerxes”; and doesn’t 
the other answer, ‘ No, I preferred the one about 
the battle of Thermopylae’’?? Is this what listen- 
ing to a philosopher amounts to? 

: ᾿ Ἢ typical rhetorum campus, as Cicero calls it (De Ofictis | 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ΠῚ A 3 
κδ΄, Περὶ τοῦ μὴ δεῖν προσπάσχειν τοῖς οὐκ ἐφ 
ἡμῖν. 
\ 7 
1 Τὸ ἄλλου παρὰ φύσιν σοὶ κακὸν μὴ γινέσθω" 
a 7 \ 
οὐ yap συνταπεινοῦσθαι πέφυκας οὐδὲ συνα- 
““ ων f ΜᾺ 
ῶ τυχεῖν, ἀλλὰ συνευτυχεῖν. ἂν δέ τις ἀτυχῇ, 
»" \ \ 
μέμνησο, ὅτε wap αὑτὸν ἀτυχεῖ. ὁ yap θεὸς 
~ \ 
πάντας ἀνθρώπους ἐπὶ τὸ εὐδαιμονεῖν, ἐπὶ τὸ 
ral ἴω \ 
8 εὐσταθεῖν ἐποίησεν. πρὸς τοῦτο ἀφορμὰς ἔδωκεν, 
\ \ x AS ς ΄ \ 4 5 f \ \ 
τὰ μὲν ἴδια Sods ἑκάστῳ, τὰ δ' ἀλλότρια' τὰ μὲν 
κωλυτὰ καὶ ἀφαιρετὰ καὶ ἀναγκαστὰ οὐκ ἴδια, 
Ν 2 3 i » \ + 3 ’ “ 3 ἴω 
τὰ δ᾽ ἀκώλυτα ἴδια' τὴν δ᾽ οὐσίαν τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ 
[ων fad \ 
καὶ τοῦ κακοῦ, ὥσπερ ἦν ἄξιον τὸν κηδόμενον 
o~ \ ζω “ 
ἡμῶν καὶ πατρικῶς προϊστάμενον, ἐν τοῖς ἰδίοις. 
% ων “A “a 
4 “ἀλλ᾽ ἀποκεχώρηκα τοῦ δεῖνος καὶ ὀδυνᾶται." 
4 
διὰ τί yap τὰ ἀλλότρια ἴδια ἡγήσατο; διὰ τί, 
f 
ὅτε oe βλέπων ἔχαιρεν, οὐκ ἐπελογίζετο ὅτι 
Φ ‘ rn 
θνητὸς ei, ἀποδημητικὸς εἶ; τοιγαροῦν τίνει 
ΨᾺ [ω / 
5 δίκας τῆς αὑτοῦ μωρίας. σὺ δ᾽ ἀντὶ τίνος ; ἐπὶ 
, ΄ 1 Pon a "δὲ \ “ 3 7) 
τί κλάεις ὃ σεαυτὸν ; ἢ οὐδὲ σὺ ταῦτα ἐμελέτησας, 
3 3 ἔξ \ 7 \ > ἈΝ 27 cal 
ἀλλ᾽’ ὡς τὰ γύναια τὰ οὐδενὸς ἄξια πᾶσιν οἷς 
\ 7 od “~ 
ἔχαιρες ὡς ἀεὶ συνεσόμενος συνῆς, τοῖς τόποις, 
nm , Ἂ A ‘oe 
τοῖς ἀνθρώποις, ταῖς διατριβαῖς ; καὶ νῦν κλαίων 
bl 10 [τέ ‘ \ 3 A / \ 3 ῬᾺ 
ἐκάθισας, ὅτι μὴ τοὺς αὐτοὺς βλέπεις καὶ ἐν τοῖς 
6 αὐτοῖς τόποις διατρίβεις. τούτου γὰρ ἄξιος εἶ, 


1 Salmasius, after Schegk: κλᾶισ 8, 





1 That is, is produced by himself, or is his own fault; and 
really affects no one but himself. 


184 


BOOK III. xxiv. 1-6 


CHAPTER XXIV 


That we ought not to yearn for the things which are not 
under our control 


Ler not that which in the case of another is 
contrary to nature become an evil for you; for you 
are born not to be humiliated along with others, nor 
to share in their misfortunes, but to share in their 
good fortune. If, however, someone is unfortunate, 
remember that his misfortune concerns himself. For 
God made all mankind to be happy, to be serene. 
To this end He gave them resources, giving each man 
some things for his own, and others not for his own. 
The things that are subject to hindrance, deprivation, 
and compulsion are not a man’s own, but those 
which cannot be hindered are his own. The true 
nature of the good and the evil, as was fitting for 
Him who watches over and protects us like a father, 
He gave to man to be among his own possessions. 
« But I have parted from So-and-so, and he is stricken 
with grief.” Yes, but why did he regard what was 
not his own as his own? Why, when he was glad 
to see you, did he not reflect that you are mortal, 
and likely to go on a journey? And therefore he is 
paying the penalty for his own folly. But why are 
you bewailing yourself, and to what end? Or did 
you also neglect to study this matter, but, like 
worthless women, did you enjoy everything in which 
you took delight as though you were to enjoy it for 
ever, your surroundings, human beings, your ways of 
life? And now you sit and wail because you no longer 
lay eyes upon the same persons, and do not spend 
your life in the same places. Yes, for that’s what you 


185 


10 


1} 


12 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


iva καὶ τῶν κοράκων καὶ κορωνῶν ἀθλιώτερος 
ἧς, οἷς ἔξεστιν ἵπτασθαι, ὅπον θέλουσιν, καὶ 
μετοικοδομεῖν τὰς νεοσσιὰς καὶ τὰ πελάγη δια- 
περᾶν μὴ στένουσιν μηδὲ ποθοῦσι τὰ πρῶτα. ---- 
Nai: ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὸ τοῦ ἄλογα εἶναι πάσχει αὐτά. --- 
Ἡμῖν οὖν λόγος ἐπὶ ἀτυχίᾳ καὶ κακοδαιμονίᾳ 
δέδοται ὑπὸ τῶν θεῶν, ἵν᾽ ἄθλιοι, ἵνα πενθοῦντες 
διατελῶμεν ; ἢ πάντες ἔστωσαν ἀθάνατοι καὶ 
μηδεὶς ἀποδημείτω, ἀλλὰ μένωμεν ὡς τὰ φυτὰ 
προσερριζωμένοι': ἂν δέ τις ἀποδημήσῃ τῶν 
συνήθων, καθήμενοι κλαίωμεν καὶ πάλιν, ἂν 
ἔλθῃ, ὀρχώμεθα καὶ κροτῶμεν ὡς τὰ παιδία ; 
Οὐκ ἀπογαλακτίσομεν ἤδη ποθ᾽ ἑαυτοὺς καὶ 
μεμνησόμεθα ὧν ἠκούσαμεν παρὰ τῶν φιλο- 
σόφων ; εἰ γε μὴ ὡς ἐπαοιδῶν αὐτῶν ἠκούομεν, 
ὅτι ὁ κόσμος οὗτος μία πόλις ἐστὶ καὶ ἡ οὐσία, ἐξ 
ἧς δεδημιούργηται, μία καὶ ἀνάγκη περίοδόν τινα 
εἶναε καὶ παραχώρησιν ἄλλων ἄλλοις καὶ τὰ μὲν 
διαλύεσθαι, τὰ δ᾽ ἐπιγίνεσθαι, τὰ μὲν μένειν ἐν 
τῷ αὐτῷ, τὰ δὲ κινεῖσθαι. πάντα δὲ φίλων 
μεστά, πρῶτα μὲν θεῶν, εἶτα καὶ ἀνθρώπων 
φύσει πρὸς ἀλλήλους ὠκειωμένων' καὶ δεῖ τοὺς 
A ΤᾺ 3 7 \ 3 2 4 
μὲν παρεῖναι ἀλλήλοις, τοὺς δ᾽ ἀπαλλάττεσθαι, 
τοῖς μὲν συνοῦσι χαίροντας, τοῖς δ᾽ ἀπωλλαττο- 
μένοις μὴ ἀχθομένους. ὁ δ᾽ ἄνθρωπος πρὸς τῷ 
φύσει μεγαλόφρων εἶναι καὶ πάντων τῶν ἀπροαι- 
ρέτων καταφρονητικὸς ἔτε κἀκεῖνο ἔσχηκε τὸ μὴ 
ἐρριζῶσθαι μηδὲ προσπεφυκέναι τῇ γῇ, ἀλλὰ 


1 The clause, μηδ᾽ ἡμεῖς που ἀποδημῶμεν, which follows 
here in S, is deleted by Oldfather as a doublet of the pre- 
ceding three words. It arose probably as a superfluous 
attempt either to gloss or to emend. 


186 


BOOK III. xxiv. 6-12 


deserve, to be more wretched than crows and ravens, 
which can fly away wherever they please, and change 
their nests, and cross the seas, without groaning or 
longing for their first home.—Yes, but they feel that 
way because they are irrational creatures,—Has, 
then, reason been given us by the gods for misfortune 
and misery, so that we may spend our lives in 
wretchedness and mourning? Or shall all men be 
immortal, and no one leave home, but shall we stay 
rooted in the ground like the plants? And if any 
one of our acquaintances leaves home, shall we sit 
down and wail, and then again, if he comes back, 
dance and clap our hands as the children do? 

Shall we not wean ourselves at last, and call to 
mind what we have heard from the philosophers ?— 
if, indeed, we did not listen to them as to enchanters 
——when they said that this universe is but a single 
state, and the substance out of which it has been 
fashioned is single, and it needs must be that there 
is a certain periodic change and a giving place of one 
thing to another, and that some things must be 
dissolved and others come into being, some things to 
remain in the same place and others to be moved. 
Further, that all things are full of friends, first gods, 
and then also men, who by nature have been made 
of one household with one another; and that some 
men must remain with each other, while others 
must depart, and that though we must rejoice in 
those who dwell with us, yet we must not grieve at 
those who depart. And man, in addition to being 
by nature high-minded and capable of despising all 
the things that are outside the sphere of his moral 
purpose, possesses also this further quality, that, 
namely, of not being rooted nor growing in the 


13 


14 


pened 
Gt 


17 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ἄλλοτ᾽ ἐπ᾿ ἄλλους ἵεσθαι τόπους ποτὲ μὲν 
χρειῶν τινῶν ἐπειγουσῶν, ποτὲ δὲ καὶ αὐτῆς τῆς 
θέας ἕνεκα. 

Καὶ τῷ ᾿Οδυσσεῖ τὸ συμβὰν τοιοῦτόν τι Hy 


δ᾿ , 
πολλῶν δ᾽ ἀνθρώπων ἴδεν ἄστεα Kal νόον ἔγνω" 
καὶ ἔτι πρόσθεν τῷ Ἡρακλεῖ περιελθεῖν τὴν 
οἰκουμένην ὅλην 
> , ῳ \ 09 , ’ A 
ἀνθρώπων ὕβριν τε καὶ εὐνομίην ἐφορῶντα, 


καὶ τὴν μὲν ἐκβάλλοντα καὶ καθαίροντα, τὴν δ᾽ 
ἀντεισάγοντα. καίτοι πόσους οἴει φίλους ἔσχεν 
ἐν Θήβαις, πόσους ἐν ᾿Αθήναις, πόσους δὲ περιερ- 
χόμενος ἐκτήσατο, ὅς γε καὶ ἐγάμει, ὅπου 
καιρὸς ἐφάνη αὐτῷ, καὶ ἐπαιδοποιεῖτο καὶ τοὺς 
παῖδας ἀπέλειπεν 1 οὐ στένων οὐδὲ ποθῶν οὐδ᾽ ὡς 
ὀρφανοὺς ἀφιείς; dee γάρ, ὅτε οὐδείς ἐστιν 
ἄνθρωπος ὀρφανός, ἀλλὰ πάντων ἀεὶ καὶ διηνε- 
κῶς ὁ πατήρ ἐστιν ὁ κηδόμενος. οὐ γὰρ μέχρι 
λόγου ἠκηκόει, ὅτι πατήρ ἐστιν ὁ Ζεὺς τῶν 
ἀνθρώπων, ὅς γε καὶ αὑτοῦ πατέρα Beto αὐτὸν 
καὶ ἐκάλει καὶ πρὸς ἐκεῖνον ἀφορῶν ἔπραττεν ἃ 
ἔπραττεν. τοιγάρτοι πανταχοῦ ἐξῆν αὐτῷ διάγειν 
εὐδαιμόνως. οὐδέποτε δ᾽ ἐστὶν οἷόν T εἰς τὸ 
αὐτὸ ἐλθεῖν εὐδαιμονίαν καὶ πόθον τῶν οὐ παρόν- 
των. τὸ γὰρ εὐδαιμονοῦν ἀπέχειν δεῖ πάντα ἃ 


1 Koraes: ἀπέλιπεν S. 





1 Homer, Odyssey, I. 3. 

* Homer, Odyssey, X VII. 487 (slightly modified). 

8. This is about the most drastic bit of idealisation of the 
Heracles myths which the Stoics, for whom Heracles was a 
kind of Arthurian knight, ever achieved. The comic poets 


188 


BOOK III. xxiv. 12-17 


earth, but of moving now to one place and now to 
another, at one time under the pressure of certain 
needs, and at another merely for the sake of the 
spectacle. 

Now it was something of this sort which fell to the 
lot of Odysseus : 


Many the men whose towns he beheld, and he 
learned of their temper. 


And even before his time it was the fortune of 
Heracles to traverse the entire inhabited world, 


Seeing the wanton behaviour of men and the 
lawful,? 


casting forth the one and clearing the world of it, 
and introducing the other in its place. Yet how 
many friends do you suppose he had in Thebes, in 
Argos, in Athens, and how many new friends he 
made on his rounds, seeing that he was even in the 
habit of marrying when he saw fit, and begetting 
children, and deserting his children, without either 
groaning or yearning for them, or as though leaving 
them to be orphans? ? It was because he knew that no 
human being is an orphan, but all men have ever and 
constantly the Father, who cares for them. Why, to 
him it was no mere story which he had heard, that 
Zeus is father of men, for he always thought of Him 
as his own father, and called Him so, and in all that 
he did he looked to Him. Wherefore he had the 
power to live happily in every place. But it is 
impossible that happiness, and yearning for what ἰδ. 
not present, should ever be united. For happiness 


naturally presented this aspect of his career in a somewhat 
different light. 


189 


18 


19 


20 


21 


22 


23 


94 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


θέλει, πεπληρωμένῳ τινὶ ἐοικέναι' οὐ δίψος δεῖ 
προσεῖναι αὐτῷ, οὐ hepov.— AXN ot ᾽Οδυσσεὺς 
ἐπεπόνθει πρὸς τὴν γυναῖκα καὶ ἔκλαιεν ἐπὶ 
πέτρας καθεζόμενος. --Σὺ 8 Ὁμήρῳ πάντα 
προσέχεις καὶ τοῖς μύθοις αὐτοῦ; ἢ εἰ ταῖς ἄλη- 
θείαις ἔκλαεν, τί ἄλλο ἢ ἐδυστύχει; τίς δὲ 
καλὸς TE καὶ ἀγαθὸς δυστυχεῖ; τῷ ὄντι κακῶς 
διοικεῖται τὰ ὅλα, εἰ μὴ ἐπιμελεῖται ὁ Ζεὺς τῶν 
ἑαυτοῦ πολιτῶν, ἵν’ ὦσιν ὅμοιοι αὐτῷ, εὐδαίμονες. 
ἀλλὰ ταῦτα οὐ θεμιτὰ οὐδ᾽ ὅσια ἐνθυμηθῆναι, 
ἀλλ᾽ ὁ ᾽Οδυσσεύς, εἰ μὲν ἔκλαεν καὶ ὠδύρετο, οὐκ 
ἦν ἀγαθός. τίς γὰρ ἀγαθός ἐστιν ὁ οὐκ εἰδώς, 
ὅς ἐστιν; τίς δ᾽ οἶδεν ταῦτα ἐπιλελησμένος, 
ὅτι φθαρτὰ τὰ γενόμενα καὶ ἄνθρωπον ἀνθρώπῳ 
συνεῖναι οὐ δυνατὸν ἀεί; τί οὖν; τῶν μὴ δυνα- 
τῶν ἐφίεσθαι ἀνδραποδῶδες, ἠλίθιον, ξένου θεο- 
μαχοῦντος, ὡς μόνον οἷόν τε, τοῖς δόγμασι τοῖς 
e a) 
ἑαυτοῦ. 

᾿Αλλ ἡ μήτηρ μου στένει μὴ ὁρῶσά pe— Ata 
τί γὰρ οὐκ ἔμαθεν τούτους τοὺς λόγους ; καὶ οὐ 
τοῦτό φημι, ὃ ὅτι οὐκ ἐπιμελητέον τοῦ μὴ οἰμώξειν 
αὐτήν, ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι οὐ δεῖ θέλειν τὰ ἀλλότρια. ἐξ 
ἅπαντος. λύπη δ᾽ ἡ ἄχλου ἀλλότριόν ἐστιν, ἡ δ' 
ἐμὴ ἐμόν. ἐγὼ οὖν τὸ μὲν ἐμὸν παύσω ἐξ ὁ ἅπαν- 
τος, ἐπ᾽ ἐμοὶ γάρ ἐστιν" τὸ δ᾽ ἀλλότριον πειράσο- 
μαι κατὰ δύναμιν, ἐξ ἅπαντος δ᾽ οὐ πειράσο- 
μαι, εἰ δὲ μή, θεομαχήσω, ἀντιθήσω πρὸς τὸν 


1 §added by Schenkl: ἀλλ᾽ ὁδυσσεύς 8, 





1 Homer, Odyssey, V. 82. 


190 


BOOK III. xxiv. 17-24 


must already possess everything that it wants ; it must 
resemble a replete person: he cannot feel thirst or 
hunger.—Still, Odysseus felt a longing for his wife, 
and sat upon a rock and wept.t—And do you take 
Homer and his tales as authority for everything? If 
Odysseus really wept, what else could he have been but 
miserable? But what good and excellent man is 
miserable? In all truth the universe is badly managed, 
if Zeus does not take care of His own citizens, 
that they be like Him, that is, happy. Nay, it is 
unlawful and unholy to think of such an alternative, 
but if Odysseus wept and wailed, he was not a good 
man, Why, what man could be good who does not 
know who he is? And who knows that, if he has 
forgotten that the things which come into being are 
corruptible, and that it is impossible for one human 
being always to live with another? What then? 
To reach out for the impossible is slavish and 
foolish ; it is acting like a stranger in the universe, 
one who is fighting against God with the only 
weapons at his command, his own judgements. 

But my mother mourns because she does not see 
me.— Yes, but why did she not learn the meaning of 
these words of the philosophers? And I am not 
saying that you ought to take no pains to keep 
her from lamenting, but only that a person ought 
not to want at all costs what is not his own. Now 
another’s grief is no concern of mine, but my 
own grief is. Therefore, I will put an end at 
all costs to what is my own concern, for zt is 
under my control: and that which is another’s 
concern 1 will endeavour to check to the best of my 
ability, but my effort to do so will not be made 
at all costs. Otherwise I shall be -fighting against 


101. 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


Δία, ἀντιδιατάξομαι αὐτῷ πρὸς τὰ ὅλα. καὶ 
τἀπίχειρα τῆς θεομαχίας ταύτης καὶ ἀπειθείας 
οὐ παῖδες παίδων. ἐκτίσουσιν, ἀλλ᾽ αὐτὸς ἐγὼ 
μεθ᾽ ἡμέραν, νυκτὸς διὰ τῶν ἐνυπνίων ἐκπηδῶν, 
ταρασσόμενος, πρὸς πᾶσαν ἀπαγγελίαν τρέμων, 
ἐξ ἐπιστολῶν ἀλλοτρίων. ἠρτημένην ἔχων τὴν 
25 ἐμαυτοῦ ἀπάθειαν. ἀπὸ Ῥώμης τίς ἥκει. “ μό- 
VOV μή τι κακόν." τί δὲ κακὸν ἐκεῖ σοι συμβῆναι 
δύναται, ὃ ὅπου μὴ εἶ; ἀπὸ τῆς Ἑλλάδος. “ μόνον 
μή τι κακόν. οὕτως σοι πᾶς τόπος δύναται 
96 δυστυχίας εἶναι αἴτιος. οὐχ ἱκανὸν ἐκεῖ σε ἀτυ- 
χεῖν, ὅπου αὐτὸς εἶ, ἀλλὰ καὶ πέραν θαλάσσης 
καὶ διὰ γραμμάτων; οὕτως ἀσφαλῶς σοι τὰ 
27 πράγματα ἔχει -—Te οὗν, ἂν ἀποθάνωσιν οἱ ἐκεῖ 
φίλοι; πάν γὰρ ἂν ἄλλο ἢ οἱ θνητοὶ ἀπέθανον ; 
ἢ πῶς ἅμα μὲν γηρᾶσαι θέλεις, ἅμα δὲ μηδενὸς 
98 τῶν ΄στεργομένων μὴ ἰδεῖν θάνατον ; οὐκ οἶσθ᾽, 
ὅτι ἐν τῷ μακρῷ χρόνῳ πολλὰ καὶ ποικίλα ἀπο- 
βαίνειν ἀνάγκη, τοῦ μὲν πυρετὸν γενέσθαι κρείτ- 
29 τονα, τοῦ δὲ λῃστήν, τοῦ δὲ τύραννον ; τοιοῦτο 
γὰρ τὸ περιέχον, τοιοῦτον οἱ συνόντες, ψύχη καὶ 
καύματα καὶ τροφαὶ ἀσύμμετροι καὶ ὁδοιπορίαι 
καὶ πλοῦς καὶ ἄνεμοι, καὶ περιστάσεις ποικίλαι" 
τὸν μὲν ἀπώλεσαν, τὸν δ᾽ ἐξώρισαν, τὸν δ᾽ εἰς 
πρεσβείαν, ἄλλον δ᾽ εἰς στρατείαν ἐνέβαλον. 
80 κάθησο τοίνυν πρὸς πάντα ταῦτα ἐπτοημένος, 
πενθῶν, ἀτυχῶν, δυστυχῶν, ἐξ ἄλλου ἠρτημένος 


1 Schweighduser : εὐπείθειαν 8, 





1 The phrase in quotation marks is a verbal reminiscence 
of Homer, Iliad, KX. 308. 


ΤΟ2 


BOOK III. xxrv. 24-30 


God, I shall be setting myself in opposition to 
Zeus, I shall be arraying myself against Him in 
regard to His administration of the universe. And 
the wages of this fighting against God and this 
disobedience will not be paid by “children’s 
children,’ Ὁ but by me myself in my own person, by 
day and by night, as I start up out of dreams and am 
disturbed, trembling at every message, with my own 
peace of mind depending upon letters not my own. 
Someone has arrived from Rome. “If only there 
is no bad news!” But how can anything bad for 
you happen in a place, if you are not there? Some- 
one arrives from Greece. “If only there is no bad 
news!” In this way for you every place can cause 
misfortune. Isn't it enough for you to be miserable 
where you are? Must you needs be miserable 
even beyond the seas, and by letter? Is this the 
fashion in which all that concerns you is secure? 
—Yes, but what if my friends over there die ?—Why, 
what else than that mortal men died? Or how can 
you wish to reach old age yourself, and at the same 
time not behold the death of any that you love? 
Do you not know that in the long course of time 
many different things must needs happen; fever 
must overcome one man, a brigand another, a 
tyrant a third? Because such isthe character of the 
air about us, such that of our associates ; cold and 
heat and unsuitable food, and journeys by land and 
by sea, and winds and all manner of perils; this 
man they destroy, that man they drive into exile, 
another they send on an embassy, and yet another 
on a campaign. Sit down, therefore, and get all 
wrought up at each one of these events, mourning, 
unfortunate, miserable, depend on something other 


91 


99 


84 


35 


35 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


καὶ τούτον οὐχ ἑνός, οὐ δυεῖν, ἀλλὰ μυρίων ἐπὶ 
μυρίοις. 

Ταῦτα ἤκουες παρὰ τοῖς φιλοσόφοις, ταῦτ᾽ 
ἐμάνθανες ; οὐκ οἶσθ᾽, ὅτι στρατεία τὸ χρῆμά 
ἐστιν; τὸν μὲν δεῖ φυλάττειν, τὸν δὲ κατασκο- 
πήσοντα ἐξιέναι, τὸν δὲ καὶ πολεμήσοντα' οὐχ 
οἷόν τ᾽ εἶναι πάντας ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ οὐδ᾽ ἄμεινον. 
σὺ δ᾽ ἀφεὶς ἐκτελεῖν τὰ προστάγματα τοῦ στρατὴη- 
γοῦ ἐγκαλεῖς, ὅταν τί σοι προσταχθῇ τραχύτερον, 
καὶ οὐ παρακολουθεῖς, οἷον ἀποφαίνεις, ὅσον ἐπὶ 
col, τὸ στράτευμα, ὅτι ἄν σε πάντες μιμήσωνται, 
οὐ τάφρον σκάψει TLS, οὐ χάρακα περιβαλεῖ, οὐκ 
ἀγρυπνήσει, οὐ κινδυνεύσει, ἀλλὰ ἄχρηστος 
δόξει στρατεύεσθαι. πάλιν ἐν πλοίῳ ναύτης ἂν 
πλέῃς, μίαν χώραν κάτεχε καὶ ταύτην προσλι- 
πάρει" ἂν δ᾽ ἐπὶ τὸν ἱστὸν ἀναβῆναι δέῃ, μὴ θέλε, 
ἂν εἰς τὴν πρώραν διαδραμεῖν, μὴ θέλε. καὶ τίς 
ἀνέξεταί σου κυβερνήτης ; οὐχὶ 8 ὡς σκεῦος 
ἄχρηστον ἐκβαλεῖ, οὐδὲν ἄλλο ἢ ἐμπόδιον καὶ 
κακὸν παράδειγμα τῶν ἄλλων ναυτῶν ; οὕτως δὲ 
καὶ ἐνθάδε: στρατεία τίς ἐστιν ὁ βίος ἑκάστου 
καὶ αὕτη μακρὰ καὶ ποικίλη. τηρεῖν σε δεῖ τὸ 
τοῦ στρατιώτου καὶ τοῦ στρατηγοῦ πρὸς νεῦμα 1 

/ 


! . wD 
πράσσειν Exacta’ εἰ οἷόν τε, μαντευόμενον 2 ἃ 


θέλει. οὐδὲ γὰρ ὅμοιος ἐκεῖνος ὁ στρατηγὸς καὶ 
οὗτος οὔτε κατὰ τὴν ἰσχὺν οὔτε κατὰ τὴν τοῦ 
ἤθους ὑπεροχήν. τέταξαι ἐν πόλει ἡγεμόνι καὶ 
οὐκ ἐν ταπεινῇ τινὶ χώρᾳ, οὐκ ἐπέτειος GAN 


1 Schweighéuser: στρατιώτου πρόσνευμχ, καὶ τοῦ στρατηγεῖν 


2 Reiske: μαντευόμενος 8. 


194 


BOOK III. xxiv. 30-36 


than yourself, and that not one thing or two, but 
tens upon tens of thousands of things ! 

Is that what you used to hear when you sat at the 
feet of the philosophers? Isthat what you learned? 
Do you not know that the business of life is a 
campaign? One man must mount guard, another go 
out on reconnaissance, and another out to fight. It is 
not possible for all to stay in the same place, nor is it 
better so. But you neglect to perform the duties 
assigned you by your commanding officer, and com- 
plain when some rather hard order is given you, and 
fail to understand to what a state you are bringing 
the army, as far as in you lies; because, if they 
all imitate you, no one will dig a trench, no one 
construct a palisade, or watch through the night, or 
risk his life in fighting, but they will seem useless 
soldiers. Again, if you take ship as a sailor, take 
up one place and stick to that! and if you have to 
climb the mast, be unwilling ; if you have to run to 
the bow, be unwilling! And what ship’s captain 
will put up with you? Won't he throw you over- 
board like a piece of junk, nothing but a nuisance, 
and a bad example to the other sailors? So also in 
this world ; each man’s life is a kind of campaign, 
and a long and complicated one at that.. You have 
to maintain the character of a soldier, and do each 
separate act at the bidding of the General, if possible 
divining what He wishes. For there is no com- 
parison between this General and an ordinary one, 
either in His power, or in the pre-eminence of His 
character. You have been given a post in an 
imperial city, and not in some mean place; not for a 





3. C. Schenk]: ἡγεμονίᾳ 5. 
195 


37 


38 


39 


40 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


εἰς 1 ἀεὶ βουλευτής. οὐκ οἷσθ᾽, ὅτι τὸν τοιοῦτον 

3 7 \ A 3 a Ν \ 3 > A“ 

ὀλίγα μὲν δεῖ οἰκονομεῖν, τὰ πολλὰ δ᾽ ἀποδημεῖν 

A a ἃ 

ἄρχοντα ἢ ἀρχόμενον ἢ ὑπηρετοῦντά τινι ἀρχῇ ἢ 

στρατευόμενον ἢ δικάξοντα; εἶτά μοι θέλεις ὡς 

aA ~ ow ? 

φυτὸν προσηρτῆσθαι- τοῖς αὐτοῖς τόποις καὶ 

al ¢ \ 7 3 ’ 3 

προσερριζῶσθαι ; --- Ἡδὺ γάρ ἐστιν. --- Τίς οὔ 

\ 

φησιν; ἀλλὰ καὶ ξωμὸς ἡδύς ἐστι καὶ γυνὴ καλὴ 
τὰ.» 3 ἢ 3 / e , 7 

ἡδύ ἐστιν. τί ἄλλο λέγουσιν οἱ τέλος ποιούμενοι 

τὴν ἡδονήν ; 

Οὐκ αἰσθάνῃ, τίνων ἀνθρώπων φωνὴν ἀφῆκας ; 
ὅτι ᾿Εἰπικουρείων καὶ κιναίδων ; εἶτα τὰ ἐκείνων 
ἔργα πράσσων καὶ τὰ δόγματα ἔχων τοὺς λόγους 
ἡμῖν λέγεις τοὺς Ζήνωνος καὶ Σωκράτους ; οὐκ 

, © ~ 
ἀπορρίψεις ὡς μακροτάτω τἀλλότρια, οἷς κοσμῇ 
΄ ϑ 
μηδέν cot προσήκουσιν; ἢ τί ἄλλο θέλουδιν 
ἐκεῖνοι ἢ καθεύδειν ἀπαραποδίστως καὶ ἀναναγ- 
κάστως καὶ ἀναστάντες ἐφ᾽ ἡσυχίας γχασμή- 
\ , σι i 
σασθαι καὶ τὸ πρόσωπον ἀποπλῦναι, εἶτα 

, \ 3 [οὶ ἃ θέ 9 

γράψαι Kal ἀναγνῶναι a θέλουσιν, εἶτα φλυα- 
n ᾽ὔ cat 
ρῆσαί τί ποτ᾽ ἐπαινούμενοι ὑπὸ τῶν φίλων, ὅ τι 
ἂν λέγωσιν, εἶτα εἰς περίπατον προελθόντες καὶ 
ὀλίγα περιπατήσαντες λούσασθαι, εἶτα φαγεῖν, 
a δ \ 
εἶτα κοιμηθῆναι, οἵαν δὴ κοίτην καθεύδειν τοὺς 
+ f 
τοιούτους εἰκός---τί ἄν τις λέγοι; ἔξεστιν γὰρ 
τεκμαίρεσθαι. 
Ψ f \ \ \ A / 
Aye, φέρε μοι καὶ ov τὴν σαυτοῦ διατριβήν, 
Ὁ \ o 
ἣν ποθεῖς, Cntora τῆς ἀληθείας καὶ Σωκράτους 

4 μ ra) 

καὶ Διογένους. τί θέλεις ἐν ᾿Αθήναις ποιεῖν ; 


1 εἰς added by Capps: χώρᾳ ἀλλάεί S. The senators at 
Athens, for example, served only one year. 


196 


BOOK III. xxiv. 36-40 


short time either, but you are a senator for life. Do 
you not know that a man in such a post has to give 
only a little attention to the affairs of his own 
household, but for most of the time has to be away, 
in command, or under command, or serving some 
official, or in the field, or on the judge’s bench? And 
then you want to be attached to the same spot and 
rooted in it like a plant >—Yes, it is pleasant.—-Why 
deny it? But soup is pleasant too, and a pretty 
woman is a pleasant thing. What else do those say 
who make pleasure their end? 

Do you not realize the kind of men they are 
whose language you have just uttered? That they 
are Epicureans and blackguards? And yet, while 
doing their deeds and holding their opinions, you 
recite to us the words of Zeno and Socrates? Will 
you not cast away from you, as far as you can fling 
them, these alien trappings with which you adorn 
yourself, although they do not at all become you? 
Or what else do these fellows want but to sleep 
without hindrance or compulsion, and after they 
have arisen, to yawn at their ease, and wash their 
faces; then to write and read what they please, 
then to babble something or other, to the applause 
of their friends, no matter what they say ; then to go 
out for a stroll, and after a short walk to take a bath ; 
then to eat, then to seek their rest, and sleep in such 
a bed as you might expect such persons to enjoy— 
why should I say the word? For you can infer what 
it is like. . 

Come now, do you also tell me your style of life, 
the one on which you have set your heart, you eager 
follower of the truth, and of Socrates, and of Diogenes ! 
What do you want to do in Athens? Just what I 


107 


41] 


43 


44 


45 


46 


47 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


“a f \ 
ταῦτα αὐτά ; μή τι ἕτερα; TL οὖν Στωικὸν σαυτὸν 
ΓῚ 9 Ἀ Fal ¢ / 
εἶναι λέγεις ; εἶτα οἱ μὲν τῆς “Ῥωμαίων πολιτείας 
/ [οὶ Y 
καταψευδόμενοι κολάζονται πικρῶς, τοὺς ὃ 
οὕτως μεγάλον καὶ σεμνοῦ καταψευδομένους 
{ 
πράγματος καὶ ὀνόματος ἀθῴους ἀπαλλάττεσθαι 
δεῖ; ἢ τοῦτό γε οὐ δυνατόν, ἀλλ᾽ ὁ νόμος θεῖος 
f e 
καὶ ἰσχυρὸς Kal ἀναπόδραστος οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ τὰς 
\ a“ 
μεγίστας εἰσπρασσόμενος κολάσεις παρὰ τῶν τὰ 
i , Ν / 
μέγιστα ἁμαρτανόντων ; τί yap λέγει; “ὁ 
προσποιούμενος τὰ μηδὲν πρὸς αὐτὸν ἔστω 
> bet μὲ 48 . ξ 2 AG a @ / 
ἀλαξών, ἔστω κενόδοξος ὃ ἀπειθῶν τῇ θείᾳ 
διοικήσει ἔστω ταπεινός, ἔστω δοῦλος, λυπείσθω, 
φθονείτω, ἐλεείτω, τὸ κεφάλαιον πάντων, δυστυ- 
γείτω, θρηνείτω.᾽" : 
f 3 , Ν a“ ΄ 
Τί οὖν; θέλεις pe τὸν δεῖνα θεραπεύειν ; 
ἐπὶ θύρας αὐτοῦ πορεύεσθαι ;---Εἰ τοῦτο αἱρεῖ 
[οὶ “ ¢ “ “ 
λόγος, ὑπὲρ τῆς πατρίδος, ὑπὲρ τῶν συγγενῶν, 
- Ν 3 , \ ἡ ae a . ayy)? 24 
ὑπὲρ ἀνθρώπων, διὰ τί μὴ ἀπέλθῃς; ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ 
al f 3 3 ΄ 
μὲν τὰς τοῦ σκυτέως οὐκ αἰσχύνῃ πορευόμενος, 
3 Ἀ nm m 
ὅταν δέῃ ὑποδημάτων, οὐδ᾽ ἐπὶ τὰς τοῦ κηπουροῦ, 
n / 
ὅταν θιδράκων, ἐπὶ δὲ τὰς τῶν πλουσίων, ὅταν 
Ν 
τινὸς ὁμοίου δέῃ ;---Ναί τὸν σκυτέα γὰρ οὐ 
δὲ x - Οὐδὲ Ν 
θαυμάξω.---Μὴηδὲ τὸν πλούσιον.---Οὐδὲ τὸν 
κηπουρὸν κολακεύσω.---Μηδὲ᾽ τὸν πλούσιον. 
A Ζ 3 
Πῶς οὖν τύχω οὗ δέομαι ;----ἰ γὼ δέ cor λέγω 
> \ 
ὅτι “ ὡς τευξόμενος ἀπέρχου "; οὐχὶ δὲ μόνον, 
rn / ’ 
ἵνα πράξῃς τὸ σαυτῷ πρέπον ;---Γ οὖν ἔτι 
7 Ζ “4 ‘ 
πορεύομαι ;— Iv’ ἀπέλθῃς, wa ἀποδεδωκὼς ἧς 


1 Wolf: θύραις 5. 





1 Because it was a disturbing passion which interfered 
with serenity. 


198 


BOOK III. xxiv. 41-47 


have described? Nothing at all different? Why, 
then, do you call yourself a Stoic? Well, but those 
who falsely claim Roman citizenship are severely 
punished, and ought those who falsely claim so 
great and so dignified a calling and title to get off 
scot-free? Or is that impossible? whereas the 
divine and mighty and inescapable law is the law 
which exacts the greatest penalties from those who 
are guilty of the greatest offences. Now what are 
its terms? ‘Let him who makes pretence to things 
which in no wise concern him be a braggart, let him 
be a vainglorious man; let him who disobeys the 
divine governance be abject, bea slave, suffer grief, 
envy, pity,—in a word, be miserable, and lament.” 
Well, what then? Do you want me to pay court 
to So-and-so? go to his front-door ??—-If reason so 
decides, for the sake of your country, your kinsmen, 
mankind in general, why not go? Why, you are 
not ashamed to go to the door of the cobbler when 
you need shoes, nor to that of the market-gardener 
when you need lettuce; and are you ashamed to go 
to the door of the rich when you want something that 
rich men have ?—Very true, for as to the cobbler, I do 
not have to admire him.—Don’t admire the rich man, 
either.—And I shall not have to flatter the market- 
gardener.—Don’t flatter the rich man either.—How, 
then, shall I get what I need?—Am I telling you, “Go 
like a man who is certain to get what he wants,” and 
not simply, “ Go in order todo what becomes you ”? 
—Why, then, do I goat all ?-So as to have gone, so 
as to have performed the function of the citizen that 


2 The transition is most abrupt, but obviously the inter- 
locutor has been expected by his friends to pay court to 
some rich and influential man. 


199 


48 


49 


50 


51 


52 


53 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


τὰ τοῦ πολίτου ἔργα, τὰ ἀδελφοῦ, τὰ φίλου. 
καὶ λοιπὸν μέμνησο, ὅτι πρὸς σκυτέα ἀφῖξαι, 
πρὸς λαχανοπώλην, οὐδενὸς μεγάλου ἢ σεμνοῦ 
ἔχοντα τὴν ἐξουσίαν, κἂν αὐτὸ πολλοῦ πωλῇ. 
ὡς ἐπὶ τὰς θίδρακας * ἀπέρχῃ" ὀβολοῦ γάρ εἰσιν, 
ταλάντου δ᾽ οὐκ εἰσίν. οὕτως κἀνταῦθα. τοῦ 
ἐπὶ θύρας ἐλθεῖν ἄξιον τὸ πρᾶγμα" ἔστω, ἀφίξο- 
μαι. τοῦ διαλεχθῆναι οὕτως" ἔστω, διαλεχθή- 
σομαι. ἀλλὰ καὶ τὴν χεῖρα δεῖ καταφιχῆσαι 
καὶ θωπεῦσαι δι’ ἐπαίνου. ἄπαγε, ταλάντου 
ἐστίν" οὐ λυσιτελεῖ μοι οὐδὲ τῇ πόλει οὐδὲ τοῖς 
φίλοις ἀπολέσαι καὶ πολίτην ἀγαθὸν καὶ φίλον. 
᾿Αλλὰ δόξεις μὴ ,“προτεθυμῆσθαι μὴ ἀνύσας. 
πάλιν ἐπελάθου, τίνος ἕνεκα ἐλήλυθας ; οὐκ 
οἶσθ᾽, ὅτι ἀνὴρ καλὸς καὶ ἀγαθὸς οὐδὲν ποιεῖ 
τοῦ δόξαι ὁ ἕνεκα, ἀλλὰ τοῦ πεπρᾶχθαι καλῶς ;---- 
Τί οὖν ὄφελος αὐτῷ τοῦ πρᾶξαι καλῶς ὑπ τί δ᾽ 
ὄφελος τῷ γράφοντι. τὸ Δίωνος ὄνομα, ὡς χρὴ 
γράφειν ; αὐτὸ τὸ γράψαι.--- Ἑσταθλον οὖν οὐδὲν ; ; 
--Σὺ δὲ ζητεῖς ἔπαθλον ἀνδρὶ ἀγαθῷ μεῖζον τοῦ 
τὰ καλὰ καὶ δίκαια πράττειν ; ; ἐν Ὀλυμπίᾳ δ᾽ 
οὐδεὶς ἄλλο οὐδέν, ἀλλ᾽ ἀρκεῖν σοι δοκεῖ τὸ 
ἐστεφανῶσθαι Ὀλύμπια. οὕτως σοι μικρὸν 
καὶ οὐδενὸς ἄξιον εἶναι φαίνεται τὸ εἶναι καλὸν 
καὶ ἀγαθὸν καὶ εὐδαίμονα; πρὸς ταῦτα ὑπὸ 
θεῶν εἰς τὴν πόλιν ταύτην εἰσηγμένος καὶ ἤδη 
τῶν ἀνδρὸς ἔργων" ὀφείλων ἅπτεσθαι τιτθὰς 


1 Schenkl: θρίδακας S. 
2 Wolf, after Schegk : ἀνδροέργων S. 





1 2.6, the world. 
200 


BOOK III. xxiv. 47-53 


you are, of a brother, ofa friend. And furthermore, 
remember that you have come to see a cobbler, a 
vegetable-dealer, a man who has authority over 
nothing great or important, even if he sell it for a 
high price. You are going, as it were, for heads of 
lettuce; they are worth an obol, not a talent. 
So it is in our life also. The matter in hand 
is worth going to a person’s door about; very 
well, I will go. Itis also worth an interview ; very 
well, I will interview him about it. Yes, but I will 
have to kiss his hand also, and flatter him with 
words of praise. Go to! that is paying a talent for 
a head of lettuce! It is not profitable to me, nor to 
the State, nor to my friends, to ruin by so acting a 
good citizen and friend. 

Yes, but if you fail, people will think that you 
didn’t try hard. Have you gone and forgotten 
again why you went? Don’t you know that a 
good and excellent man does nothing for the sake of 
appearances, but only for the sake of having acted 
right >—What good does he get, then, from acting 
right ?—And what good. does the person get for 
writing the name “ Dio” as it ought to be written ἢ 
The mere fact of writing it that way.—Is_ there, 
then, no further reward ?—And are you looking for 
some further reward in the case of a good man, a 
reward which is greater than the doing of what is fine 
and right? At Olympia nobody wants anything 
else, but you feel content with having received an 
Olympic crown. Does it seem to you so small and 
worthless a thing to be good, and excellent, and 
happy? Therefore, when you have been introduced 
into this city-state! by the gods, and find it now 
your duty to lay hand to the work of a man, do you 


201 


54 


55 


56 


57 


58 


59 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ἐπιποθεῖς Ὁ καὶ μάμμην Kal κάμπτει σε καὶ ἀπο- 
f 

θηλύνει κλαίοντα γύναια μωρά ; οὕτως οὐδέποτε 

παύσει παιδίον ὧν νήπιον; οὐκ οἶσθ᾽, ὅτε ὃ τὰ 
ca) f 

παιδίου ποιῶν ὅσῳ πρεσβύτερος τοσούτῳ γελοιό- 

τερος ; 

Ἔν ᾿Αθήναις δ᾽ οὐδένα ἑώρας εἰς οἶκον αὐτοῦ 
φοιτῶν ;—Ov éBovrdunv.—Kal ἐνθάδε τοῦτον 
θέλε ὁρᾶν καὶ ὃν βούλει ὄψρει' μόνον μὴ ταπεινῶς, 
un μετ᾽ ὀρέξεως ἢ ἐκκλίσεως καὶ ἔσται τὰ 'σὰ 

nw “ 3 5» 9 fol 3 δι > ‘ +03 
καλῶς. τοῦτο δ᾽ οὐκ ἐν τῷ ἐλθεῖν ἐστὶν οὐδ 
+ a“ > \ , A 3 9 3 > “ 
ἐν τῷ ἐπὶ θύραις στῆναι, ἀλλ᾽ ἔνδον ἐν τοῖς 
δόγμασιν. ὅταν τὰ ἐκτὸς καὶ ἀπροαίρετα ἠἦτι- 
9 \ Ν mn 
μακὼς ἧς καὶ μηδὲν αὐτῶν σὸν ἡγημένος, μόνα 
δ᾽ ἐκεῖνα σά, τὸ κρῖναι καλῶς, τὸ ὑπολαβεῖν, τὸ 
n > “ Δ ων 
ὁρμῆσαι, τὸ ὀρεχθῆναι, τὸ ἐκκλῖναι, Tov ἔτι 
f “ 
κολακείας τόπος, ποῦ ταπεινοφροσύνης; τί ἔτι 
ω ὔ a 
ποθεῖς τὴν ἡσυχίαν τὴν ἐκεῖ, τί τοὺς συνήθεις 
͵ὔ ¥ ὃ \ \ ΄ αν Φ 
τόπους ; ἔκδεξαι βραχὺ καὶ τούτους πάλιν ἕξεις 
> 3 val 
συνήθεις. εἶτα ἂν οὕτως ἀγεννῶς ἔχης, πάλιν 
καὶ τούτων ἀπαλλαττόμενος κλαῖε καὶ στένε. 
lal ‘4 7 ΤΆ 

Πῶς οὖν γένωμαι φιλόστοργος ;— Os yevvatos, 
ὡς εὐτυχής" οὐδέποτε γὰρ αἱρεῖ3 ὁ λόγος τα- 
πειρὸν εἶναι οὐδὲ κατακλᾶσθαι οὐδ᾽ ἐξ ἄλλου 
κρέμασθαι οὐδὲ ᾿μέμψασθαί ποτε θεὸν ἢ ἄνθρω- 
πον. οὕτως μοὶ γίνου φιλόστοργος ὡς. ταῦτα 

a 3 δὲ ὃ Χ \ Ζ 2 
τηρήσων' εἰ δὲ διὰ τὴν φιλοστοργίαν ταύτην, 
ἥντινάϑ ποτε καὶ καλεῖς φιλοστοργίαν, δοῦλος 


1 Salmasius suggests & ἔτι ποθέϊς. 2. Upton: ἐρεῖ 8. 
8 Upton’s ‘‘ codex”: ταῦτα' τὴν τινά ΚΑ, 


202 


BOOK III. xxiv. 53~59 


yearn for nurses and the breast, and does the weep- 
ing of poor silly women move you and make you 
effeminate? And so will you never get over being 
an infant? Don’t you know that, when a person 
acts like a child, the older he is the more ridiculous 
he is? 

In Athens did you see nobody when you went to 
his house ?>—~Yes, the man I wanted to see.—Here also 
make up your mind to see this man, and you will 
see the man you want; only do not go humbly, not 
with desire or aversion, and all will be well with 
you. But this result is not to be found by mere 
going, nor by standing at gates, but in one’s 
judgements within. When you have contemned 
things external and outside the province of your 
moral purpose, and have come to regard none of 
them as your own, but only the being right in 
judgement, in thinking, in choosing, in desiring, 
in avoiding,—where is there any longer room for 
flattery, where for an abject spirit? Why any 
longer yearn for the quiet you enjoyed there, or 
your familiar haunts? Wait a little while and you 
will find the places here familiar in their turn. And 
then, if you are so ignoble in spirit, weep and wail 
again when you leave these too ! 

How, then, shall I become affectionate ?—As a 
man of noble spirit, as one who is fortunate; for 
it is against all reason to be abject, or broken in 
spirit, or to depend on something other than your- 
self, or even to blame either God or man. I would 
have you become affectionate in such a way as to 
maintain at the same time all these rules; if, how- 
ever, by virtue of this natural affection, whatever it 
is you call by that name, you are going to be a 


203 


60 


61 


63 


64 


65 


66 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


> f nw , 
μέλλεις εἶναι καὶ ἄθλιος, οὐ λυσιτελεῖ φιλό- 
: 3 \ t A a Lo. 
στοργον εἶναι. καὶ TL κωλύει φιλεῖν τινὰ ὡς 
θνητόν, ὡς ἀποδημητικόν; ἢ Σωκράτης οὐκ 
ἐφίλει τοὺς παῖδας τοὺς ἑαυτοῦ; ἀλλ᾽ ὡς ἐλεύ- 
θερος, ὡς μεμνημένος, ὅτι πρῶτον δεῖ θεοῖς εἶναι 

A \ “ Oe f a“ f 
φίλον. διὰ τοῦτο οὐδὲν παρέβη τῶν πρεπόντων 
2 \ 3 ”~s oF 3 4 37 ΔῈ e 
ἀνδρὶ ἀγαθῷ οὔτ᾽ ἀπολογούμενος οὔθ᾽ ὑποτι- 

, 3 3. Κ᾿ i / a f 
μώμενος οὔτ᾽ ἔτι πτρόσθεν βουλεύων ἢ oTparevo- 
μενος. ἡμεῖς δὲ πάσης προφάσεως πρὸς τὸ 
ἀγεννεῖς εἶναι εὐποροῦμεν, οἱ μὲν διὰ παῖδα, 
οἱ δὲ διὰ μητέρα, ἄλλοι δὲ δι’ ἀδελφούς. δι 

7 “ nt 
οὐδένα δὲ προσήκει δυστυχεῖν, ἀλλὰ εὐτυχεῖν 
διὰ πάντας, μάλιστα δὲ διὰ τὸν θεὸν τὸν ἐπὶ 
τοῦτο ἡμᾶς κατασκευάσαντα. ἄγε, Διογένης δ᾽ 

3 9. 7 350 7 a Ὁ t? > \ 
οὐκ ἐφίλει οὐδένα, ὃς οὕτως ἥμερος ἣν καὶ 
φιλάνθρωπος, ὥστε ὑπὲρ τοῦ κοινοῦ τῶν ἀνθρώ- 
πὼν τοσούτους πόνους καὶ ταλαιπωρίας τοῦ 
σώματος ἄσμενος ἀναδέχεσθαι; arr ἐφίλει 

ζω ς ΤᾺ Ν , 2 7 \ “ 
πῶς; ὡς τοῦ Διὸς διάκονον ἔδει, ἅμα μὲν κηδό- 
μενος, ἅμα δ᾽ ὡς τῷ θεῷ ὑποτεταγμένος. διὰ 
τοῦτο πᾶσα γῆ πατρὶς ἣν ἐκείνῳ μόνῳ, ἐξαίρετος 
δ᾽ οὐδεμία" καὶ ἁλοὺς οὐκ ἐπόθει τὰς ᾿Αθήνας 
οὐδὲ τοὺς ἐκεῖ συνήθεις καὶ φίλους, ἀλλ᾽ αὐτοῖς 
τοῖς πειραταῖς συνήθης ἐγίνετο καὶ ἐπανορθοῦν 
3 “a Ἀ ᾿ ef ? / 
ἐπειρᾶτο. καὶ πραθεὶς ὕστερον ἐν Κορίνθῳ 
διῆγεν οὕτως ὡς πρόσθεν ἐν ᾿Αθήναις καὶ εἰς 

\ 3 
Περραιβοὺς 8 ἂν ἀπελθὼν ὡσαύτως εἶχεν. 


204 


BOOK III. xxiv. 59-66 


slave and miserable, it does not profit you to be 
affectionate. And what keeps you from loving a 
person as one subject to death, as one who may leave 
you? Did not Socrates love his own children? But 
in a free spirit, as one who remembers that it was his 
first duty to be a friend to the gods. That is why 
he succeeded in everything that becomes a good 
man, both in making his defence, and in assessing 
his own penalty, and before that time in his services 
as senator or soldier. But we abound in all manner 
of excuses for being ignoble; with some it is a 
child, with others a mother, and then again it is 
brothers. But it is not becoming for us to be un- 
happy on any person’s account, but to be happy 
because of all, and above all others because of God, 
who has made us for this end. Come, was there 
anybody that Diogenes did not love, a man who was 
so gentle and kind-hearted that he gladly took upon 
himself all those troubles and physical hardships for 
the sake of the common weal? But what was the 
manner of his loving? As became a servant of Zeus, 
caring for men indeed, but at the same time subject 
unto God. That is why for him alone the whole 
world, and no special place, was his fatherland ; 
and when he had been taken prisoner he did not 
hanker for Athens nor his acquaintances and friends 
there, but he got on good terms with the pirates 
and tried! to reform them. And later, when he was 
sold into slavery at Corinth he kept on living there 
just as he had formerly lived at Athens; yes, and 
if he had gone off to the Perrhagbians he would 
have acted in quite the same way. That is how 
1 The humorous touch here in the word-jingle weiparais 
and, ἐπειρᾶτο is worthy of note, but hard to reproduce. For 

the incident in question see IV, 1, 115 f. 
205 


67 


68 


69 


70 


11 


72 


73 


74 
75 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


οὕτως ἐλευθερία γίνεται. διὰ τοῦτο ἔλεγεν ὅτι 
“ἐξ οὗ μ ᾿Αντισθένης ἠλευθέρωσεν, οὐκέτι ἐδού- 
λευσα." πῶς ἠλευθέρωσεν ; ἄκουε, τί λέγει: ὼ ἐδί- 
δαξέν με τὰ ἐμὰ καὶ τὰ οὐκ ἐμά. κτῆσις οὐκ ἐμή" 
συγγενεῖς, οἰκεῖοι, φίλοι, φήμη, συνήθεις τόποι, 
διατριβή, πάντα ταῦτα ὅτι ἀλλότρια. “σὸν οὖν 
τί; χρῆσις φαντασιῶν. ταύτην ἔδειξέν μοι ὅτι 
ἀκώλυτον ἔχω, ἀνανάγκαστον" οὐδεὶς ἐμποδίσαι 
δύναται, οὐδεὶς βιάσασθαι ἄλλως χρήσασθαι ἢ ἢ ὡς 
θέλω. τίς οὖν ἔτι ἔχει μου ἐξουσίαν ; ζίύλεππος 
ἢ ᾿Αλέξανδρος ἢ ἢ Περδίκκας ἢ ἢ ὁ μέγας βασιλεύς ; 
πόθεν αὐτοῖς ; τὸν γὰρ ὑπ᾽ ἀνθρώπου μέλλοντα 
ἡττᾶσθαι πολὺ π πρότερον ὑπὸ τῶν πραγμάτων 
δεῖ ἡττᾶσθαι." οὗτινος οὖν οὐχ ἡδονὴ κρείττων 
ἐστίν, οὐ πόνος, οὐ δόξα, οὐ πλοῦτος, δύναται δ᾽, 
ὅταν αὐτῷ δόξῃ, τὸ σωμάτιον ὅλον προσπτύσας 
τινὶ ἀπελθεῖν, τίνος ἔτι οὗτος δοῦλός ἐστιν, τίνι 
ὑποτέτακται ; εἰ δ᾽ ἡδέως ἐν ᾿Αθήναις διῆγεν καὶ 
ἥττητο ταύτης τῆς διατριβῆς, ἐπὶ παντὶ ἂν ἦν 
τὰ ἐκείνου πράγματα, ὃ ἰσχυρότερος κύριος ἂν 
ἣν λυπῆσαι αὐτόν. πῶς ἂν δοκεῖς τοὺς πειρατὰς 
ἐκολάκευεν, ἵ ἵν᾽ αὐτὸν ᾿Αθηναίων τινὶ πωλήσωσιν, 
ἵν᾽ ἴδῃ ποτὲ τὸν Πειραιᾶ τὸν καλὸν καὶ τὰ μακρὰ 
τείχη καὶ τὴν ἀκρόπολιν ; τίς ὧν εἴδῃς, ἀνδρά- 
ποδον ; δοῦλος καὶ ταπεινός" καὶ τί σοι ὄφελος ; 
--Οὔ' ἀλλ᾽ ἐλεύθερος.---Δεῖξον, πῶς ἐλεύθερος. 





1 His teacher, the famous philosopher. 
* Of Persia. 
3 Perhaps a reference to the story that Anaxarchus, when. 
Nicocreon ordered that his tongue be cut out, bit it off and 
spat it in the other’s face. Diogenes Laertius, 9, 59. 


206 


BOOK III. xxv. 66-75 


freedom is achieved. That is why he used to say, 
“From the time that Antisthenes! set me free, I 
have ceased to be a slave.” How did Antisthenes 
set him free? Listen to what Diogenes says. “He 
taught me what was mine, and what was not mine. 
Property is not mine; kinsmen, members of my 
household, friends, reputation, familiar places, 
converse with men—all these are not my own. 
‘What, then, zs yours? Power to deal with external 
impressions. He showed me that I possess this 
beyond all hindrance and constraint; no one can 
hamper me; no one can force me to deal with them 
otherwise than as I will. Who, then, has authority 
over me? Philip, or Alexander, or Perdiccas, or 
the Great King?? Where can they get it? For 
the man who is destined to be overpowered by a 
man must long before that have been overpowered by 
things.” Therefore, the man over whom pleasure 
has no power, nor evil, nor fame, nor wealth, and 
who, whenever it seems good to him, can spit his 
whole paltry body into some oppressor's face? and 
depart from this life—whose slave can he any longer 
be, whose subject? But if he had gone on living 
pleasantly in Athens, and had been enamoured of his 
life there, his fortune would have been in every man’s 
control, and the man who was stronger than he 
would have had power to cause him grief. How 
do you imagine he would have wheedled the pirates 
to sell him to some Athenian, so that he might some 
time see the beautiful Piraeus, and the Long Walls 
. and the Acropolis! Who are you that you should 
see them, slave? A thrall and a person of abject 
spirit; and what good are they to you?—No, not a 
slave, but a free man.—-Show me how you are free. 


207 


76 


77 


78 


79 


80 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


f e ζ , 
ἰδοὺ ἐπείληπταί cov Tis ποτε οὗτος, ὁ ἐξάγων σε 
3 Ἀ a f a \ / 
ἀπὸ τῆς συνήθους σοι διατριβῆς Kal λέγει 
ΜᾺ a “ 7 
“δοῦλος ἐμὸς εἶ: ἐπ᾽ ἐμοὶ γάρ ἐστι κωλῦσαϊ σε 
ta] f Ν 
διάγειν ὡς θέλεις, ἐπ᾽ ἐμοὶ τὸ ἀνεῖναί σε, τὸ 
ἴω ty ’ \ 
ταπεινοῦν. ὅταν θέλω, πάλιν εὐφραίνῃ καὶ 
Ν 
μετέωρος πορεύῃ εἰς ᾿Αθήνας." τί λέγεις πρὸς 
τοῦτον τὸν δουλαγωγοῦντά σε; ποῖον αὐτῷ 
9 
καρπιστὴν δίδως; ἢ οὐδ᾽ ὅλως ἀντιβλέπεις, ἀλλ 
ἀφεὶς τοὺς πολλοὺς λόγους ἱκετεύεις, ἵνα ἀφεθῆς ; 
ἄνθρωπε, εἰς φυλακήν σε δεῖ χαίροντα ἀπιέναι, 
σπεύδοντα, φθάνοντα τοὺς ἀπάγοντας. εἶτά μοι 
σὺ μὲν ἐν “Ῥώμῃ διάγειν ὀκνεῖς, τὴν Ελλάδα 
nn 2 
ποθεῖς ; ὅταν δ᾽ ἀποθνήσκειν δέῃ, καὶ τότε μέλ- 
λεις ἡμῶν κατακλαίειν, ὅτε τὰς ᾿Αθήνας οὐ 
μέλλεις βλέπειν καὶ ἐν Λυκείῳ οὐ περιπατήσεις ; 
Pe ar ‘ “ > ὃ / 7 th 3 Ps 
Ἐπὶ τοῦτο ἀπεδήμησας ; τούτου ἕνεκα ἐξζήτη- 
ods τινι συμβαλεῖν, ty’ ὠφεληθῇς ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ; 
ποίαν ὠφέλειαν ; συλλογισμοὺς ἵν ἀναλύσῃς 
e 7 x 3 7 ς 7 \ \ 
ἑκτικώτερον ἢ ἐφοδεύσῃς ὑποθετικούς ; καὶ διὰ 
ταύτην τὴν αἰτίαν ἀδελφὸν ἀπέλιπες, πατρίδα, 
7, 3 ἢ vA ἴω \ 9 f 
φίλους, οἰκείους, ἵνα ταῦτα μαθὼν ἐπανέλθῃς ; 
Ψ % 3 ς \ 3 / 3 7 3 δ \ 
ὥστ᾽ οὐχ ὑπὲρ εὐσταθείας ἀπεδήμεις, οὐχ ὑπὲρ 
3 , 2 fey 2 \ f f 
ἀταραξίας, οὐχ ἵν᾽ ἀβλαβὴς γενόμενος μηκέτι 
μηδένα μέμφῃ, μηδενὶ ἐγκαλῇς, μηδείς σε ἀδικῇ 
καὶ οὕτως τὰς σχέσεις ἀποσῴζῃς ἀπαραποδίσ- 
TOS; καλὴν ἐστείλω ταύτην τὴν ἐμπορίαν, 
συλλογισμοὺς καὶ μεταπίπτοντας καὶ ὕποθε- 
208 


BOOK III... xxiv. 75-80 


See, some person or other has laid hands on you— 
the man who takes you away from your accustomed 
way of life, and says, “ You are my slave; for it is 
in my power to prevent you from living as you will, 
it is in my power to lighten your servitude, or to 
humble you; whenever I wish, you can be happy 
again, and go off to Athens in high spirits.” What 
do you say to this man who makes you his 
slave? Whom have you to offer him as your 
emancipator? Ordo you not even look him in the 
face at all, but cutting all argument short do you 
implore him to set you free? Man, you ought to 
go gladly to prison, in haste, outstripping those 
who lead you away. And then, I do beseech you, 
are you loath to live in Rome, and do you yearn 
for Greece? And when you have to die, then also, 
I suppose, will you weep all over us, because you are 
never going to see Athens again or stroll in the 
Lyceum ? 

Was that what you went abroad for? Was it for this. 
that you sought to meet someone—that he might do 
you good? Good indeed! That you might analyse 
syllogisms more readily, or run down hypothetical 
arguments? It was for this reason, was it, you left 
brother, country, friends, and those of your own 
household—so as to return with this kind of learning? 
And so you did not go abroad to acquire constancy 
of character, or peace of mind; not to become secure 
yourself and thenceforward blame and find fault 
with no man; not to make it impossible for another 
to do you wrong, and so maintain without hindrance 
your relations in society? A fine exchange of goods 
this which you have achieved, syllogisms, and argu- 
ments with equivocal and hypothetical premisses! 


209 
VOL. II.- P 


81 


82 


88 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


f sf fa 3 A 3 “ 4 
τικούς" κἄν σοι φανῇ, ἐν τῇ ἀγορᾷ καθίσας 
πρόγραψον ὡς οἱ φαρμακοπῶλαι. οὐκ ἀρνήσῃ 

\ ef 27 90. 32 vf \ id \ 
καὶ ὅσα ἔμαθες εἰδέναι, ἵνα μὴ διαβάλῃς τὰ 

y 
θεωρήματα ὡς ἄχρηστα; τί σοι κακὸν ἐποίησεν 
? 7 2 Ὁ f “ 2 " Ἂ 
φιλοσοφία; τί σε ἠδίκησε Χρύσιππος, iv’ αὐτοῦ 
Ἀ / “ 
τοὺς πόνους ἔργῳ αὐτὸς ἀχρήστους ἐξελέγχῃς ; 
οὐκ ἤρκει σοι τὰ ἐκεῖ κακά, ὅσα εἶχες αἴτια τοῦ 

a a \ 
λυπεῖσθαι Kal πενθεῖν, εἰ Kal μὴ ἀπεδήμησας, 
ἀλλὰ πλείω προσέλαβες ; κἂν ἄλλους πάλιν 
ἔχῃς συνήθεις καὶ φίλους, ἕξεις πλείονα τοῦ 
οἰμώζειν αὔτια, κἂν πρὸς ἄλλην χώραν προσ- 
παθῇς. τί οὖν Cas; ἵνα λύπας ἄλλας ἐπ᾽ ἄλλαις 

7 " ἃ 3 ἴα Ἂ 7 “~ fa) 
περιβάλῃ, ov ἃς ἀτυχεῖς ; εἶτά μοι καλεῖς τοῦτο 
“ 

φιλοστοργίαν ; ποίαν, ἄνθρωπε, φιλοστοργίαν ; 
εἰ ἀγαθὸν ἐστιν, οὐδενὸς κακοῦ αἴτιον γίνεται" εἰ 
κακόν ἐστιν, οὐδέν μοι καὶ αὐτῇ. ἐγὼ πρὸς τὰ 
ἀγαθὰ τὰ ἐμαυτοῦ πέφυκα, πρὸς κακὰ οὐ πέ- 
φυκα. 

Τίς οὖν ἡ πρὸς τοῦτο ἄσκησις ; πρῶτον μὲν ἡ 
ἀνωτάτω καὶ κυριωτάτη καὶ εὐθὺς ὥσπερ ἐν 
πύλαις, ὅταν τινὶ προσπάσχῃς, ὡς οὐδενὶ τῶν 
, / 3 ’ » 7 er ; 
ἀναφαιρέτων, AANA τινε TOLOUT@ γένει, οἷὸν ἐστι 
χύτρα, οἷον ὑάλενον ποτήριον, ἵν’ ὅταν καταγῇ, 
μεμνημένος μὴ ταραχθῇς. οὕτως καὶ ἐνθάδ᾽, ἐὰν 
παιδίον σαυτοῦ καταφιλῇς, ἐὰν ἀδελφόν, ἐὰν 

f [οἷ \ , 
φίλον, μηδέποτε ἐπιδῷς τὴν φαντασίαν εἰς ἅπαν 

‘ \ / 37 “ 3.9 Φ ’ \ 
μηδὲ τὴν διάχυσιν ἐάσῃς προελθεῖν ἐφ᾽ ὅσον αὐτὴ 
θέλει, ἀλλ᾽ ἀντίσπασον, κώλυσον, οἷον οἱ τοῖς 


1 ὡς added by Sd. 
210 


BOOK III. xxiv. 80-85 


Yes, and if you see fit, seat yourself in the market- 
place, and hang out a sign, as the drug-peddlers do. 
Ought you not rather to deny that you know even all 
you have learned, so as not to bring your philosophical 
precepts into ill repute as being useless? What harm 
has philosophy done you? How has Chrysippus 
wronged you that you should prove by your own 
conduct his labours to be useless? Were not the 
ills at home enough for you, all that you had to 
cause you grief and sorrow, even if you had not 
gone abroad, but did you add yet others in addition 
to them? And if you get other intimates and 
friends again, you wil] have more reasons for lamen- 
tation, yes, and if you get attached to another land. 
Why, then, live? Is it to involve yourself in one 
grief after another that makes you miserable? 
And then, I ask you, do you call this natural 
affection? Natural affection forsooth, man! If it 
is good, it is the source of no evil; if it is evil, I 
have nothing to do with it. I am born for the 
things that are good and belong to me, not for 
things evil. 

What, then, is the proper discipline for this? In the 
first place, the highest and principal discipline,and one 
that stands at the very gates of the subject, is this: 
Whenever you grow attached to something, do not act 
as though it were one of those things that cannot be 
taken away, but as though it were something like a 
jar ora crystal goblet, so that when it breaks you 
will remember what it was like, and not be troubled. 
So too in life; if you kiss your child, your brother, 
your friend, never allow your fancy free rein, nor 
your exuberant spirits to go as far as they like, but 
hold them back, stop them, just like those who 


211 
p 2 


86 


87 


88 


89 


90 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


4 3 a“ v θ \ ,Ε f 
θριαμβεύουσιν ἐφεστῶτες ὄπισθεν καὶ ὑπομιμνῃ- 
as \ 
σκοντες, ὅτε ἄνθρωποί εἶσιν. τοιοῦτόν TL Kal 
ὔ x n 
σὺ ὑπομίμνῃσκε σεαυτόν, ὅτι θνητὸν φιλεῖς, 
οὐδὲν τῶν σεαυτοῦ φιλεῖς" ἐπὶ τοῦ παρόντος σοι 
caw 3 3 7 303 ? [τὰ 3 > ¢ 
δέδοται, οὐκ ἀναφαίρετον οὐδ᾽ εἰς ἅπαν, ἀλλ᾽ ὡς 
wv a 3) 
σῦκον, WS σταφυλή, TH τεταγμένῃ ὥρᾳ τοῦ ἔτους" 
ἂν δὲ χειμῶνος ἐπιποθῇς, μωρὸς εἶ, οὕτως κἂν 
XN eX nN Ν ,ὔ 7 nA vd 3 7 / 
τὸν υἱὸν ἢ τὸν φίλον τότε ποθῆς, ὅτε ov δέδοταί 
σοι, ἴσθι, ὅτι χειμῶνος σῦκον ἐπιποθεῖς. οἷον 
γάρ ἐστι χειμὼν πρὸς σῦκον, τοιοῦτόν ἐστι πᾶσα 
ἡ ἀπὸ τῶν ὅλων περίστασις πρὸς τὰ κατ᾽ αὐτὴν 
ἀναιρούμενα. 
Ἀ ᾿ 
Καὶ λοιπὸν ἐν αὐτοῖς οἷς χαίρεις τινί, τὰς 
} ? “ 
ἐναντίας φαντασίας σαυτῷ πρόβαλε. τί κα- 
κόν ἐστι μεταξὺ καταφιλοῦντα τὸ παιδίον 
ῇ δὰ “ 
ἐπιψελλίξζοντα λέγειν “αὔριον ἀποθανῇ," τῷ 
aN 6 / ce ba 3 ὃ f Xx \ Ἃ 
φίλῳ ὡσαύτως “αὔριον ἀἁποδημήσεις ἢ σὺ ἢ 
Ν / 9 , 3 3 
ἐγὼ καὶ οὐκέτε ὀψόμεθα ἀλλήλους " ;— ᾿Αλλὰ 
δύσφημά ἐστι ταῦτα.---Καὶ γὰρ τῶν ἐπαοιδῶν 
3 fe) 
ἔνιαι, ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι ὠφελοῦσιν, οὐκ ἐπιστρέφομαι, 
μόνον ὠφελείτω. σὺ δὲ δύσφημα καλεῖς ἄλλα ἢ 
τὰ κακοῦ τινὸς σημαντικά; δύσφημόν ἐστι δειλία, 
δύσφημον ἀγέννεια, πένθος, λύπη, ἀναισχυντία" 
΄-» 7 f 
ταῦτα τὰ ὀνόματα δύσφημά ἐστιν. καίτοι ye 
δὲ ” 3 ” ὃ “A θέ θ e \ “ 
ovde ταῦτα ὀκνεῖν δεῖ φθέγγεσθαι ὑπὲρ φυλακῆς 
1 Schenk]: πρόσβαλε 8. 





τ Among the means of warding off the evil eye from the 
triumphator was this, that a slave rode behind him in his 
triumphal car, and in the midst of the acclamations of the 


212 


BOOK III. xxiv. 85-go 


stand behind generals when they ride in triumph, 
and keep reminding them that they are mortal.? In 
such fashion do you too remind yourself that the 
object of your love is mortal; it is not one of your 
own possessions; it has been given you for the 
present, not inseparably nor for ever, but like a fig, 
or a cluster of grapes, at a fixed season of the year, 
and that if you hanker for it in the winter, you are 
a fool. Ifin this way you long for your son, or your 
friend, at a time when-he is not given to you, rest 
assured that you are hankering for a fig in winter- 
time. For as winter-time is toa fig, sois every state 
of affairs, which arises out of the universe, in rela- 
tion to the things which are destroyed in accordance 
with that same state of affairs. 

Furthermore, at the very moment when you are 
taking delight in something, call to mind the 
opposite impressions. What harm is there if you 
whisper to yourself, at the very moment you are 
kissing your child, and say, ‘To-morrow you 
will die” ? So likewise to your friend, “ To-morrow 
you will go abroad, or J shall, and we shall never see 
each other again’’?—-Nay, but these are words of 
bad omen.—Yes, and so are certain incantations, 
but because they do good, I do not care about that, 
only let the incantation do us good. But do you 
eall any things ill-omened except those which 
signify some evil for us? Cowardice is ill-omened, 
a mean spirit, grief, sorrow, shamelessness; these 
are words of ill-omen. And yet we ought not to 
hesitate to utter even these words, in order to guard 


people kept saying: ‘‘ Look behind you, and remember that 


you are a mortal.” For the evidence and literature, see 
J. Marquardt: Rémvische Staatsverwaltung, 11. 568-9, 


213 


91 


93 


94 


96 


97 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


τῶν πραγμάτων. δύσφημον δέ μοι λέγεις ὄνομα 
φυσικοῦ τινὸς πράγματος σημαντικόν ; λέγε 
δύσφημον εἶναι καὶ τὸ θερισθῆναι τοὺς στάχυας" 
ἀπώλειαν γὰρ σημαίΐίνεν, τῶν σταχύων: ἀλλ᾽ 
οὐχὶ τοῦ κόσμου. λέγε δύσφημον καὶ τὸ φυλ- 
λορροεῖν καὶ τὸ ἰσχάδα γίνεσθαι ἀντὶ σύκου καὶ 
ἀσταφίδας ἐκ σταφυλῆς. πάντα γὰρ ταῦτα τῶν 
προτέρων εἰσὶν εἰς ἕτερα μεταβολαΐ' οὐκ ἀπώ- 
ela, ἀλλὰ τεταγμένη τις οἰκονομία καὶ διοίκησις. 
τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν ἀποδημία, μεταβολὴ μικρά" τοῦτο 
θάνατος, μεταβολὴ μείζων ἐκ τοῦ νῦν ὄντος οὐκ 3 
εἰς τὸ μὴ ὄν, ἀλλ᾽ εἰς τὸ νῦν μὴ ὄν.--- Οὐκέτι οὖν 
ἔσομαι ;---Οὐκ ἔσει" ἀλλ᾽ ἄλλο τι οὗ νῦν ὁ 
κόσμος χρείαν ἔχει. καὶ γὰρ σὺ ἐγένου οὐχ ὅτε 
σὺ ἠθέλησας, ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε ὁ κόσμος χρείαν ἔσχεν. 
Διὰ τοῦτο ὁ καλὸς καὶ ἀγαθὸς μεμνημένος, τίς 
τ᾽ ἐστὶ καὶ ππόθεν ἐλήλυθεν καὶ ὑπὸ τίνος γέγονεν, 
πρὸς μόνῳ τούτῳ ἐστίν, πῶς τὴν αὑτοῦ χώραν 
ἐκπληρώσῃ εὐτάκτως καὶ εὐπειθῶς τῷ θεῷ. 
“ ἔτι pe μεῖναι ὃ θέλεις ; ὡς ἐλεύθερος, ὡς 
γενναῖος, ὡς σὺ ἠθέλησας" σὺ γάρ με ἀκώ- 
λυτον ἐποίησας ἐν τοῖς ἐμοῖς. ἀλλ᾽ οὐκέτι μου 
χρείαν ἔχεις ; καλῶς σοι γένοιτο' καὶ μέχρι νῦν 
διὰ σὲ ἔμενον, δι᾿ ἄλλον οὐδένα, καὶ νῦν cot πει- 


1 καί before this word was deleted by Upton. 

2 οὐκ added by Sb, a correction supported by the para- 
phrase of this passage in Marcus Aurelius, 11, 35, 

3 Reiske : μ᾽ εἶναι ὃ. 





1 This seems to me to be the most probable meaning of a 
vexed passage. If any change is needed, which I doubt 
(for ἄλλος with the simple genitive is abundantly attested, 
at least in other authors), I should prefer to read ἄλλο τι ἢ 


214 


BOOK III. xxiv. 90-97 


against the things themselves. Do you tell me 
that any word is ill-omened which signifies some 
process of nature? Say that also the harvesting of 
ears of grain is illomened, for it signifies the 
destruction of the ears; but not of the universe. 
Say that also for leaves to fall is ill-omened, and 
for the fresh fig to turn into a dried fig, and a 
cluster of grapes to turn into raisins. For all these 
things are changes of a preliminary state into 
something else; it is not a case of destruction, but 
a certain ordered dispensation and management. 
This is what going abroad means, a slight change; 
this is the meaning of death, a greater change of that 
which now is, not into what is not, but into what is 
not now.—Shall I, then, be no more?—-No, you 
will not be, but something else will be, something 
different from that of which the universe now has 
need. And this is but reasonable, for you came 
into being, not when you wanted, but when the 
universe had need of you. 

For this reason the good and excellent man, 
bearing in mind who he is, and whence he has 
come, and by whom he was created, centres his 
attention on this and this only, how he may fill his 
place in an orderly’fashion, and with due obedience 
to God. “Is it Thy will that I should still remain ? 
I will remain as a free man, as a noble man, as Thou 
didst wish it; for Thou hast made me free from 
hindrance in what was mine own. And now hast 
Thou no further need of me? Be it well with Thee. 
I have been waiting here until now because of Thee 
and of none other, and now I obey Thee and depart.” 


οὗ, rather than to change οὐκ into od, delete or transpose it, 
or take νῦν in the sense of τότε. 
215 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


98 θόμενος ἀπέρχομαι." ““τῶς ἀπέρχῃ ; ἐμῶν: πάλιν 
ὡς σὺ ἠθέλησας, ὡς ἐλεύθερος, ὡς ὑπηρέτης σύς, 
ὡς ἠσθημένος σου τῶν προσταγμάτων καὶ ἀπαγο- 

99 ρευμάτων. μέχρι δ᾽ ἂν οὗ ὗ διατρίβω ἐ ἐν τοῖς σοῖς, τίνα 
με θέλεις εἶναι ; ἄρχοντα ἢ ἰδιώτην, βουλευτὴν ἢ 
δημότην, στρατιώτην ἢ στρατηγόν, παιδευτὴν ἢ 
οἰκοδεσπότην ; ἣν ἂν χώραν καὶ τάξιν ἐγχει- 
ρίσῃς, ὡς λέγει ὁ Σωκράτης, μυριάκις ἀπο- 
θανοῦμαι πρότερον ἣ “ταύτην ἐγκαταλείψω. 

100 ποῦ δέ μ᾽ εἶναι θέλεις ; ἐν Ῥώμῃ ἢ ἐν ᾿Αθήναις 
ἢ ἐν Θήβαις ἢ ἐν Γυάροις ; μόνον ἐκεῖ μου 

101 μέμνησο. ἄν μ᾽ ἐκεῖ πέμπηῃς; ὅπου κατὰ φύσιν 
διεξαγωγὴ οὐκ ἔστιν ἀνθρώπων, οὐ σοὶ ἀπειθῶν 
ἔξειμι, ἀλλ᾽ ὡς σοῦ μοι σημαίνοντος τὸ ἀνακλητι- 
κόν: οὐκ ἀπολεύίπω σε' μὴ γένοιτο" ἀλλ᾽ aic- 

102 θάνομαε, ὅ ὅτι μου χρείαν οὐκ ἔχεις. ἂν δὲ διδῶται 
κατὰ φύσιν διεξαγωγή, οὐ ζητήσω ἄλλον τόπον * 


x 


ἢ ἐν ᾧ εἰμὲ ἢ ἄλλους ἀνθρώπους ἢ μεθ᾽ ὧν 
» 59 


εἰμί, 

103 Ταῦτα νυκτός, ταῦτα ἡμέρας πρόχειρα ἔστω: 
ταῦτα γράφειν, ταῦτα ἀναγυγνώσ κειν' περὶ 
τούτων τοὺς λόγους ποιεῖσθαι, αὐτὸν πρὸς αὑτόν, 
πρὸς ἕτερον “ μή τι ἔχεις μοι πρὸς τοῦτο Bone h- 
σαι ." καὶ πάλιν ἄλλῳ προσελθεῖν " καὶ ἄλλῳ. 

104 εἶτα ἄν τι γένηται τῶν λεγομένων ἀβουλήτων, 
εὐθὺς ἐκεῖνο πρῶτον ἐπικουφίσει σε, ὅτι οὐκ 


105 ἀπροσδόκητον. μέγα γὰρ ἐπὶ πάντων τὸ “ἤδειν 


1 τόπον added by Schweighiuser, after Schegk. 
2 Wolf, after Schegk ; ἐλθεῖν 8. 





1 A very free paraphrase of Plato Apology, 28 D-29 A. 
216 


BOOK ΠῚ, xxiv. 97-105 


“How do you depart?” “ Again, as Thou didst 
wish it, as a free man, as Thy servant, as one who 
has perceived Thy commands and Thy prohibitions. 
But so long as I continue to live in Thy service, 
what manner of man wouldst Thou have me be? 
An official or a private citizen, a senator or one of 
the common people, a soldier or a general, a teacher 
or the head of a household? Whatsoever station 
and post Thou assign me, I will die ten thousand 
times, as Socrates says, or ever I abandon it.t And 
where wouldst Thou have me be? In Rome, or in 
Athens, or in Thebes, orin Gyara?? Only remember 
me there. If Thou sendest me to a place where men 
have no means of living in accordance with nature, 
1 shall depart this life, not in disobedience to Thee, 
but as though Thou wert sounding for me the recall. 
I do not abandon Thee—far be that from me! but 
I perceive that Thou hast no needof me. Yet if 
there be vouchsafed a means of living in accordance 
with nature, I will seek no other place than that in 
which I am, or other men than those who are now 
my associates.” 

Have thoughts like these ready at hand by night 
and by day; write them, read them, make your 
conversation about them, communing with yourself, 
or saying to another, “Can you give me some help 
in this matter?’’ And again, go now to one man 
and now to another. Then, if some one of those 
things happens which are called undesirable, im- 
mediately the thought that it was not unexpected 
will be the first thing to lighten the burden. For 
in every case it is a great help to be able to say, 
“J knew that the son whom I had begotten was 


2 See on I, 24, 19, 
217 


106 


107 


108 


109 


110 


lil 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


θνητὸν γεγεννηκώς." οὕτως γὰρ ἐρεῖς καὶ ὅτι 
“den θνητὸς ὦν», “ ἤδειν ἀποδημητικὸς ὦν," 

«Hew ἔκβλητος ὦν," “nde εἰς φυλακὴν ἀπό- 
TAKTOS av.” εἶτ᾽ ἂν ἐπιστρέφῃς κατὰ σαυτὸν 
καὶ ζητήσῃς τὴν χώραν, ἐξ ἧς ἐστὶ τὸ συμβεβη- 
κὄς, εὐθὺς ἀναμνησθήσῃ, ὅτι “ ἐκ τῆς τῶν 
ἀπροαιρέτων, τῶν οὐκ ἐμῶν" τί οὖν πρὸς ἐμέ; " 
εἶτα τὸ κυριώτατον “ris δ᾽ αὐτὸ καὶ ἐπιπέ- 
πομῴεν ; ὁ ἡγεμὼῤνφ ἢ ὁ στρατηγός, ἡ 
πόλις, O τῆς πόλεως νόμος. “δὸς οὖν αὐτό' 
δεῖ γάρ με ἀεὶ τῷ νόμῳ πείθεσθαι ἐν παντί." 
εἶθ᾽ ὅταν σε ἡ φαντασία δάκνῃ (τοῦτο γὰρ 
οὐκ ἐπὶ gol), ἀναμάχου τῷ λόγῳ, καταγωνίζου 
αὐτήν, μὴ ἐάσῃς ἐνισχύειν μηδὲ προάγειν ἐπὶ τὰ 
ἑξῆς ἀναπλάσσουσαν ὅσα θέλει καὶ ὡς θέλει. 
ἂν ἐν Γυάροις ἧς, μὴ ἀνάπλασσε τὴν. ἐν Ῥώμῃ 
διατριβὴν καὶ ὅσαι διαχύσεις ἦσαν ἐκεῖ διάγοντι, 
ὅσαι γένοιντ᾽ ἂν ἐπανελθόντι' ἀλλ᾽ ἐκεῖ τέτασο, 
ὅπως δεῖ τὸν ἐν Τυάροις διάγοντα, ἐν Ῥυάροις 
ἐρρωμένως διάγειν. κἂν ἐν Ῥώμῃ ἧς, μὴ ἄνά- 
wracoe τὴν ἐν ᾿Αθήναις διατριβήν, Ura περὶ 
μόνης τῆς ἐκεῖ μελέτα. 

Kir’ ἀντὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἁπασῶν διαχύσεων ἐ ἐκείνην 
ἀντείσαγε, τὴν ἀπὸ τοῦ παρακολουθεῖν, ὅ ὅτι πείθῃ 
τῷ θεῷ, ὅτι οὐ λόγῳ, ἀλλ᾽ ἔργῳ τὰ τοῦ καλοῦ καὶ 
ἀγαθοῦ ἐκτελεῖς. οἷον yap ἐστεν αὐτὸν αὑτῷ 





1 Variously attributed to Solon (Diogenes Laertius, 2, 13), 
Anaxagoras (Cicero, Zuse. 3, 30; Diogenes Laertius, 2, 13°, 
or Xenophon (Diogenes Laertins, 2. 13 and 55). Compare 
also Seneca, De Consol. ad Polyb. 11, 2, and Hierocles on the 
Golden Verses of Pythagoras, chap. 11 (p. 439 a, Mullach). 


218 


BOOK III. xxrv. ros-111 


mortal.” + For that is what you will say, and again, 
“J knew that I was mortal,’ “I knew that I was 
likely to leave home,” “I knew that I was liable to 
banishment,” “I knew that I might be sent off to 
prison.” And in the next place, if you reflect with 
yourself and look for the quarter from which the 
happening comes, immediately you will be reminded 
of the principle: “It comes from the quarter of the 
things that are outside the sphere of the moral 
purpose, that are not mine own; what, then, is it 
tome?” Then comes the most decisive considera- 
tion: “ Who was it that has sent the order?” Our 
Prince, or our General, the State, or the law of the 
State? “Give it to me, then, for 1 must always 
obey the law in every particular.” Later on, when 
your imagination bites you (for this is something 
you cannot control), fight against it with your reason, 
beat it down, do not allow it to grow strong, or to 
take the next step and draw all the pictures it 
wants, in the way it wants todo, Ifyou are at Gyara, 
don’t picture the style of life at Rome, and all the 
relaxations a man had who was living there, as well 
as all that he might have upon his return; but since 
you have been stationed there, you ought to strive to 
live manfully at Gyara, as beseems the man whose life 
is spent in Gyara. And again, if you are in Rome, 
don’t picture the style of life at Athens, but make 
your life in Rome the one object of your study and 
practice. 

Then, in the place of all the other relaxations, 
introduce that which comes from the consciousness 
that you are obedient to God, and that you are 
playing the part of the good and excellent man, not 
ostensibly but in reality. For what a fine thing it 


219 


112 


113 


114 


115 


116 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


δύνασθαι εἰπεῖν “νῦν ἃ οἱ ἄλλοι ἐν ταῖς σχολαῖς 
\ a “ 
σεμνολογοῦσιν καὶ παραδοξολογεῖν δοκοῦσι, ταῦτα 
ἐγὼ ἐπιτελῶ: κἀκεῖνοι καθήμενοι τὰς ἐμὰς ἀρετὰς 
ἐξηγοῦνται καὶ περὶ ἐμοῦ Entodow καὶ ἐμὲ 
ὑμνοῦσιν' καὶ τούτου pe ὁ Ζεὺς αὐτὸν παρ᾽ 
ἴω - / 
ἐμαυτοῦ λαβεῖν ἀπόδειξιν ἠθέλησεν Kal αὐτὸς δὲ 
γνῶναι, εἰ ἔχει στρατιώτην οἷον δεῖ, πολίτην οἷον 
δεῖ, καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις ἀνθρώποις προάγειν με 
μάρτυρα τῶν ἀπροαιρέτων. “ἴδετε, ὅτε. εἰκῆ 
“ f . 3 “a Ὄ 3 a \ 
φοβεῖσθε, μάτην ἐπιθυμεῖτε ὧν ἐπιθυμεῖτε. τὰ 
> \ ,' \ fal 3 ξ " o 3 Ν 
ἀγαθὰ ἔξω μὴ ἕητεῖτε, ἐν ἑαυτοῖς ζητεῖτε' εἰ δὲ 
μή, οὐχ εὑρήσετε. ἐπὶ τούτοις με νῦν μὲν 
ἐνταῦθα ἄγει, νῦν δ᾽ ἐκεῖ πέμπει, πένητα δείκνυσι 
τοῖς ἀνθρώποις, δίχα ἀρχῆς, νοσοῦντα" εἰς Γύαρα 
ἀποστέλλει, εἰς δεσμωτήριον εἰσάγει. οὐ μισῶν' 
μὴ γένοιτο" τίς δὲ μισεῖ τὸν ἄριστον τῶν ὑπηρε- 
τῶν τῶν ἑαυτοῦ ; οὐδ᾽ ἀμελῶν, ὅς γε οὐδὲ τῶν 
? Ν 3 nn ? \ / Ν᾽ 
μικροτάτων τινὸς ἀμελεῖ, ἀλλὰ γυμνάξων καὶ 
μάρτυρι πρὸς τοὺς ἄλλους χρώμενος. εἰς τοιαύ- 
τὴν ὑπηρεσίαν κατατεταγμένος ἔτι φροντίζω, 
ποῦ εἰμὲ ἢ μετὰ τίνων ἢ τί περὶ ἐμοῦ λέγουσιν ; 
> \ 3 χὰ Ν Ν Ἀ f 4 \ 

οὐχὶ & ὅλος πρὸς τὸν θεὸν τέταμαι Kal τὰς 


ἜΝ) ἢ Ν ΩΝ ΄ a) 
ἐκείνου ἐντολὰς Kal Ta προστάγματα; 


Ταῦτα ἔχων ἀεὶ ἐν χερσὶ καὶ τρίβων αὐτὸς 
παρὰ σαυτῷ καὶ πρόχειρα ποιῶν οὐδέποτε δεήσῃ 
τοῦ παραμυθουμένου, τοῦ ἐπιρρωννύντος. καὶ 

4 3 ‘ 3 \ o \ 3, > 4 Ν 
γὰρ αἰσχρὸν ov τὸ φαγεῖν μὴ ἔχειν, ἀλλὰ τὸ 
220. 


BOOK IIL. xxv. Irr-116 


is to be able to say to oneself, “ Now I am actually 
performing what the rest talk solemnly about in 
their lectures, and are thought to be uttering para- 
doxes. Yes, they sit and expound my virtues, and 
study about me, and sing my praise. And of this 
Zeus wished me to get a demonstration in my own 
person, while at the same time He wished to know 
whether He has the right kind of soldier, the right 
kind of citizen, and to present me before all other 
men as a witness about the things which lie outside 
the sphere of the moral purpose. ‘Behold,’ says 
He, ‘ your fears are at haphazard, it is in vain that 
you desire what you desire. Do not look for your 
blessings outside, but look for them within your- 
selves; otherwise you will not find them.’ ‘These 
are the terms upon which now He brings me here, 
and again He sends me there; to mankind exhibits 
me in poverty, without office, in sickness; sends me 
away to Gyara, brings me into prison. Not because 
He hates me—perish the thought! And who hates 
the best of his servants? Nor because He neglects 
me, for He does not neglect any of even the least 
of His creatures; but because He is training me, 
and making use of me as a witness to the rest of 
men, When I have been appointed to such a 
service, am I any longer to take thought as to where 
I am, or with whom, or what men say about me? 
Am I not wholly intent upon God, and His 
commands and ordinances ?”’ 

If you have these thoughts always at hand and 
go over them again and again in your own mind, 
and keep them in readiness, you will never need a 
person to console you, or strengthen you. For dis- 
grace does not consist in not having anything to 


221 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


λόγον μὴ ἔχειν ἀρκοῦντα πρὸς ἀφοβίαν, πρὸς 

117 ἀλυπίαν. ἂν δ᾽ ἅπαξ περιποιήσῃ τὸ ἄλυπον καὶ 
ἄφοβον, ἔτι σοι τύραννος ἔσται τις ἢ ἢ δορυφόρος ἢ ἢ 
Καισαριανοὶ ἢ ὀρδινατίων δήξεταί. σε ἢ οἱ ἐπι- 
θύοντες ἐν τῷ Καπιτωλίῳ ἐπὶ τοῖς ὀπτικίοις τὸν 
τηλικαύτην ἀρχὴν παρὰ τοῦ Διὸς εἰληφότα ; 

118 μόνον μὴ πόμπευε αὐτὴν μηδ᾽ ἀλαξζονεύου ἐπ᾽ 
αὑτῇ, ἀλλ᾽ “ἔργῳ δείκνυε" κἂν μηδεὶς αἰσθάνηται, 
ἀρκοῦ αὐτὸς ὑγιαίνων καὶ εὐδαιμονῶν. 


κε΄. Πρὸς τοὺς ἀποπίπτοντας ὧν προέθεντο, 


1 Σκέψαι, ὧν mpoeGou ἀρχόμενος, τίνων μὲν 
ἐκράτησας, τίνων δ᾽ οὔ, καὶ πῶς ἐφ᾽ οἷς μὲν 
εὐφραίνῃ ἀναμιμνῃκόμεν ος, ἐφ᾽ οἷς δ᾽ ἄχθῃ, καὶ εἰ 

2 δυνατόν, ἀνάλαβε κἀκεῖνα ὧν ἀπώλισθες. οὐ 
γὰρ ἀποκνητέον τὸν ἀγῶνα τὸν μέγιστον ἀγωνιξο- 

3 μένοις, ἀλλὰ καὶ πληγὰς ληπτέον. οὐ γὰρ ὑπὲρ 
πάλης καὶ παγκρατίου ὁ ἀγὼν πρόκειται, οὗ καὶ 
τυχόντι καὶ μὴ τυχόντι ἔξεστιν μὲν πλείστου 
ἀξίῳ, ἔξεστι δὲ ὀλίγου εἶναι καὶ vn Δία ἔξεστιν 
μὲν εὐτυχεστάτῳ, ἔξεστι δὲ κακοδαιμονεστάτῳ 
εἶναι, ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὲρ αὐτῆς εὐτυχίας καὶ εὐδαιμονίας. 

4 τί οὖν; οὐδ᾽ ἂν ἀπαυδήσωμεν ἐνταῦθα, κωλύει 





* In this passage the words Caesariani and ordinatio have 
been taken over direct from the Latin. In ὀπτικίοις, a word 
which seems to occur nowhere else in Greek or in Latin, it 
may be that the Latin azwspicia (sacrifices at the inauguration 
of some official enterprise) are meant, as Wolf suggested, 
and so the passage is translated ; but ‘the word is very un- 


222 


BOOK III. xxiv. 116—xxv. 4 


eat, but in not having reason sufficient to secure you 
against fear and against grief. But if onee you win 
for yourself security against grief and fear, will 
there any longer exist for you a tyrant, or a guards- 
man, or members of Caesar's household ; or will some 
appointment to office sting you with envy, or those 
who perform sacrifices on the Capitol in taking the 
auspices, you who have received so important an office 
from Zeus? Only make no display of your office, 
and do not boast about it; but prove it by your 
conduct ; and if no one perceives that you have it, 
be content to live in health and happiness yourself. 


CHAPTER XXV 


To those who fail io achieve their purposes 


Consiper which of the things that you purposed 
at the start you have achieved, and which you have 
not; likewise, how it gives you pleasure to recall 
some of them, and pain to recall others, and, if 
possible, recover also those things which have slipped 
out of your grasp. For men who are engaged in the 
greatest of contests ought not to flinch, but to take 
also the blows; for the contest before us is not in 
wrestling or the pancratium, in which, whether a 
man succeeds or fails, he may be worth a great deal, 
or only a little,—yes, by Zeus, he may even be 
extremely happy or extremely miserable,— but it is 
a contest for good fortune and happiness itself. 
What follows? Why here, even if'we give in for 


certain (Chinnock, Class, Rev. 3 (1889), 70, thinks it stands 
for oficia), and several emendations have been proposed, of 
which ὀπφικίοις (oficia, Koraes) is perhaps the most plausible. 


223 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


td 3 , 5 ΣΝ κι “~ 
Tis πάλιν ἀγωνίξεσθαι οὐδὲ δεῖ περιμεῖνας τετραε- 
τίαν ἄλλην, ἵν ἔλθῃ ἄλλα ᾿Ολύμπια, ἀλλ᾽ εὐθὺς 
ἀναλαβόντι καὶ ἀνακτησαμένῳ ἑαυτὸν καὶ τὴν 
3 Ν 3 / / 3 >] ᾽ 
αὐτὴν εἰσφέροντι προθυμίαν ἔξεστιν ἀγωνίζεσθαι" 
Xx / 3 ? 4 + x Ye 
κἂν πάλιν ἀπείπῃς, πάλιν ἔξεστιν, κἂν ἅπαξ 
, 4 “ 
νικήσῃς, ὅμοιος εἰ τῷ μηδέποτε ἀπειπόντι. 
ἤ \ ¢ \ a > a en7 > N\ ¥ 

5 μόνον μὴ ὑπὸ ἔθους τοῦ αὐτοῦ ἡδέως αὐτὸ ἄρξῃ 

ποιεῖν" καὶ λοιπὸν ὡς κακὸς ἀθλητὴς περιέρχῃ 

/ ry n “ 
νικώμενος τὴν περίοδον ὅμοιος τοῖς ἀποφυγοῦσιν 
μὴ ec ft nN 7 / 

6 ὄρτυξιν. “nrg με φαντασία ,παιδισκαρίου 
καλοῦ. τί yap; πρῴην οὐχ HnTTHOnv;” “ mpo- 

7 7 
θυμία μοι γίνεται ψέξαι τινά. πρῴην γὰρ οὐκ 
4 3 a - 

7 ἔψεξα ; οὕτως ἡμῖν λαλεῖς ὡς ἀξήμιος ἐξελη- 
λυθώς, οἱονεί τις τῷ ἰατρῷ κωλύοντι λούσασθαι 
λέγοι “πρῴην γὰρ οὐκ ἐλουσάμην; ἢ ἂν οὖν ὁ 
’ 4 > a» t .- ΚΝ , ἣ , 
ἰατρὸς αὐτῷ ἔχῃ λέγειν “ ἄγε, λουσάμενος οὖν τί 
of ae eee See, ? 2 7 . 39 
ἔπαθες ; οὐκ ἐπύρεξας ; οὐκ ἐκεφαλάλνγησας ; 

Ν ‘ / ? Ν 3 7 “ 

8 καὶ σὺ ψέξας πρῴην τινὰ οὐ κακοήθους ἔργον 
vf > - 3 / 2 Ἁ 
ἔπραξας; οὐ φλυάρου ; οὐκ ἔθρεψάς σον τὴν 
[ν΄ 4 ΄ ΘΝ A 3 a », ‘ 
ἕξιν ταύτην παραβάλλων αὐτῇ τὰ οἰκεῖα ἔργα ; 
ς θεὶς δὲ A ὃ η ΧΟ Ibs Ν᾿ 
ἡττηθεὶς δὲ τοῦ παιδισκαρίου ἀπῆλθες ἀζήμιος ; 

9 τί οὖν τὰ inv λέ > ἔδει δ᾽ οὗμαι μεμνημένο 
τί οὖν τὰ πρῴην λέγεις ; ἔ μαι μεμνημένον, 

ξ “a n a“ 3 4 “~ > nw 

᾿ς ὡς οἱ δοῦλοι τῶν πληγῶν, ἀπέχεσθαι τῶν αὐτῶν 

ξ / 3 % 5 4 3 [ω \ 

10 ἁμαρτημάτων. adr οὐχ ὅμοιον: ἐνταῦθα μὲν 





14 The comparison is brief, but I presume that a fighting 
quail, on once having submitted to defeat, became very 
ready to do so again, as is the case among ordinary chickens. 
One shouted into his ear in order to make him forget, as they 
said, the voice of the victor, and to restore his courage. 
Pollux, 9, 109. 


224 


BOOK III. xxv. 4-10 


the time being, no one prevents us from struggling 
again, and we do not have to wait another four-year 
period for another Olympic festival to come around, 
but the moment a man has picked himself up, and 
recovered himself, and exhibits the same eagerness, 
he is allowed to contest ; and if you give in again, 
you can enter again; and if once you win a victory, 
you are as though you had never given in at all, 
Only don’t begin cheerfully to do the same thing 
over again out of sheer habit, and end up as a bad 
athlete, going the whole cireuit of the games, and 
getting beaten all the time, like quails that have 
once run away. “I amovercome by the impression 
of a pretty maid. Well, what of it? Wasn’t I 
overcome just the other day?” “I feel strongly 
inclined to censure somebody, for didn’t I censure 
somebody just the other day?” You talk thus to 
us as though you had come off scot-free ; just as if 
a man should say to his physician who was for- 
bidding him to bathe, “ Why, but didn’t 1 bathe 
just the other day?” If, then, the physician is 
able to say to him, “Very well, after you had 
bathed, then, how did you feel? Didn’t you have 
a fever? Didn’t your head ache?” So, too, when 
you censured somebody the other day, didn’t you 
act like an ugly-spirited man, like a silly babbler? 
Didn’t you feed this habit by citing the example of 
your own previous acts? And when you were over- 
come by the maid, did you escape scot-free? Why, 
then, do you talk about what you were doing just 
the other day? In my opinion, you ought to have 
remembered, as slaves remember their blows, and 
to have kept away from the same mistakes. But 
one case is not like the other; for with slaves it is 


225 
VOL. 11. 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES. OF EPICTETUS 


γὰρ δ πόνος τὴν μνήμην ποιεῖ, ἐπὶ δὲ τῶν ἁμαρτη- 
μάτων ποῖος πόνος, ποία ζημία ; πότε γὰρ 
εἰθίσθης φεύγειν τὸ κακῶς ἐνεργῆσαι ; 


f ‘ \ \ 3 / f 
xs’. Ilpos τοὺς τὴν ἀπορίαν δεδοικότας. 


1 Οὐκ αἰσχύνῃ δειλότερος ὦ OY καὶ ἀγεννέστερος τῶν 
δραπετῶν ; , πῶς ἐκεῖνοι φεύγοντες ἀπολείπουσι 
τοὺς δεσπότας, ποΐοις ἀγροῖς πεποιθότες, ποίοις 
οἰκέταις ; οὐχὶ δ᾽ ὀλίγον ὅσον πρὸς τὰς πρώτας 

ἡμέρας ὑφελόμενοι εἶθ᾽ ὕστερον διὰ γῆς ἢ καὶ 
θαλάττης φέρονται ἄλλην ἐξ ἄλλης ἀφορμὴν πρὸς 

276 διατρέφεσθαι φιλοτεχνοῦντες ; καὶ τίς πώποτε 
δραπέτης λιμῷ ἀπέθανεν ; Ὶ σὺ δὲ τρέμεις, μή σοι 
λείπῃ τὰ ἀναγκαῖα, καὶ τὰς νύκτας ἀγρυπνεῖς. 

8 ταλαίπωρε, οὕτως τυφλὸς εἶ καὶ τὴν ὁδὸν οὐχ 
ὁρᾷς, ὅποι φέρει ἡ τῶν ἀναγκαίων ἔνδεια ; ποῦ 
γὰρ φέρει; ὅπου καὶ ὁ πυρετός, ὅπου καὶ 
λίθος ἐπιπεσών, εἰς θάνατον. τοῦτοϊ οὖν οὐ 
πολλάκις σὺ αὐτὸς εἶπες πρὸς τοὺς ἑταίρους, 
πολλὰ δ᾽ ἀνέγνως τοιαῦτα, πολλὰ δ᾽ ἔγραφες ; 
ποσάκις δ᾽ ἠλαζονεύσω, ὅτι πρός γε τὸ ἀπο- 

4 θανεῖν μετρίως ἔχεις ;---Ναί" ἀλλὰ καὶ οἱ ἐμοὶ 
πεινήσουσιν.---Τί οὗν; μή τι καὶ ὃ ἐκείνων 
λιμὸς ἀλλαχοῦ που φέρει ; ; ,οὐχὶ καὶ ἡ αὐτή που 

5 κάθοδος; τὰ κάτω τὰ αὐτά; οὐ θέλεις. οὖν ἐκεῖ 
βλέπειν θαρρῶν πρὸς πᾶσαν ἀπορίαν καὶ ἔνδειαν, 
ὅπου καὶ τοὺς πλουσιωτάτους καὶ τὰς ἀρχὰς τὰς 


1 Meibom, after Wolf: τοῦτον ΚΑ. 
2 Reiske : δαυτός S. 


226 


BOOK III. xxv. ro-xxvi. 5 


the suffering which produces the memory, but in the 
case of your mistakes, what suffering is there, what 
penalty do you feel? Why, when did you ever 
acquire the habit of avoiding evil activities? 


CHAPTER XXVI 
To those who fear want 


AREN'T you ashamed to be more cowardly and 
ignoble than a runaway slave? How do they, when 
they run off, leave their masters? in what estates or 
slaves do they put their confidence? Don’t they 
steal just a little bit to last them for the first few 
days, and then afterwards drift along over land or 
sea, contriving one scheme after another to keep 
themselves fed? And what runaway slave ever died 
of hunger? But you tremble, and lie awake at 
night, for fear the necessities of life will fail you. 
Wretch, are you so blind, and do you so fail to see 
the road to which lack of the necessities of life leads? 
Where, indeed, does it lead? Where also fever, or 
a stone that drops on your head, lead,—to death. 
Have you not, then, often said this same thing your- 
self to your companions, read much of the same sort, 
and written much? How many times have you 
boasted that, as far as death at least was concerned, 
you are in a fairly good state?P—Yes, but my 
family too will starve-—What then? Their starva- 
tion does not lead to some other end than yours, 
does it? Have they not also much the same descent 
thereto, and the same world below? Are you not 
willing, then, to look with courage sufficient to face 
every necessity and want, at that place to which the 


227 
ῳ 2 


9 


10 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


μεγίστας ἄρξαντας καὶ αὐτοὺς τοὺς βασιλεῖς καὶ 
τυράννους δεῖ κατελθεῖν, καὶ ᾿ σὲ πεινῶντα, ἂν 
οὕτως τύχῃ, ἐκείνους δὲ διαρραγέντας ὑπὸ ἀπε- 
ψιῶν καὶ μέθης ; τίνα πώποτ᾽ ἐπαίτην ῥᾳδίως 
εἶδες μὴ γέροντα; τίνα δ᾽ οὐκ ἐσχατόγηρων ; 
ἀλλὰ ῥιγῶντες τὰς νύκτας καὶ τὰς ἡμέρας Kat 
χαμαὶ ἐρριμμένοι καὶ ὅσον αὐτὸ τὸ ἀναγκαῖον 
συτούμενοι ἐγγὺς ἥκουσιν τῷ μηδ᾽ ἀποθανεῖν 
δύνασθαι, σὺ" § ὁλόκληρος ἄνθρωπος χεῖρας 
ἔχων καὶ πόδας περὶ λιμοῦ δέδοικας οὕτως; οὐκ 
ἀντλεῖν δύνασαι, οὐ γράφειν, οὐ παιδαγωγεῖν, οὐ 
θύραν ἀχλοτρίαν φυλάττειν ;---Αλλ᾽ αἰσχρὸν εἰς 
ταύτην ἐλθεῖν τὴν ἀνάγκην.---Μάθε οὖν πρῶτον, 
τίνα τὰ αἰσχρά ἐστιν, καὶ οὕτως ἡμῖν λέγε 
σαυτὸν φιλόσοφον. τὸ νῦν δὲ μηδ᾽ ἂν ἄλλος τις 
εἴπῃ σε, ἀνέχου. 

Αἰσχρόν ἐστί σοι τὸ μὴ σὸν ἔργον, οὗ σὺ αἴτιος 
οὐκ εἶ, ὃ ἄλλως ἀπήντησέν σοι, ὡς κεφαλαλγία, 
ὡς TUPET OS ; εἴ σου οἱ γονεῖς πένητες σαν, ἢ 
πλούσιοι μὲν ἦσαν ὃ ἄλλους δὲ κληρονόμους 
ἀπέλιπον, καὶ ζῶντες οὐκ ἐπαρκοῦσιν οὐδέν, σοὶ 
ταῦτα αἰσχρά ἐστιν; ταῦτα ἐμάνθανες παρὰ τοῖς 
φιλοσόφοις : οὐδέποτε ἤκουσας, ὅτε τὸ αἰσχρὸν 
ψεκτόν ἐστιν, τὸ δὲ ψεκτὸν ἄξιόν ἐστι τοῦ 
ψέγεσθαι; τίνα δ᾽ 4 ἐπὶ τῷ μὴ αὑτοῦ ἔργῳ, ὃ 
αὐτὸς οὐκ ἐποίησεν; σὺ οὖν ἐποίησας τοῦτο, τὸν 


1 Meibom, after Wolf: εἰ 8. 

2 From here through δύνασαι the passage is written in the 

margin by the first hand of 8. 

8 ἢ πλούσιοι μέν supplied by Schweighiuser, ἦσαν by Ο, 
Schenkl. 

4 δ᾽ added by Schweighauser. 


228 


BOOK III. xxv. 5-10 


wealthiest needs must go, and those who have held 
the highest offices, and very kings and tyrants? 
Only you will descend hungry, if it so happen, and 
they bursting with indigestion aud drunkenness. Did 
you ever easily find a beggar who was not an old man? 
Wasn't he extremely old? But though they are cold 
night and day, and lie forlorn on the ground, and have 
to eat only what is absolutely necessary, they approach 
a state where it is almost impossible for them to 
die ;! yet you who are physically perfect, and have 
hands and feet, are you so alarmed about starving? 
Can’t you draw water, or write, or escort boys to and 
from school, or be another’s doorkeeper ?—-But it is 
disgraceful to come to such a necessity.—Learn, 
therefore, first of all, what the disgraceful things are, 
and after you have done that, come into our 
presence and call yourself a philosopher. But as 
the case stands now, do not even allow anyone else 
to call you one! 

Is anything disgraceful to you which is not your 
own doing, for which you are not responsible, which 
has befallen you accidentally, as a headache or a 
fever? If your parents were poor, or if they were 
rich but left others as their heirs, and if they give 
you no help though they are living, is all this dis- 
graceful to you? Is that what you learned at the 
feet of the philosophers? Have you never heard 
that the disgraceful thing is censurable, and the 
censurable is that which deserves censure? And 
whom do you censure for what is not his own doing, 
which he didn’t produce himself? Well, did you 
produce this situation? did you make your father 

1 The argument is, one need hardly remark, quite 
unsound, for the death-rate among the poor is unquestion- 


ably much higher than among the wealthy. 
229 


11 


18 


14 


AKRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


πατέρα τοιοῦτον ; ἢ ἔξεστίν σοι ἐπανορθῶσαι 
αὐτόν ; δίδοταί σοι τοῦτο; τί οὖν; δεῖ σε θέλειν 
τὰ μὴ διδόμενα ἢ μὴ τυγχάνοντα αὐτῶν αἰσχύνε- 
σθαι; οὕτως δὲ καὶ εἰθίζου φιλοσοφῶν ἀφορᾶν 
εἰς ἄλλους καὶ μηδὲν αὐτὸς ἐλπίζειν ἐκ σεαυτοῦ ; 
τοιγαροῦν οἴμωξε καὶ στένς καὶ ἔσθιε δεδοικώς, μὴ 
οὐ σχῇς “τροφὰς αὔριον" περὶ τῶν δουλαρίων 
τρέμε, μὴ κλέψῃ τι, μὴ φύγῃ, μὴ ἀποθάνῃ. 
οὕτως σὺ ζῆθι καὶ μὴ παύσῃ μηδέποτε, ὅστις 
ὀνόματι μόνον πρὸς φιλοσοφίαν προσῆλθες καὶ τὰ 
θεωρήματα αὐτῆς ὅσον ἐπὶ σοὶ κατήσχυνας 
ἄχρηστα ἐπιδείξας καὶ ἀνωφελῆ τοῖς ἀναλαμβά- 
νουσιν" οὐδέποτε δ᾽ εὐσταθείας ὠρέχθης, ἀταρα- 
ξίας, ἀπταθείας" οὐδένα τούτου ἕνεκα ἐθεράπευσας, 
συλλογισμῶν δ᾽ ἕνεκα πολλούς" οὐδέποτε τούτων 
τινὰ τῶν φαντασιῶν διεβασάνισας αὐτὸς ἐπὶ 
σεαυτοῦ “ δύναμαι φέρειν ἢ οὐ δύναμαι ; τί μοι τὸ 
λοιπόν ἐστιν ;", ἀλλ᾽ ὡς πάντων ἐχόντων σοι 
καλῶς καὶ ἀσφαλῶς περὶ τὸν τελευταῖον κατε- 
γίνου τόπον, τὸν τῆς ἀμεταπτωσίας, ἵν᾽ ἀμε- 
τάπτωτα σχῇς τίνα; τὴν δειλίαν, τὴν ἀγέννειαν, 
τὸν θαυμασμὸν τῶν πλουσίων, τὴν ἀτελῆ ὄρεξιν, 
τὴν ἀποτευκτικὴν ἔκκλισιν" περὶ τῆς τούτων 
ἀσφαλείας ἐφρόντιξες. 


15 Οὐκ ἔδει προσκτήσασθαι πρῶτον ἐκ τοῦ λόγου, 


1 See explanatory note. 





1 So the text as it stands in S, but the singular mixture of 
technical terms in ἀποτευκτικὴ ἔκκλισις is Incredible. Else- 
where, and quite properly, it is desire that fails to get what 
it wills (ἀποτευκτικῆ), and aversion that falls into what it 
would avoid (see ITT. 6, 6 and especially IV. 10, 4, Hence 
there is great plausibility in Schenkl’s suggestion (partly 


230 


BOOK ΠῚ. xxvi. 10-15 


what he is? Or is it in your power to reform him? 
Is that vouchsafed you? What follows? Ought 
you to wish for what is not given you, or to be 
ashamed when you fail to get it? And did you 
really, while studying philosophy, acquire the 
habit of looking to other persons, and of hoping 
for nothing yourself from yourself? Very well then, 
lament and groan, and eat in fear of not having food 
to-morrow ; tremble about your paltry slaves, for fear 
they will steal something, or run away, or die! Live 
in this spirit and never cease to live so, you who in 
name only have approached philosophy, and, as far 
as in you lay, have discredited its principles by 
showing them to be useless and good for nothing to 
those who receive them! But you never desired 
stability, serenity, peace of mind; you never culti- 
vated anybody’s acquaintance for that purpose, but 
many persons’ acquaintance for the sake of syllo- 
gisms; you never thoroughly tested for yourself any 
one of these external impressions, asking the ques- 
tions: “Am I able to bear it, or am J not? What 
may I expect next?” but just as though everything 
about you were in an excellent and safe condition, 
you have been devoting your attention to the last of all 
topics, that which deals with immutability, in order 
that you may have immutable—what? your cowardice, 
your ignoble character, your admiration of the rich, 
your ineffectual desire, your aversion that fails of its 
mark!1 These are the things about whose security 
you have been anxious! 

Ought you not, first, to have acquired something 


after Reiske), ὄρεξιν, τὴν ἀποτευκτικὴν, «τὴν wepinrerinhy> 
ἔκκλισιν : ‘desire, that fails to get what it wills, and 
aversion that falls into what it would avoid.” 


231 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


p 4 nn A 3 / δ , 
ELTA τούτῳ περιποιεῖν THY ἀσφάλειαν ; καὶ τίνα 
πώποτ᾽ εἶδες τριγχὸν περιοικοδομοῦντα μηδενὶ 
, f a“ 
τευχίῳ περιβαλόμενον αὐτόν ;1 ποῖος δὲ θυρωρὸς 
16 καθίσταται ἐπὶ οὐδεμιᾷ θύρᾳ; ἀλλὰ σὺ με- 
λετᾷς ἀποδεικνύειν δύνασθαι" τίνα ; μελετᾷς μὴ 
ἀποσαλεύεσθαι διὰ σοφισμάτων: ἀπὸ τίνων; 
od / A , “A Ὃν 3 
17 δεῖξόν μοι πρῶτον, τί τηρεῖς, τί μετρεῖς ἢ τί 
¢ , . 99) Φ 3 7 \ \ A LA 
ἱστάνεις" εἶθ᾽ οὕτως ἐπιδείκνυε τὸν ζυγὸν ἢ τὸν 
7 
18 μέδιμνον. ἢ μέχρι τίνος μετρήσεις τὴν σποδόν ; 
οὐ ταῦτά σε ἀποδεικνύειν δεῖ, ἃ ποιεῖ τοὺς 
ἀνθρώπους εὐδαίμονας, ἃ ποιεῖ προχωρεῖν αὐτοῖς 
\ / ¢ 7 δὰ 2 Ἂ / 
Ta πράγματα ws θέλουσιν, du ἃ οὐ δεῖ μέμφεσθαι 
Σ ’ 5 a 2 / 7 ol f 
οὐδενί, ἐγκαλεῖν οὐδενί, πείθεσθαι τῇ διοικήσει 
19 τῶν ὅλων ; ταῦτἄ μοι δείκνυε. “ ἰδοὺ δεικνύω," 
φησίν, “ἀναλύσω σοι συλλογισμούς. τοῦτο 
τὸ μετροῦν ἐστίν, ἀνδράποδον" τὸ μετρούμενον 
20 δ᾽ οὐκ ἔστιν. διὰ ταῦτα νῦν τίνεις δίκας ὧν 
ἠμέλησας" 5 τρέμεις, ἀγρυπνεῖς, μετὰ πάντων 
a) / 
βουλεύῃ" κἂν μὴ πᾶσιν ἀρέσκειν μέλλῃ τὰ 
βουλεύματα, κακῶς οἴει βεβουλεῦσθαι. 
21 Hira φοβῇ λιμόν, ὡς δοκεῖς. σὺ δ᾽ οὐ λιμὸν 
“ 4 ~ * 
“φοβῇ, ἀλλὰ δέδοικας μὴ οὐ σχῆς μάγειρον, μὴ 
4 
οὐ σχῇς ἄλλον ὀψωνητήν, ἄλλον τὸν ὑποδή- 
_ σόντα, ἄλλον τὸν ἐνδύσοντα, ἄλλους τοὺς 
᾽ 
(22 τρίψοντας, ἄλλους τοὺς ἀκολουθήσοντας, ty’ ἐν 
1 Sb (περιβαλόμενον Schenkl): μηδενὶ τειχίον περιβαλλό- 
μενον αὐτὸ αὐτοῦ Κ. The correct form of the text is highly 
uncertain, and the version in Sb is acceptable only as meeting 


in a general way the requirement of the context, 
* φιλοσοφίας after ἠμέλησας deleted by Schenk. 


232 


BOOK III. xxvi. 15-22 


from reason, and then to have made that something 
secure? Why, did you ever see anyone building a 
cornice all around without first having a wall about 
which to build it?! And what kind of doorkeeper 
is placed on guard where there isn’t any door? 
But you practise to get the power to demonstrate ; 
demonstrate what? You practise to avoid being 
shaken by sophisms; shaken from what? Show me 
first what you are maintaining, what you are measur- 
ing, or what you are weighing; and after that, and 
under those conditions, show me your scales or your 
bushel-measure. Or how long will you keep measur- 
‘Ing ashes? Are not these what you ought to be 
demonstrating, the things, namely, that make men 
happy, that make their affairs prosper for them as 
they desire, that make it unnecessary for them to 
blame anybody, and to find fault with anybody, but 
to acquiesce in the government of the universe? 
Show me these. “See, I do show you,” a man says; 
“I will analyse syllogisms for you.” Slave, this is a 
mere measuring instrument, it is not the thing 
measured. That is why you are now being punished 
for what you neglected; you tremble, lie awake, take 
counsel with everyone, and, if your plans are not 
likely to win the approval of all men, you think that, 
your deliberations have been faulty. ἡ 

And then you fear hunger, as you fancy. Yet it 
is not hunger that you fear, but you are afraid that 
you will not have a professional cook, you will not 
have another servant to buy the delicacies, another 
to put on your shoes for you, another to dress you, 
others to give you your massage, others to follow at 
your heels, in order that when you have undressed 


1 The figure is reminiscent of Plato, Rep. VII, 534 E. 
233 


23 


24 


25 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


τῷ βαλανείῳ ἐκδυσάμενος καὶ ἐκτείνας σεαυτὸν 
ὡς οἱ ἐσταυρωμένοι τρίβῃ ἔνθεν καὶ ἔνθεν, εἶθ᾽ 
ὃ ἀλείπτης ἐπιστὰς λέγῃ “ μετάβηθι, δὸς 
πλευρόν, κεφαλὴν αὐτοῦ λάβε, παράθες τὸν 
ὦμον, εἶτ᾽ ἐλθὼν ἐκ τοῦ βαλανείου εἰς οἶκον 
κραυγάσῃς " “ οὐδεὶς φέρει φαγεῖν ; ” εἶτ᾽ “ἄρον 
Tas τραπέζας" σπόγγιεσον. τοῦτο φοβῇ, μὴ 
οὐ δύνῃ ζῆν ἀρρώστου βίον, ἐπεί ToL τὸν τῶν 
ὑγιαινόντων. μάθε, πῶς οἱ δοῦλοι ζῶσιν, πῶς οἱ 
ἐργάται, πῶς οἱ γνησίως φιλοσοφοῦντες, πῶς 
Σωκράτης ἔζησεν, ἐ ἐκεῖνος μὲν καὶ μετὰ γυναικὸς 
καὶ παΐδων, πῶς Διογένης, πῶς Κλεάνθης "ἅμα. 
σχολάζων καὶ ἀντλῶν. ταῦτα ἂν θέλῃς ἔχειν, 


e 


ἕξεις πανταχοῦ καὶ ζήσεις θαρρῶν, τίνι ; ᾧ 
μόνῳ θαρρεῖν ἐνδέχεται, τῷ πιστῷ, τῷ ἀκωλύτῳ, 
τῷ AVAPALPET Dy τοῦτ᾽ ἔστι Τῇ προαιρέσει TH 
σεαυτοῦ. διὰ τί δ᾽ οὕτως ἄχρηστον καὶ ἀνωφελῆ 
σαυτὸν παρεσκεύακας, ἵνα μηδείς σε εἰς οἰκίαν 
θέλῃ δέξασθαι, μηδεὶς ἐπιμεληθῆναι ; ; ἀχλὰ 
σκεῦος μὲν ὁλόκληρον καὶ χρήσιμον ἔξω ἐρριμμέ- 
vov πᾶς τις εὑρὼν ἀναιρήσεται καὶ κέρδος 
ἡγήσεται, σὲ δ᾽ οὐδείς, ἀλλὰ πᾶς ζημίαν. 
οὕτως οὐδὲ κυνὸς δύνασαι χρείαν παρασχεῖν 
οὐδ᾽ λυ νῶν τί οὗν ἔτι ζῆν θέλεις τοιοῦτος 
ὦν; 

Φοβεῖταί, τίς ἀνὴρ ἀγαθός, μὴ λείπωσιν αὐτῷ 
τροφαί ; τοῖς τυφλοῖς οὐ λείπουσι, τοῖς χωλοῖς 
οὐ λείπουσι" λείψουσιν ἀνδρὶ ἀγαθῷ ; καὶ 
στράτίωτῇ μὲν ἀγαθῷ οὐ λείπει ὃ μισθοδοτῶν 





1 Diogenes Laertius, 7, 168. 
234 


BOOK III. xxv. 22-27 


in a bath, and stretched yourself out like men who 
have been crucified, you may be massaged on this side 
and on that; and that then the masseur may stand 
over you and say, “ Move over, give me his side, you 
take his head, hand me his shoulder’’; and then, when 
you have left the bath and gone home, that you may 
shout out, “Is no one bringing me something to 
eat?’’ and after that, “Clear away the tables; wipe 
them off with a sponge.” What you are afraid of is 
this—that you may not be able to live the life of an 
invalid, since, I tell you, you have only to learn the 
life of healthy men—howthe slaves live, the workmen, 
the genuine philosophers, how Socrates lived—he too 
with a wife and children—how Diogenes lived, how 
Cleanthes, who combined going to school and pump- 
ing water.t If this is what you want, you will have 
it everywhere, and will live with full confidence. 
Confidence in what? In the only thing in which 
one can have confidence—in what is faithful, free 
from hindrance, cannot be taken away, that is, in your 
own moral purpose. And why have you made your- 
self so useless and unprofitable, that no one is willing 
to take you into his house, no one willing to 
take care of you? But when a whole and useful 
implement has been thrown out, anyone who finds 
it will pick it up and count it gain; yet not when he 
picks up you, but everyone will count you a loss. 
You are so unable to serve the purpose of even a 
dog or a cock. Why, then, do you care to keep on 
living, if that is the sort of person you are? 

Does a good man fear that food will fail him? It 
does not fail the blind, it does not fail the lame; 
will it fail a good man? A good soldier does not 
lack someone to give him pay, or a workman, or a 


235 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


4 SF 3 f ys ΤᾺΝ m, “ y 3 a“ 7 . 
οὐδ᾽ ἐργάτῃ οὐδὲ σκυτεῖ" τῷ δ᾽ ἀγαθῷ λείψει ; 
" [ fad a ¢ [ων > ᾽ 
58 οὕτως ὁ θεὸς ἀμελεῖ τῶν αὑτοῦ ἐπιτευγμάτων, 
ral ¢ » i o 
τῶν διακόνων, τῶν μαρτύρων, ols μόνοις χρῆται 
4 , \ 
παραδείγμασιν πρὸς τοὺς ἀπαιδεύτους, OTL καὶ 
ἂν 4 [ων μι \ ev Ν 2 > “ 
ἔστι καὶ καλῶς διοικεῖ τὰ ὅλα καὶ οὐκ ἀμελεῖ 
al Ο Ν 
τῶν ἀνθρωπίνων πραγμάτων καὶ ὅτι ἀνδρὶ aya- 
A a“ by ; f 
G6 οὐδέν ἐστι κακὸν οὔτε ζῶντι οὔτ ἀποθανόντι; 
: x 
29-—Ti οὖν, ὅταν μὴ παρέχῃ τροφάς ;—T! yap 
yf * ¢ 3 4 \ Ν 3 “a 
ἄλλο ἢ ὡς ἀγαθὸς στρατηγὸς TO ἀνακλητικὸν 
μοι σεσήμαγκεν ; πείθομαι, ἀκολουθῶ, ἐπευφη- 
on % ΄ e ~ n \ 
μῶν τὸν ἡγεμόνα, ὑμνῶν αὐτοῦ τὰ ἔργα. καὶ 

30 γὰρ ἤλθον, ὅτ᾽ ἐκείνῳ ἔδοξεν, καὶ ἄπειμε πάλιν 
ἐκείνῳ δοκοῦν καὶ ξῶντός μου τοῦτο τὸ ἔργον 
ἣν, ὑμνεῖν τὸν θεὸν καὶ αὐτὸν ἐπ᾽ ἐμαυτοῦ καὶ 

81 πρὸς ἕνα καὶ πρὸς πολλούς. οὐ παρέχει μοι 
TOU, οὐκ ἄφθονα, τρυφᾶν με οὐ θέλει' οὐδὲ 

» ὃ . ~ a » ΜᾺ a 
yap τῷ ἕϊρακλεῖ παρεῖχεν, τῷ υἱεῖ τῷ ἑαυτοῦ, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἄλλος ἐβασίλευεν “Apyous καὶ Μυκηνῶν, 
δ ¢ μ“ 

32.08 ἐπετάσσετο καὶ ἐπόνει καὶ ἐγυμνάζετο. καὶ 
i Bz a ἵ 4 a > v ot ” 
ἣν Etpuodeds μέν, ὃς ἦν, οὔτε "Ἄργους οὔτε 
, [ον / tt 3 5 3. ¢ “ ¢ 
Muxnvav βασιλεύς, ὅς γ᾽ οὐδ᾽ αὐτὸς ἑαυτοῦ, ὁ 
Ἵ κα ΤᾺ αὶ ? “~ \ 7 bed 
δ᾽ “Πρακλῆς ἁπάσης γῆς καὶ θαλάττης ἄρχων 

Ν 4 
καὶ ἡγεμὼν ἦν, καθαρτὴς ἀδικίας καὶ ἀνομίας, 
A! ? 
εἰσαγωγεὺς δὲ δικαιοσύνης καὶ ὁσιότητος" καὶ 

᾿ ὌΝ f , 

83 ταῦτα ἐποίει καὶ γυμνὸς καὶ μόνος. ὁ δ᾽ 
" Ἀ XN 
Οδυσσεὺς ὅτε vavayos ἐξερρίφη, μή τι éra- 
πείνωσεν αὐτὸν ἡ ἀπορία, μή τι ἐπέκλασεν ; 
Ἰχλὰ n > Ff \ \ ! x 7 
ἀ πῶς amnet πρὸς Tas παρθένους αἰτήσων 
236 


BOOK III. χχνι. 27-33 


cobbler; and shall a good man?! Does God so 
neglect His own creatures, His servants, His wit- 
nesses, whom alone He uses as examples to the 
uninstructed, to prove that He both is,and governs 
the universe well, and does not neglect the affairs of 
men, and that no evil befalls a good man either in 
life or in death??—-Yes, but what if He does not 
provide food >—Why, what else but that as a good 
general He has sounded the recall? I obey, I follow, 
lauding my commander, and singing hymns of praise 
about His deeds. For I came into the world when 
it so pleased Him, and I leave it again at His 
pleasure, and while I live this was my function—to 
sing hymns of praise unto God, to myself and to 
others, be it to one or to many. God does not give 
me much, no abundance, He does not want me to 
live luxuriously ; He did not give much to Heracles, 
either, though he was His own son, but someone 
else was king over Argos and Mycenae, while he was 
subject, and suffered labours and discipline. And 
Kurystheus, such as he was, was not king over either 
Argos or Mycenae, for he was not king even over 
“himself; but Heracles was ruler and leader of all the 
land and sea, purging them of injustice and lawless- 
ness, and introducing justice and righteousness; and 
all this he did naked and by himself. And when 
Odysseus was shipwrecked and cast ashore, did his 
necessity make abject his spirit, or break it? Nay, 
but how did he advance upon the maidens to ask for 


1 The scholiast appropriately compares Matt. vi. 31 
and 33: ‘‘Take no thought,” and ‘Seek ye first the king- 
dom of God, and all these things shall be added unto you.” 
2 This last clause is slightly modified from Plato, Apol. 


41D 
237 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


τὰ ἀναγκαῖα, ὧν αἴσχιστον εἶναι δοκεῖ δεῖσθαι 
παρ᾽ ἄλλου ; 
ὥς τε λέων ὀρεσίτροφος. 

84 τίνι πεποιθώς ; οὐ δόξῃ οὐδὲ χρήμασιν οὐδ᾽ 
ἀρχαῖς, ἀλλ᾽ ἀλκῇ τῇ ἑαυτοῦ, τοῦτ᾽ ἔστι δόγμασι 

35 περὶ τῶν ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν καὶ οὐκ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν. ταῦτα 
γάρ ἐστι μόνα τὰ τοὺς ἐλευθέρους ποιοῦντα, τὰ 
τοὺς ἀκωλύτους, τὰ τὸν τράχηλον ἐπαίροντα 
τῶν τεταπεινομένων, τὰ ἀντιβλέπειν ποιοῦντα 
ὀρθοῖς τοῖς ὀφθαλμοῖς πρὸς τοὺς πλουσίους, 

86 πρὸς τοὺς τυράννους. καὶ τὸ τοῦ φιλοσόφου 
δῶρον τοῦτο ἣν, σὺ δ᾽ οὐκ ἐξελεύσῃ θαρρῶν, 
ἀλλὰ περιτρέμων τοῖς ἱματιδίοις καὶ τοῖς ἀργυ- 
ρωματίοις ; δύστηνε, οὕτως ἀπώλεσας τὸν μέχρι 
νῦν χρόνον ; 

δῚ Τί οὖν, ἂν νοσήσω ;---Νοσήσεις καλῶς.--- ς 
με θεραπεύσει ;—O θεός, οἱ φίλοι.---Φξῶᾶᾧῷῥμ ληρῶς 
κατακείσομαι.---ἰ Αλλ᾿ ὡς ἀνήρ.---Οἴκημα ἐπιτή- 
decoy οὐχ ἕξω.---ἰ Ἐν ἀνεπιτηδείῳ οὖν ὃ νοσήσεις.---- 
Tis μοι ποιήσει τὰ τροφεῖα ;---Οἱ καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις 
ποιοῦντες ὡς Mavys voonoes.—Tt δὲ καὶ τὸ 

88 πέρας τῆς νύσον.--Αλλο τι ἢ θάνατος ; ap οὖν 
ἐνθυμῇ, ὅτι κεφάλαιον τοῦτο πάντων τῶν κακῶν 
τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ καὶ ἀγεννείας καὶ δειλίας οὐ 


1 περί supplied by Schenkl. 
2 ἀνεπιτηδείῳ the Cambridge ed., after Wolf; οὖν supplied 
by Oldfather : ἐνεπιτηδείῳ νοσήσεις 8. 





1 Homer, Odyssey, VI. 130. 
® The text is very uncertain. Schenk] reads Ἔν ἐπιτηδείῳ 
ob νοσήσεις ; which would appear to mean something like: 


238 


BOOK III. χχνι. 33-38 


food, which is regarded as being the most disgraceful 
thing for one person to ask of another ? 


As a lion reared in the mountains. 


In what did he trust? Not in reputation, or money, or 
office, but in his own might, that means, his judge- 
ments about the things which are under our con- 
trol, and those which are not under our control. 
For these are the only things that make men free, 
that make men unhampered, that lift up the neck of 
those who have become abject, that make them look 
with level eyes into the faces of the rich, and the 
faces of tyrants. And all this was what the philo- 
sopher had to give, yet will you not come forth bold, 
instead of trembling for your paltry clothes and silver 
plate? Miserable man, have you so wasted your 
time down to the present? 

Yes, but what if I fall ill?—You will bear illness 
well.—Who will nurse me?—-God and your friends. 
- 1 shall have a hard bed to lie on.—But like a man. 
--- shall not have a suitable house.—Then you will 
fall ill in an unsuitable house.2~-Who will prepare my 
food for me ?—Those who prepare it for others also. 
You will be ill like Manes.23—And what is also the 
end of the illness?—Anything but death? Will 
you, then, realize that this epitome of all the ills 
that befall man, of his ignoble spirit, and his 


‘¢ Will you not choose a suitable house in which to fall ill?” 
But that sort of reply seems scarcely to fit the context. 

8 That is, like a slave, for this was a typical slave name, 
like ‘‘ Sambo” among American negroes. In particular the 
reference seems to be to Zeno, who, when his physicians 
ordered him to eat young pigeons, insisted, ‘‘Cure me as 
you do Manes.” Musonius, frag. 18 A (p. 98, 4 ff., Hense). 


239 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


θάνατός ἐστιν, μᾶλλον δ' ὁ τοῦ θανάτου φόβος ; : 


39 ἐπὶ τοῦτον οὖν μοι γυμνάξου, ἐνταῦθα νευέ- 
τῶσαν οἱ λόγοι, πάντες, τὰ ἀσκήματα, τὰ 
ἀναγνώσματα, καὶ εἴσῃ, ὅτι οὕτως μόνως ἐλευθε- 

ροῦνται ἄνθρωποι. 


240 


BOOK III. xxvz. 38-39 


cowardice, is not death, but it is rather the fear 
of death? Against this fear, then, I would have 
you discipline yourself, toward this let all your 
reasoning tend, your exercises, your reading; and 
then you will know that this is the only way in 
which men achieve freedom. 


241 


BOOK IV 


---- 


Δ 


ΚΕΦΑΛΑΙΑ ΤΟΥ͂ ἃ ΒΙΒΛΙΟΥ͂ 
a’, Περὶ ἐλευθερίας. 
β΄. πιερὶ συμπεριφορᾶς. 
γ΄. Tha τίνων ἀντικαταλλαςτέον | 
δ΄, Τιρὸς τοὺς περὶ τὸ ἐν ἡσυχίᾳ διάγειν ἐσπουδακότας. 
ε΄, Πρὸς τοὺς μαχίμους καὶ θηριώδεις. 
ς΄. Πρὸς τοὺς ἐπὶ τῷ ἐλεεῖσθαι ὀδυνωμένους. 
¢'. Περὶ ἀφοβίας. 
η΄. Τιρὸς τοὺς ταχέως ἐπὶ τὸ σχῆμα τῶν φιλοσόφων ἐπιπηδῶντας. 
0’. Mpds τὸν εἰς ἀναισχυντίαν μεταβληθέντα. 
(, Τίνων δεῖ καταφρονεῖν καὶ πρὸς τίνα διαφέρεσθαι; 
ια΄. Περὶ καθαριότητος. 
ιβ΄. Περὶ προσοχῆς. 
ty’. Πρὸς τοὺς εὐκόλως ἐκφέροντας τὰ αὑτῶν, 


α΄. Περὶ ἐλευθερίας. 


a / a Θ᾽ 
1 ᾿Ελεύθερός ἐστιν ὁ ζῶν ὡς βούλεται, ὃν οὔτ 


ἀναγκάσαι ἔστιν οὔτε κωλῦσαι οὔτε βιάσασθαι, 
οὗ αἱ ὁρμαὶ ἀνεμπόδιστοι, αἱ ὀρέξεις ἐπιτευκτι- 
καί, αἱ ἐκκλίσεις ἀπερίπτωτοι. τίς οὖν θέλει 

2 ζῆν ἁμαρτάνων ;—Oddeis.—Tis θέλει ζῆν ἐξαπα- 
τώμενος, προπίπτων, ἄδικος ὦν, ἀκόλαστος, 

8 μεμψίμοιρος, ταπεινός ;—Ovdets.—Ovdels ἄρα 
τῶν φαύλων ζῇ ὡς βούλεται" ov, τοίνυν οὐδ᾽ 
244 


BOOK IV 


Chapters of the Fourth Buok 


Of freedom. 

Of social intercourse. 

What things should be exchanged for what things? 

To those who have set their hearts upon living in 
peace. 

Against the contentious and brutal. 

To those who are vexed at being pitied. 

Of freedom from fear. 

To those who hastily assume the guise of the 
philosophers. 

To the man who had hecome shamcless. 

What ought we to despise and on what place a high 
value ? 

Of cleanliness. 

Of attention. 

To those who lightly talk about their own affairs. 


CHAPTER I 
Of freedom 


He is free who lives as he wills, who is subject 
neither to compulsion, nor hindrance, nor force, 
whose choices are unhampered, whose desires attain 
their end, whose aversions do not fall into what 
they would avoid. Who, then, wishes to live in 
error >—No one.— Who wishes to live deceived, im- 
petuous, unjust, unrestrained, peevish, abject >No 
one.—Therefore, there is no bad man who lives as 


245 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


4 ἐλεύθερος ἐστιν. τίς δὲ θέλει λυπούμενος 
ben f 6 nm aN Ὁ b / \ 
ζῆν, φοβούμενος, φθονῶν, ἐλεῶν, ὀρεγόμενος καὶ 
ἀποτυγχάνων, ἐκκλίνων καὶ περιπέίπτων ;---Οὐδὲ 

ὅ εἷς.--χομεν οὖν τινὰ τῶν φαύλων ἄλυπον, 
"ἢ f 3 a 3 , Ἰδέ 
ἄφοβον, ἀπερίπτωτον, ἀναπότευκτον ;---Οὐδένα. 
-- Οὐκ ἄρα οὐδὲ ἐλεύθερον. 

6 Ταῦτα ἄν τις ἀκούσῃ δισύπατος, ἂν μὲν 
προσθῆς ὅτι “ἀλλὰ σύ γε σοφὸς εἶ, οὐδὲν πρὸς 
σὲ ταῦτα," συγγνώσεταί σοι. ἂν δ᾽ αὐτῷ τὰς 
3 ΄ v Ψ a“ \ f 

7 ἀληθείας εἰπῆς τε “τῶν τρὶς πεπραμένων 

30. κα 7 \ Ν \ \ > 4 ἴω 
οὐδὲν διαφέρεις πρὸς τὸ μὴ καὶ αὐτὸς δοῦλος 
> 33 ’; 2 Ἃ , »" nn 
εἶναι, τί ἄλλο ἢ πληγάς σε δεῖ προσδοκᾶν ; 

 (ξ ζω f 39 ? ἐς 3 \ f id 3 [4 Ν 

ὃ “πῶς yap, φησίν, “ ἐγὼ δούλος εἶμι ; ὁ πατὴρ 
3 7 e , 5 / Ὄ Ἵ \ ᾿ \ 
ἐλεύθερος, ἡ μήτηρ ἐλευθέρα, οὗ ὠνὴν οὐδεὶς 
> . 3 Ν \ ; > \ ; 
ἔχει ἀλλὰ καὶ συγκλητικός εἰμι καὶ Καίσαρος 
φίλος καὶ ὑπάτευκα καὶ δούλους πολλοὺς eyo.” 

9 πρῶτον μέν, ὦ βέλτιστε συγκλητικέ, τάχα σου 

t ἴω 

καὶ ὁ πατὴρ τὴν αὐτὴν δουλείαν δοῦλος ἦν καὶ 
/ n 

ἡ μήτηρ καὶ ὁ πάππος Kat ἐφεξῆς πάντες ot 

10 πρόγονοι. εἰ δὲ δὴ καὶ τὰ μάλιστα ἦσαν 
ἐλεύθεροι, τί τοῦτο πρὸς σέ; τί γάρ, εἰ ἐκεῖνοι 
μὲν γενναῖοι ἦσαν, σὺ δ᾽ ἀγεννής ; ἐκεῖνοι μὲν 
wv 4 - a) 
ἄφοβοι, σὺ δὲ δειλός ; ἐκεῖνοι μὲν ἐγκρατεῖς, σὺ 
ὃ ἀκόλαστος ; 

‘ rd rn 
11 Kai τί, φησί, τοῦτο πρὸς τὸ δοῦλον εἶναι ;— 
᾿ “Ὁ 
Οὐδέν σοι φαίνεται εἶναι τὸ ἄκοντά τι ποιεῖν, τὸ 

% f 
ὠναγκαζόμενον, TO στένοντα πρὸς’ τὸ δοῦλον 
Φ rl 4 Fen 

12 εἶναι ;—Todro μὲν ἔστω, φησίν. ἀλλὰ τίς με 

3 rf 3 Ἀ εξ 
δύναται ἀναγκάσαι, εἰ μὴ ὁ πάντων κύριος 
246 


BOOK IV. 1. 3-12 


he wills, and accordingly no bad man is free. And 
who wishes to live in grief, fear, envy, pity, desiring 
things and failing to get them, avoiding things and 
falling into them ?—No one at all.—Do we find, 
then, any bad man free from grief or fear, not 
falling into what he would avoid, nor failing to 
achieve what he desires?—-No one.—-Then we find 
no bad man free, either. 

Now if some man who has been consul twice hear 
this, he will forgive you, if you add, “ But you are a 
wise man; this does not apply to you.” Yet if you 
tell him the truth, to wit: “In point of being 
a slave you are not a whit better than those who 
have been thrice sold,” what else can you expect 
but a flogging? “Why, how am I a slave?” says 
he. “ My father was free, my mother free; no one 
has a deed of sale for me. More than that, [am ἃ 
member of the senate, and a friend of Caesar, and I 
have been consul, and I own many slaves.” Now in 
the first place, most worthy senator, it is very likely 
that your father was the same kind of slave that you 
are, and your mother, and your grandfather, and all 
your ancestors from first to last. But even if they 
were free to the limit, what does that prove in your 
case? Why, what does it prove if they were noble, 
and you are mean-spirited? If they were brave, and 
you acoward? If they were self-controlled, and you 
unrestrained ἢ 

And what, says someone, has this to do with being 
a slave?—Doesn’t it strike you as “having to do 
with being a slave’’ for a man to do something 
against his will, under compulsion?—Granted the 
point, he replies. But who can put me under 
compulsion, except Caesar, the lord of all?—-There, 


247 


13 


14 


16 


17 


18 


19 


20 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


Καῖσαρ ;---Οὐκοῦν ἕνα μὲν δεσπότην σαυτοῦ καὶ 

σὺ αὐτὸς ὡμολόγησας. ὅτι δὲ πάντων, ὡς 
} ΡᾺ 

λέγεις, κοινός ἐστιν, μηδέν σε τοῦτο παραμυ- 

# 3 \ ὔ ef > , > tA 
θείσθω, ἀλλὰ γίγνωσκε, OTL EK μεγάλης οἰκίας 
δοῦλος εἶ. οὕτως καὶ Νικοπολῖται ἐπιβοᾶν 
εἰώθασι “νὴ τὴν Καίσαρος τύχην, ἐλεύθεροί 
ἐσμεν." 

“Ὅμως δ᾽, ἐάν σοι δοκῇ, τὸν μὲν Καίσαρα 
πρὸς τὸ παρὸν ἀφῶμεν, ἐκεῖνο δὲ μοι εἰπέ" 
οὐδέποτ᾽ ἠράσθης τινός; οὐ παιδισκαρίου, οὐ 

f 3 / 3 3 f f > 
παιδαρίου, ov δούλου, οὐκ ἐλευθέρου ;—Ti οὖν 

(al Ν Ν [κ᾿ εὺ Ἃ } f 
τοῦτο πρὸς τὸ δοῦλον εἶναι ἢ ἐλεύθερον ;— 
Οὐδέποθ᾽ ὑπὸ τῆς ἐρωμένης ἐπετάγης οὐδὲν ὧν 

+) v 3 f f Ἁ / 3 
οὐκ ἤθελες; οὐδέποτέ σου TO δουλάριον éxo- 
λάκευσας ; οὐδέποτ᾽ αὐτοῦ τοὺς πόδας κατε- 

~ la 
φίλησας; Kaito. τοῦ Καίσαρος ἄν σέ τις 
% f ef 3 Ν [4 le) ‘ e A 
ἀναγκάσῃ, ὕβριν avTo ἡγῇ καὶ ὑπερβολὴν 
/ ΄ 9 bY 4 > ἈΝ ὃ ἈΝ 
τυραννίδος. τί οὖν ἄλλο ἐστὶ δουλεία ; νυκτὸς 
οὐδέποτ᾽ ἀπῆλθες, ὅπου οὐκ ἤθελες ; ἀνάλωσας, 
[χὰ % of Ly / 3 f \ 
ὅσα οὐκ ἤθελες; εἶπάς τινα οἰμώζων Kal 
f 
στένων, ἠνέσχου λοιδορούμενος, ἀποκλειόμενος ; 
ἀλλ᾽ εἰ σὺ αἰσχύνῃ τὰ σαυτοῦ ὁμολογεῖν, 
ὅρα ἃ λέγει καὶ ποιεῖ ὁ Θρασωνίδης, ὃς 
Ἂ [τὰ 
τοσαῦτα στρατευσάμενος, ὅσα τάχα οὐδὲ σύ, 
πρῶτον μὲν ἐξελήλυθε νυκτός, ὅτε ὁ Γέτας οὐ 
a fol 3 
τολμᾷ ἐξελθεῖν, ἀλλ᾽ εἰ προσηναγκάζετο v7’ 

3 f 3 f 

αὐτοῦ, πόλλ᾽ ἂν ἐπικραυγάσας Kal THY πικρὰν 
é 

δουλείαν ἀπολοφυράμενος ἐξῆλθεν. εἶτα, τί 

λέγει ; 

248 


BOOK IV. 1. 12-20 


you have yourself admitted that you have one 
master. And let it not comfort you that he is, 
as you say, the common master of all men, but 
realize that you are a slave in a great house. So 
also the men of Nicopolis! are wont to shout: 
“Yea, by the fortune of Caesar, we are free 
men!” 

However, let us leave Caesar out of account, if 
you please, for the present, but answer me this: 
Were you never in love with anyone, a pretty girl, 
or pretty boy, a slave, a freedman 7—What, then, has 
that to do with being either slave or free >—Were 
you never commanded by your sweetheart to do 
something you didn’t wish to do? Did you never 
cozen your pet slave? Did you never kiss his feet? 
Yet if someone should compel you to kiss the feet 
of Caesar, you would regard that as insolence and 
most extravagant tyranny. What else, then, is 
slavery? Did you never go out at night where you 
didn’t want to go? Did you never spend more 
than you wanted to spend? Did you never utter 
words with groaning and lamentation, endure to be 
reviled, to have the door shut in your face? Well, 
if you are ashamed to admit such things about 
yourself, observe what Thrasonides says and does, a 
man who had served on so many campaigns—perhaps 
more even than you have. First, he went out at 
night when Geta hasn’t the courage to go abroad, 
but, if the latter had been compelled by him to 
do so, he would have gone out crying aloud and 
bewailing his bitter slavery. And then what does 
Thrasonides say? Says he, 


1 Where he was teaching. The very form of the oath 
contradicts the statement made. 


249 


23 


9 
He 


bo 
ot 


tS 
toe | 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


παιδισκάριόν με, 
¢ 
φησῖν, 
Fa 
καταδεδούλωκ᾽ εὐτελές, 
ὧς δὲ Φ 1 nm , 4 7 2 
ὃν οὐδὲ εἷς τῶν πολεμίων οὐπώποτε. 


¢ δ “ > S 
τάλας, ὅς ye καὶ παιδισκαρίου δοῦλος εἶ καὶ 
~ ‘ 
παιδισκαρίου εὐτελοῦς. τί οὖν ἔτι σαυτὸν 
\ 
ἐλεύθερον λέγεις ; τί δὲ προφέρεις cov τὰς 
ὌᾺ Ὗ 
στρατείας ; εἶτα ξίφος αἰτεῖ καὶ πρὸς τὸν ὑπ 
εὐνοίας μὴ διδόντα χαλεπαίνει καὶ δῶρα τῇ 
μισούσῃ πέμπει καὶ δεῖται καὶ κλαίει, πάλιν 
δὲ μικρὰ εὐημερήσας ἐπαίρεται" πλὴν καὶ τότε 
“ a a Ν 
πῶς pnd ἐπιθυμεῖν ἢ φοβεῖσθαι ἀπομαθὼν 
οὗτος ἐλευθερίαν ἂν εἶχε ; 8 
-- f δ᾽ % es f A , θ “ 
Σκέψαι δ᾽ ἐπὶ τῶν ζῴων, πῶς χρώμεθα TH 
᾿ f “" κι f f «ἢ ς f 
ἐννοίᾳ τῆς ἐλευθερίας. λέοντας τρέφουσιν ἡμέ- 
ρους ἐγκλείσαντες καὶ σιτίξζουσι καὶ κομίξουσιν 
ἔνιοι ped αὑτῶν. καὶ τίς ἐρεῖ τοῦτον τὸν 
λέοντα ἐλεύθερον ; οὐχὶ δ᾽ ὅσῳ μαλακώτερον 
διεξάγει, τοσούτῳ δουλικώτερον ; τίς δ᾽ ἂν λέων 
αἴσθησιν καὶ λογισμὸν λαβῶν βούλοιτο τού- 
τῶν τις εἶναι τῶν λεόντων; ἄγε, τὰ δὲ πτηνὰ 
ra) ef o λ 2 / f 
ταῦτα ὅταν ληφθῇ καὶ ἐγκεκλειμένα τρέφηται, 
οἷα πάσχει ζητοῦντα ἐκφυγεῖν; καὶ ἔνιά ye 
αὐτῶν λιμῷ διαφθείρεται μᾶλλον ἢ ὑπομένει τὴν 
- / va > > 7 
τοιαύτην διεξαγωγήν, ὅσα δ᾽ οὖν διασῴζξεται, 
ἣ 4 al Ν t x [χὰ 
μόγις καὶ χαλεπῶς καὶ φθίινοντα, κἂν ὅλως 
1 Koraes: οὐδείς 5. * Meineke: πώποτε 8, 


* Carl Schenkl’s rewriting, based in part upon some old 
corrections in 8, which is clearly right in the general sense: 


250 


BOOK IV. 1. 20-27 


A cheap little wench has made of me a perfect 
slave, 

Of me, though never a one among all my 
foeinen might. : 


Sad wretch, to be the slave of a wench, and a cheap 
one at that! Why, then, do you call ‘yourself free 
any longer? And why do you talk of your cam- 
paigns: >” Then he calls for a ‘sword, and gets angry 
at the man who refuses out of good-will » to give it 
to him, and sends presents to the girl whom he 
hates, and begs, and weeps, and again, when he 
has had a little success, he is elated. "And yet even 
then, so long as he had not learned to give up 
passionate desire or fear, could this man have been 
in possession of freedom? 

Consider now, in the case of the animals, how we 
employ the concept of freedom. Men shut up tame 
lions in a cage, and bring them up, and feed them, 
and some take them around with them. And yet 
who will call such a lion free? Is it not true that 
the more softly the lion lives the more slavishly he 
lives? And what lion, were he to get sense and 
reason, would care to be one of these lions? Why, 
yes, and the birds yonder, when they are caught 
and brought up in cages, what do they suffer in 
their efforts to escape? And some of them starve 
to death rather than endure such a life, while even 
such as live, barely do so, and suffer and pine away, 


i From the Misoumenos of Menander: Koch 338; Kéorte?, 
p. 129; Allinson, p. 412 (Loeb Classical Library). 





φοβεῖσθαι οὔτ᾽ ἐλευθερίαν S apparently at first; that is, 
ἀπομαθών and ἂν εἶχε are additions. 


251 


29 


30 


ol 


32 


89. 


i 
ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


* 7 ef 9 ra 
εὕρῃ Te παρεῳγμένον, ἐξεπήδησεν. οὕτως ὀρέ- 
fol χὰ “ i 
yeTat τῆς φυσικῆς ἐλευθερίας καὶ τοῦ αὐτόνομα 
f 
καὶ ἀκώλυτα εἶναι. καὶ τί σοι κακὸν ἐστιν 
3 ~ cc Ὁ , f θ 7 vf 
ἐνταῦθα; “ola λέγεις ; πέτεσθαι πέφυκα ὅπου 
’ "“ ὃ , LO vf θέλ 5 ΄ 
θέλω, ὕπαιθρον διώγειν, ἄδειν ὅταν θέλω" σύ 
fol , 2 
μὲ πάντων τούτων ἀφαιρῇ καὶ λέγεις “τί σοι 
κακὸν ἐστιν; 
[οὶ aA ᾽ a / a 
Διὰ τοῦτο ἐκεῖνα μόνα ἐροῦμεν ἐλεύθερα, ὅσα 
% eo 5 f 2 5 iva t. 7 \; 
τὴν ἅλωσιν οὐ φέρει, ἀλλ᾽ ἅμα TE Edrdw Kal 
é 
ἀποθανόντα διέφυγεν. οὕτως καὶ Διογένης πον 
Ἀ 
λέγει μίαν εἶναι μηχανὴν πρὸς ἐλευθερίαν τὸ 
εὐκόλως ἀποθνήσκειν, καὶ τῷ Περσῶν βασιλεῖ 
͵ cy f 
γράφει OTe “τὴν ᾿Αθηναίων πόλιν κατα- 
sa Ἅ»} 
δουλώσασθαι οὐ δύνασαι' οὐ μᾶλλον, φησίν, 
ἐς ἃ ᾿ 3 , 2 tem, 5 \ f 
ἢ τοὺς ἰχθύας. TOS; οὐ γὰρ λήψομαι 
3 f 99 6 Ἃ A 5} / ςς Or 2 
αὐτούς ; ἂν λάβῃς, φησίν, “εὐθυς ἀπο- 
λιπόντες σε οἰχήσονται, καθάπερ οἱ ἰχθύες. 
A , / 
καὶ yap ἐκείνων ὃν ἂν λάβης, ἀπέθανεν" Kat 
οὗτοι ληφθέντες ἐὰν ἀποθνήσκωσιν, τί σοΐ ἐστι 
el ἴω % + ΄Ν ? 
τῆς παρασκευῆς ὄφελος ; 1 τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν ἐλευθέρου 
ἀνδρὸς φωνὴ σπουδῇ ἐξητακότος τὸ πρᾶγμα καὶ 
f ἴω 
ὥσπερ εἰκὸς εὑρηκότος. ἂν δ᾽ ἀλλαχοῦ ξητῆῇς 
ἡ ὅπου ἐστίν, τί θαυμαστόν, εἰ οὐδέποτε αὐτὸ 
εὑρίσκεις ; 
Ὃ δοῦλος εὐθὺς εὔχεται ἀφεθῆναι ἐλεύθερος. 
. “ fa a “ 
διὰ τί; δοκεῖτε, ὅτι τοῖς εἰκοστώναις ἐπιθυμεῖ 
1 There is some uncertainty about the extent of the 
quotation from Diogenes. Capps extends it as far as this 


point, while Schenk! thought it stopped with ἰχθύες, three 
lines above. 





+ Here as in 11. 3 and in § 156 of this same chapter 
Epictetus seems to have used a larger collection of letters 


252 


BOOK IV, 1. 27-33 


and if ever they find any opening, make their 
escape. Such is their desire for physical freedom, 
and a life of independence and freedom from re- 
straint. And what is wrong with you here in your 
cage? “What a question! My nature is to fly 
where I please, to live in the open air, to sing when 
I please. You rob me of all this, and then ask, 
‘ What is wrong with you?’” 

That is why we shall call free only those animals 
which do not submit to captivity, but escape by 
dying as soon as they are captured. Soalso Diogenes 
says somewhere:1 “The one sure way to secure 
freedom is to die cheerfully’; and to the Persian 3 
king he writes: “ You cannot enslave the Athenian 
State any more than you can enslave the fish.” 
“ον so? Shall I not lay hold of them?” “Ifyou 
do,”’ he replies, “they will forthwith leave you and 
escape, like the fish. And that is true, for if you 
lay hold of one of them, it dies; and if these 
Athenians die when you lay hold of them, what 
good will you get from your armament?” That is 
the word of a free man who has seriously examined 
the matter, and, as you might expect, had discovered 
truth about it. But if you look for it where it does 
not exist, why be surprised if you never find it ἢ 

It is the slave's prayer that he be set free 
immediately. Why? Do you think it is because 
he is eager to pay his money to the men who collect 


ascribed to Diogenes than that which has survived to our 
time. See Schenkl’s note on ἃ 156 below. 

2 Schenk! deletes the word, and Orelli conjectures Maxe- 
δόνων, making the reference to Philip or Alexander; but 
about 355 Artaxerxes Ochus seems actually to have threatened 
war against Athens. See Judeich in the Zea/-Encyclopidie*, 
2, 1319, 25 ff. 


253 


34 


36 


37 


38 


39 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


aA 9 f 3 3 oe 4 7 
δοῦναι ἀργύριον ; οὔ: ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε φαντάξεται μέχρι 
νῦν διὰ τὸ μὴ τετυχηκέναι τούτου ἐμποδίζεσθαι 
καὶ δυσροεῖν. “ἂν ἀφεθῶ," φησίν, “ εὐθὺς πᾶσα 
εὔροια, οὐδενὸς ἐπιστρέφομαι, πᾶσιν ὡς ἴσος καὶ 
[χέ “ 4 [τὰ / δ᾽ 
ὅμοιος λαλῶ, πορεύομαι ὅπον θέλω, ἔρχομαι 
ὅθεν θέλω καὶ ὅπου θέλω. εἶτα ἀπηλευθέρω- 

\ 3s \ > 2} n , n 

Tat καὶ εὐθὺς μὲν οὐχ ἔχων, ποῖ φάγῃ, Cnret, 

τίνα κολακεύσῃ, παρὰ τίνι δειπνήσῃ" εἶτα ἢ 

ἐργάξεται τῷ σώματι καὶ πάσχει τὰ δεινότατα 

κἂν σχῇ τινὰ φάτνην, ἐμπέπτωκεν εἰς δουλείαν 

πολὺ τῆς προτέρας χαλεπωτέραν ἢ καὶ ev- 

πορήσας ἄνθρωπος ἀπειρόκαλος πεφίληκε παι- 
~ ? 

δισκάριον καὶ δυστυχῶν ἀνακλαίεται καὶ τὴν 

na ‘ > 

δουλείαν ποθεῖ. “Ti yap μοι κακὸν ἣν; ἄλλος 
, 

μ᾽ ἐνέδυεν, ἄλλος pe ὑπέδει, ἄλλος ἔτρεφεν: 

2 > f "- ἢ > “ἡ δ f ”“ 

ἄλλος EVOTOKOMEL, Ohiya αὐτῷ ὑπηρέτουν, νυν 

δὲ τάλας οἷα πάσχω πλείοσι δουλεύων ἀνθ᾽ 

Ν x 

ἑνός; ὅμως δ᾽ ἐὰν δακτυλίους, φησίν, ““λάβω, 

τότε γ᾽ εὐρούστατα διάξω καὶ εὐδαιμονέστατα." 

“ Ν Φ é ? © > \ af 
πρῶτον μὲν iva λάβῃ, πάσχει ὧν ἐστὶν ἄξιος" 
εἶτα λαβὼν πάλιν ταὐτά. εἶτά φησιν “ ἂν μὲν 
στρατεύσωμαι, ἀπηλλάγην πάντων τῶν κακῶν." 
στρατεύεται, Tacyer ὅσα μαστιγίας καὶ οὐδὲν 
ἧττον δευτέραν αἰτεῖ στρατείαν καὶ τρίτην. 





1 See note on II. 1, 26. 

* For the euphemistic phrase used in the Greek see 
Demosthenes, 59, 20. 

3. The members of the Equestrian order at Rome had the 
right to wear a gold ring. 


254 


BOOK IV. 1. 33-39 


the five per cent. tax?! No, it is because he fancies 
that up till now he is hampered and uncomfortable, 
because he has not obtained his freedom from 
slavery. “If Iam set free,” he says, “immediately 
it is all happiness, I shall pay no attention to 
anybody, I talk to everybody as an equal and as 
one in the same station in life, I go where I please, 
I come whence I please, and where I please.” 
Then he is emancipated, and forthwith, having no 
place to which to go and eat, he looks for someone 
to flatter, for someone at whose house to dine. 
Next he either earns a living by prostitution,? and 
so endures the most dreadful things, and if he gets 
a manger at which to eat he has fallen into a slavery 
much more severe than the first; or even if he 
grows rich, being a vulgarian he has fallen in love 
with a chit of a girl, and is miserable, and laments, 
and yearns for his slavery again. “ Why, what was 
wrong with me? Someone else kept me in clothes, 
and shoes, and supplied me with food, and nursed 
me when I was sick; I served him in only a few 
matters. But now, miserable man that I am, what 
suffering is mine, who am a slave to several instead 
of one! However, if I get rings on my fingers,” 3 
he says, “ then indeed I shall live most prosperously 
and happily.” And so, first, in order to get them 
he submits to—what he deserves! Then when he 
has got them, you have the same thing over again. 
Next he says, “If I serve in a campaign, I am rid of 
all my troubles.” He serves in a campaign, he 
submits to all that a jail-bird suffers, but none the 
less he demands a second campaign and a third.* 


4 Required of those who held the higher offices. See note 
on ΠῚ, 14, 17. 
255 


40 


41 


48 


45 


46 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


εἶθ᾽ ὅταν αὐτὸν τὸν κολοφῶνα ἐπιθῇ καὶ γέ- 
νηται συγκλητικός, τότε γίνεται δοῦλος εἰς 
σύλλογον ἐρχόμενος, τότε τὴν καλλίστην: καὶ 
λιπταρωτάτην δουλείαν δουλεύει. 

: ἵνα μὴ μωρὸς ἦ, ἄγ᾽," ἵνα μάθῃ, ἃ ἔλεγεν ὁ 
ὠκράτης, ‘rt ἐστὶ τῶν ὄντων ἕκαστον, καὶ 
μὴ εἰκῆ τὰς προλήψεις ἐφαρμόξῃ ταῖς ἐπὶ 
μέρους οὐσίαις. τοῦτο γάρ ἐστι τὸ αἴτιον τοῖς 
ἀνθρώποις πάντων τῶν κακῶν, τὸ τὰς προλήψεις 
τὰς κοινὰς μὴ δύνασθαι ἐφαρμόξειν τοῖς 8 ἐπὶ 
μέρους. ἡμεῖς δ᾽ ἄλλοι ἄλλο οἰόμεθα. ὁ μὲν 
ὅτι νοσεῖ. οὐδαμῶς, ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι τὰς προλήψεις 
οὐκ ἐφαρμόξει. ὁ δ᾽ ὅτι “πτωχὸς ἐστιν, ὁ δ' 
ὅτι πατέρα χαλεπὸν ἔχει ἢ μητέρα, τῷ δ ὅτι 
ὗ Καῖσαρ οὐχ ἵλεώς ἐστιν. τοῦτο δ᾽ ἐστὶν ἕν 
καὶ μόνον τὸ τὰς προλήψεις ἐφαρμόζειν μὴ 
εἰδέναι. ἐπεὶ τίς οὐκ ἔχει κακοῦ πρόληψιν, ὃ ὅτι 
βλαβερόν ἐστιν, ὅτι φευκτόν ἐστιν, ὅτε παντὶ 
τρόπῳ ἀποικονόμητόν ἐστιν; πρόληψις προλήψει 
οὐ μάχεται, ἀλλ᾽ ὅταν ἔλθῃ ἐπὶ τὸ ἐφαρμόζειν. 
τί οὖν τὸ κακόν ἐστι τοῦτο καὶ βλαβερὸν καὶ 
φευκτὸν ; λέγει τὸ Καίσαρος μὴ εἶναι φίλον" 
ἀπῆλθεν, ἀπέπεσεν τῆς ἐφαρμογῆς, θλίβεται, 
ξητεῖ τὰ μηδὲν πρὸς τὸ προκείμενον" ὅτι τυχὼν 
τοῦ φίλος εἶναι Καίσαρος οὐδὲν ἧττον τοῦ 
ξητουμένου οὐ τέτευχεν. τί γάρ ἐστιν, ὃ ζητεῖ 
πᾶς ἄνθρωπος ; εὐσταθῆσαι, εὐδαιμονῆσαι, πάντα 


1 Schw eighiuser : καλλί (Ὁ) 8. 2 Elter: ἀλλ᾽ αὶ, 
8. Wolf: ταῖς 8. 





1 de, the finishing touch. See note on II. 14, 19. 


256 


BOOK IV. 1. 40-46 


After that, when he adds the very colophon,? and 
becomes a senator, then he becomes a slave as 
he enters the senate, then he serves in the hand- 
somest and sleekest slavery. 

Come, let him not be a fool, let him learn, as 
Socrates used to say, “ What each several thing 
means,” “and not apply his preconceptions at random 
to the particular cases. For this is the cause to 
men of all their evils, namely, their inability to 
apply their general preconceptions to the particular 
instances. But some of us think one thing and 
some another. One man fancies he is ill, Not at 
all; the fact is that he is not applying his pre- 
conceptions. Another fancies he isa beggar ; another 
that he has a hard-hearted father or mother; still 
another that Caesar is not gracious to him, But 
this means one thing and one thing only—ignorance 
of how to apply their preconceptions. Why, who 
does not have a preconception of evil, that it is 
harmful, that it is to be avoided, that it is something 
to get rid of in every way? One preconception 
does not conflict with another, but conflict arises 
when one proceeds to apply them, What, then, is 
this evil that is harmful and is to be avoided? One 
person says it is not to be Caesar's friend ;® he is 
off the course, he has missed the proper application, 
he is in a bad way, he is looking for what is not 
pertinent to the case in hand; because, when he has 
succeeded in being Caesar’s friend, he has none the 
less failed to get what he was seeking. For what 
is it that every man is seeking? To live securely, 
to be happy, to do everything as he wishes to do, 


2 Xenophon, Mem. IV. 6, 1. 
3 That is, persona grata at court. 


257 
VOL. If. 5 


47 


48 


49 


50 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ὡς θέλει ποιεῖν, μὴ κωλύεσθαι, μὴ ἀναγκάζεσθαι. 
ὅταν οὖν γένηται Καίσαρος φίλος, πέπαυται 
κωλυόμενος, πέπαυται ἀναγκαζόμενος, εὐσταθεῖ, 
εὐροεῖ; τίνος πυθώμεθα ; τίνα ἔχομεν ἀξιο- 
πιστότερον ἢ αὐτὸν τοῦτον τὸν γεγονότα φίλον ; 
ἐλθὲ εἰς τὸ μέσον καὶ εἰπὲ ἡμῖν, πότε ἁταραχώ- 
τερον ἐκάθευδες, νῦν ἢ πρὶν γενέσθαι φίλος τοῦ 
Καίσαρος; εὐθὺς ἀκούεις ὅτι “ παῦσαι, τοὺς 
θεούς σοι, ἐμπαίζων μον τῇ τύχῃ οὐκ οἶδας, 
ola πάσχω τάλας" οὐδ᾽ ὕπνος ἐπέρχεταί μοι, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἄλλος ἐπ᾿ ἄλλῳ ἐλθὼν λέγει, ὅτε ἤδη 
ἐγρηγορεῖ, ἤδη πρόεισιν' εἶτα ταραχαΐ, εἶτα 
φροντίδες." ἄγε, ἐδείπνεις δὲ πότε εὐαρεστό- 
τερον, νῦν ἢ πρότερον ; ἄκουσον αὐτοῦ καὶ περὶ 
τούτων τί Χέγςι" ὅτι, ἂν μὲν μὴ κληθῇ, ὀδυνᾶται, 
ἂν δὲ κληθῇ, ὡς δοῦλος παρὰ κυρίῳ δειπνεῖ 
μεταξὺ προσέχων, μή τι μωρὸν εἴπῃ ἢ ποιήσῃ. καὶ 
τί δοκεῖς φοβεῖται; μὴ μαστιγωθῇ ὡς δοῦλος ; 
πόθεν αὐτῷ οὕτως καλῶς; ἀλλ᾿ ὡς πρέπει 
τηλικοῦτον ἄνδρα, Καίσαρος φίλον, μὴ ἀπο- 
λέσῃ τὸν τράχηλον. ἐλούου δὲ πότ᾽ ἀταρα- 
χώτερον ; ἐγυμνάξον δὲ πότε σχολαίτερον ; τὸ 
σύνολον ποῖον μᾶλλον ἤθελες βίον βιοῦν, τὸν νῦν 
ἢ τὸν τότε; ὀμόσαι δύναμαι, ὅτι οὐδεὶς οὕτως 
ἐστὶν ἀναίσθητος ἢ ἀναλθής, μὴ ἀποδύρασθαι 
τὰς αὑτοῦ συμφοράς, ὅσῳ ἂν ἡ φίλτερος. 
1 Schweighduser: ψυχῆι S. 


2 ἐπ᾿ ἄλλῳ added by Reiske. 3 κληθῇ repeated in &. 
4 Oldfather: ἀναληθής αὶ (and Scholiast). 





1 Compare with this section the grave words of Francis 
Bacon: ‘* Men in great place are thrice servants, servants to 
the sovereign or state, servants of fame, and servants of 


258 


BOOK IV. 1. 46-30 


not to be hindered, not to be subject to compulsion. 
When, therefore, he becomes a friend of Caesar, 
has he been relieved of hindrance, relieved of com- 
pulsion, does he live securely, does he live serenely ? 
From whom shall we inquire? What better witness 
have we than this very man who has become 
Caesar’s friend? Come into the midst and tell us. 
When did you sleep more peacefully, now or before 
you became Caesar's triend?> Immediately the 
answer comes: “Stop, 1 implore you by the gods, 
and do not jest at my lot; vou don’t know what | 
suffer, miserable mun that I am; no sleep visits me, 
but first one person comes in and then another and 
reports that Caesar is already awake, and is already 
coming out; then troubles, then worries!” Come, 
when did you dine more pleasantly, now or formerly ? 
Listen to him and to what he has to say on this topic. 
If he is not invited, he is hurt, and if he is invited, 
he dines like a slave at a master’s table, all the time 
careful not to say or do something foolish. And what 
do you suppose he is afraid of ? That he be scourged 
like a slave? How can he expect to get off as well 
as that? But as befits so great a man, a friend 
of Caesar, he is afraid he will lose his head. When 
did you take your bath in greater peace? And 
when did you t take your exercise at greater leisure ἢ 
In a word, which life would you rather live, your 
present life or the old one? I can take oath that 
no one is so insensate or so incurable as not to 
lament his misfortunes the more he is a friend of 
Caesar} 


business, so as they have no freedom, neither in their persons, 


nor in their actions, nor in their times.” Essays, “ΟΣ Great 
Place.” 


259 
s 2 


51 


53 


54 


55 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


Οταν οὖν μήτε οἱ βασιλεῖς λεγόμενοι ζῶσιν 
ὡς θέλουσι μήθ᾽ οἱ φίλοι τῶν βασίλέων, τίνες 
ἔτι εἰσὶν ἐλεύθεροι ;-τΖήτει καὶ εὑρήσεις. ἔχεις 
γὰρ ἀφορμὰς παρὰ τῆς φύσεως πρὸς εὕρεσιν τῆς 
ἀληθείας. εἰ δ᾽ αὐτὸς οὐχ οἷός τε εἶ κατὰ ταύτας 
ψιλὰς πορευόμενος εὑρεῖν τὸ ἑξῆς, ἄκουσον παρὰ 
τῶν ἐξητηκότων. τί λέγουσιν ; ἀγαθόν σοι 
δοκεῖ ἡ ἐλευθερία ;—To μέγιστον.---Δύναται οὖν 
τὶς τοῦ μεγίστου ἀγαθοῦ τυγχάνων κακοδαι- 
μονεῖν ἢ κακῷς πράσσειν ;---Οὔ.-Ξ Οσους οὖν 
ἂν ἴδης κακοδαιμονοῦντας, δυσροοῦντας, πεν- 
θοῦντας, ἀποφαίνου θαρρῶν μὴ εἶναι édev- 
θέρους.---ἰ Αποφαίνομαι.---Οὐκοῦν ἀπὸ μὲν ὠνῆς 
καὶ πράσεως καὶ τῆς τοιαύτης ἐν κτήσει κατα- 
τάξεως ἤδη ἀποκεχωρήκαμεν. εἰ γὰρ ὀρθῶς 
ὡμολόγησας ταῦτα, ἄν τε μέγας βασιλεὺς κακο- 
δαιμονῇ, οὐκ ἂν ἐλεύθερος, ἄν τε μικρός, ἄν θ᾽ 

ὑπατικός, ἄν τε δισύπατος. —Eoto. 

Ἔτσι οὖν ἀπόκριναί μοι κἀκεῖνο" δοκεῖ σοι μέγα 
τι εἶναι καὶ γενναῖον ἡ ἐλευθερία καὶ ἀξιόλογον ; ; 
-τ- ἰὸς γὰρ οὔ 3— ἔστιν οὖν τυγχάνοντά τινος 
οὕτως μεγάλου καὶ ἀξιολόγου καὶ γενναίου τα- 
πεινὸν εἶναι ; 3—Ov« ἔστι» .--- Ὅταν οὖν ἴδῃς τινὰ 
ὑποπεπτωκότα ἑτέρῳ ἢ κολακεύοντα παρὰ τὸ 
φαινόμενον αὐτῷ, λέγε καὶ τοῦτον θαρρῶν μὴ 
εἶναι ἐλεύθερον: καὶ μὴ μόνον, ἂν δειπναρίου 
ἕνεκα αὐτὸ ποιῇ, ἀλλὰ κἂν ἐπαρχίας ἕνεκα κἂν 
ὑπατείας. ἀλλ᾽ ἐκείνους μὲν ᾿μικροδούλους λέγε 
τοὺς μικρῶν τινῶν ἕνεκα ταῦτα ποιοῦντας, τού- 





1 The reference is to the ordinary method of acquiring 
slaves, since relatively few were ever bred, 


260 


BOOK IV. 1 51-55 


When, therefore, neither those who are styled 
kings live as they will, nor the friends of these kings, 
what free men are left?—Seek and you will find. 
For nature has given you resources to find the truth. 
But if you are unable of yourself, by employing 
these resources alone, to find the next step, listen to 
those who have already made the search. What do 
they say? Doesfreedom seem to you to be a good ? 
— Yes, the greatest.—Is it possible, then, for a man 
who has this greatest good to be unhappy, or to fare 
ill?—No,—When, therefore, you see men unhappy, 
miserable, grieving, declare confidently that they 
are not free.—I do so declare—Very well, then, we 
have now got away from buying and selling? and 
arrangements of that kind in the acquisition of 
property. For if you are right in agreeing to these 
propositions, whether it be the Great King? who 
is unhappy, or a little king, whether it be a man of 
consular rank, or one who has been a consul twice, 
he could not be free.—Granted. 

Answer me, then, this further question: Does 
freedom seem to you to be a great and noble thing, 
and precious ?—-Of course.—Is it possible, then, for a 
man who achieves a thing so great and precious and 
noble, to be of abject spirit?—It is not.—When, 
therefore, you see one*man cringing before another, 
or flattering him contrary to his own opinion, say 
confidently of this man also that he is not free; and 
that not merely if he be doing so for the sake of a 
paltry meal, but even if it be for a governorship or a 
consulship. Call rather those who do these things 
for certain small ends slaves on a small scale, and 


2 That is, of Persia. 
261 


56 


ΜΕ 


or 


58 


59 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


τους δ᾽, ὡς εἰσὶν ἄξιοι, μεγαλοδούλους.---" Εἰστω 
καὶ ταῦτα.---Δοκεῖ δέ σοι ἡ ἐλευθερία αὐτεξού- 
σιόν TL εἶναι καὶ αὐτόνομον ;—Hlas γὰρ οὔ ; — 

“Ὄντινα οὖν ἐπ᾿ ἄλλῳ κωλῦσαι ἔστι καὶ ἀναγ- 
κάσαι, θαρρῶν λέγε μὴ εἶναι ἐλεύθερον. καὶ 
μή μοι πάπτους αὐτοῦ καὶ προπάππους βλέπε 
καὶ ὠνὴν ζήτει καὶ πρᾶσιν, ἀλλ᾽ ἂν ἀκούσῃς 
λέγοντος ἔσωθεν καὶ ἐκ πάθους “ κύριε," κἂν 
δώδεκα ῥάβδοι προάγωσιν, , λέγε δοῦλον" κἂν 
ἀκούσῃς λέγοντος " “τάλας ἐγώ, οἷα πάσχω, ᾿ λέγε 
δοῦλον: ἂν ἁπλῶς ἀποκλαιόμενον i ἴδης, “μεμφό- 
μενον, δυσροοῦντα, λέγε δοῦλον περιπόρφυρον 
ἔχοντα. ἂν οὖν μηδὲν τούτων ποιῇ, μήπω εἴπῃς 
ἐλεύθερον, ἀλλὰ τὰ δόγματα αὐτοῦ κατάμαθε, 
μὴ τι ἀναγκαστά, μή τι κωλυτικά, μή τι δυσροη- 
τικά: κἂν εὕρῃς τοιοῦτον, λέγε δοῦλον ἀνοχὰς 
ἔχοντα ἐν Σατουρναλίοις" λέγε, ὅτι, ὁ κύριος 
αὐτοῦ ὠποδημεῖ: εἶθ᾽ ἥξει καὶ γνώσῃ οἷα πάσχει. 
--Τίς ἥξει ;—Ilas ὃς ἂν ἐξουσίαν ἔνῃ τῶν UT 
αὐτοῦ τινὸς θελομένων πρὸς τὸ περιποιῆσαι 
ταῦτα ἢ ἀφελέσθαι.--- Οὕτως οὖν πολλοὺς κυρίους 
ἔχομεν ᾿--ὕτως, τὰ γὰρ πρώγματα προτέρους 
τούτων κυρίους ἔχομεν' ἐκεῖνα δὲ πολλά ἐστιν. 
διὰ ταῦτα ἀνάγκη καὶ τοὺς τούτων τινὸς ἔχοντας 
ἐξουσίαν κυρίους εἶναι" ἐπεί τοι οὐδεὶς αὐτὸν τὸν 
Καίσαρα φοβεῖται, ἀλλὰ θάνατον, φυγήν, ἀφαΐί- 
βέσιν τῶν ὄντων, φυλακήν, ἀτιμίαν. οὐδὲ φιλεῖ 
τίς τὸν Καίσαρα, ἃ ἂν μὴ TL πολλοῦ ἄξιος, ἀλλὰ 


wane 





1 The number for a consul. 


2 The robe worn by high officials at Rome. Cf. I. 2, 18. 
3 When slaves had special liberties. 


262 , 


BOOK IV. 1. 55-60 


the others, as they deserve, slaves on a grand scale. 
—This also I grant.—And does freedom seem to you 
to be something independent and self-governing ?— 
Of course. — When, therefore, it is in another’s power 
to put hindrances in a man’s way and subject him to 
compulsion, say confidently that this man is not free. 
And please don’t look at his grandfathers and great- 
grandfathers, or look for a deed of sale or purchase, 
but if you hear him say “ Master,” in the centre of his 
being and with deep emotion, call him a slave, even if 
twelve fasces? precede him; and if you hear him say, 
“Alas! What I must suffer!” callhima slave; and, in 
short, if you see him wailing, complaining, in misery, 
call him a slave in a foga praetexta." However, if he 
does none of these things, do not call him free yet, 
but find out what his judgements are, whether they 
are in any respect subject to compulsion, to hindrance, 
to unhappiness ; and if you find him to be that kind 
of a person, call him a slave on holiday at the 
Saturnalia ;? say that his master is out of town; 
later on he will return, and then you will learn what 
the fellow suffers—Who will return ?>—Anyone 
who has control over the things which some man 
desires, to get these for him or to take them away.— 
Have we, then, so many masters -—Yes, somany. For 
even before these personal masters we have masters 
in the form of circumstances, and these are many. 
Hence, it needs must follow that those too who 
have authority over some one of these circumstances 
are our masters, Why, look you, no one is afraid of 
Caesar himself, but he is afraid of death, exile, loss of 
property, prison, disfranchisement. Nor does anyone 
love Caesar himself, unless in some way Caesar 
is a person of great merit; but we love wealth, a 


263 


61 


63 


64 


66 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


a oe f i ἐν 
πλοῦτον φιλοῦμεν, δημαρχίαν, στρατηγίαν, ὕπα- 
τείαν. ὅταν ταῦτα φιλῶμεν καὶ μισῶμεν καὶ 
φοβώμεθα, ἀνάγκη τοὺς ἐξουσίαν αὐτῶν ἔχοντας 

a) nw Ἀ 

κυρίους ἡμῶν εἶναι. διὰ τοῦτο καὶ ὡς θεοὺς 

» » , Ν 

αὐτοὺς προσκυνοῦμεν' ἐννοοῦμεν γάρ, ὅτε τὸ 
n af 

ἔχον ἐξουσίαν τῆς μεγίστης ὠφελείας θεῖόν ἐστιν. 

[ω 3 ΜᾺ 

εἶθ᾽ ὑποτάσσομεν κακῶς “otros δ᾽ ἔγχει τῆς 

Ἀ 

μεγίστης ὠφελείας ἐξουσίαν." ἀνάγκη καὶ τὸ 

f “ n " 
γενόμενον ἐξ αὐτῶν ἐπενεχθῆναι κακῶς. 

/ [ο ld 

Τί οὖν ἐστὶ τὸ ποιοῦν ἀκώλυτον τὸν ἄνθρωπον 
καὶ αὐτεξούσιον; πλοῦτος γὰρ οὐ ποιεῖ οὐδ᾽ 
ig é 2 ὯΔ 3 / 3 \ f b] Ν a 
ὑπατεία οὐδ᾽ ἐπαρχία οὐδὲ βασιλεία, ἀλλὰ δεῖ 

of ¢ ol / ®@ 2 \ \ 4 a ¢ 
τι ἄλλο εὑρεθῆναι. τί ody ἐστὶ τὸ ἐν TO γράφειν 
rs ¢ 
ἀκώλυτον ποιοῦν καὶ ἀπαραπόδιστον ;—H ἐπι- 

“ ων “ “ + 3 “ f ᾿ 
στήμη τοῦ ypddev.—Ti δ᾽ ἐν τῷ κιθαρίξειν ;— 
Ἢ ἐπιστήμη τοῦ κιθαρίξειν.---Οὐκοῦν καὶ ἐν τῷ 
βιοῦν ἡ ἐπιστήμη τοῦ βιοῦν. ὡς μὲν οὖν ἁπλῶς, 
ἀκήκοας: σκέψαι δ᾽ αὐτὸ καὶ ἐκ τῶν ἐπὶ 3 

\ ; “~ b 
μέρους. τὸν ἐφιέμενόν τινος τῶν ἐπ᾽ ἄλλοις 
sf 3 “ 3 a > "ἢ > é 
ὄντων ἐνδέχεται ἀκώλυτον εἶναι ;—OvU.— Evéé- 

3 , : of > on INF WF 

χεταί ἀπαραπόδιστον ;---Οὐ.--Οὐκοῦν οὐδ᾽ érev- 
’᾽ 

θερον. ὅρα οὖν: πότερον οὐδὲν ἔχομεν, ὃ ἐφ᾽ 

ἡμῖν μόνοις ἐστίν, ἢ πάντα, ἢ τὰ μὲν ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν 

3 f \ ᾽ 29 Fd nm f % \ 

ἐστίν», τὰ δ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἄλλοις ;--ἰἰ]ῶς λέγεις -—TO 

ΦᾺ ef / e f Φ » % 3 
σῶμα ὅταν θέλῃς ὁλόκληρον εἶναι, ἐπὶ ToL ἐστιν 

1 The last eleven words are here wrongly repeated in 8, 
as Schenk! observed ; but he was mistaken in assuming that 


the repetition began immediately after ἔχει, whereas it 


probably was due to the eye going back to the wrong 
ὠφελείας. 


2 ἐπί added by Sd. 





1 The major premiss is: ‘‘ What has power to confer the 
greatest advantage is divine’’; the minor premiss, as in the 


204 


BOOK IV. 1. 60-66 


tribuneship, a praetorship, a consulship. When we 
love and hate and fear these things, it needs must 
be that those who control them are masters over us. 
That is why we even worship those persons as gods ; 
for we consider that what has power to confer the 
greatest advantage is divine. And then we lay down 
the wrong minor premiss: “ This man has power to 
confer the greatest advantage.” It needs must be 
that the conclusion from these premisses is wrong too.! 

What, then, is it which makes a man free from 
hindrance and his ownmaster? For wealth does not 
do it, nor a consulship, nor a province, nor a 
kingdom, but something else has to be found. 
What, therefore, is it which makes a man free 
from hindrance and restraint in writing >—The 
knowledge of how to write.—And what in play- 
ing on the harp?—The knowledge of how to 
play on the harp.—So also in living, it is the know- 
ledge of how to live. Now you have already 
heard this, as a general principle, but consider it also 
in its particular applications. Is it possible for the 
man who is aiming at some one of these things 
which are under the control of others to be free 
from hindrance ?—No.—Is it possible for him to be 
free from restraint?—-No.—Therefore, it is not 
possible for him to be free, either. Consider then: 
Have we nothing which is under our own exclusive 
control, or is everything in that state; or are some 
things under our control and others under the 
control of others ?—How do you mean: >—When you 
want your body to be whole, is the matter under 


text ; from which follows the conclusion: ‘‘ Therefore, this 
man is divine,” which is wrong because of the false minor 
premiss. 


265 


68 


69 


79 


11 


72 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ἢ οὔ ;---Οὐκ ἐπ᾽ éuot.—Orav δ᾽ ὑγιαίνειν ;— 
Οὐδὲ τοῦτο.-- Οταν δὲ καλὸν εἶναι͵;---Οὐδὲ 
τοῦτο.---Ζῆν δὲ καὶ ἀποθανεῖν ;---Οὐδὲ τοῦτο.---- 
Οὐκοῦν τὸ μὲν σῶμα ἀλλότριον, ὑπεύθυνον παᾶν- 
τὸς τοῦ ἰσχυροτέρου --- Ἔστω.---Τὸν ἀγρὸν δ᾽ ἐπὶ 
σοί ἐστιν ἔχειν, ὅταν θέλῃς καὶ ἐφ᾽ ὅσον θέλεις 
καὶ οἷον θέλεις ;---Οὔ.----Γὰ δὲ δουλάρια ;—03.— 
Ta δ᾽ ἱμάτια ;—Ov.—To δὲ οἰκίδιον ;—O’v.— 
Τοὺς δ᾽ ἵππους ;—Tovrev μὲν οὐδέν. — Ay δὲ τὰ 
τέκνα σου ζῆν θέλῃς ἐξ ἅπαντος ἢ τὴν γυναῖκα 
ἢ τὸν ἀδελφὸν ἢ ἢ τοὺς φίλους, ἐπὶ cob ἐστιν ;— 
Οὐδὲ ταῦτα. 

“Πότερον οὖν οὐδὲν ἔχεις αὐτεξούσιον, ὃ ἐπὶ 
μόνῳ ἐστὶ σοί, ἢ ἔχεις. TL τοιοῦτον ;--Οὐκ οἶδα. 
—Opa οὖν οὕτως καὶ σκέψαι αὐτό. μή τις 
δύναταί σε ποιῆσαι συγκαταθέσθαι τῷ ψεύδει; 
--Οὐδείς. --Οὐκοῦν ἐν μὲν τῷ συγκαταθετικῷ 
τόπῳ ἀκώλυτος εἶ καὶ ἀνεμπόδιστος.--" “Kora .— 

* Arve, ὁρμῆσαι δέ σε ἐφ᾽ ὃ μὴ θέλεις τις δύναται 
ἀναγκάσαι ;---Δύναται. ὅταν γάρ μοι θάνατον 
ἢ δεσμὰ ἀπειλῇ, ἀναγκάζει pw ὁρμῆσαι. — Ap 
οὖν καταφρονῇς τοῦ ἀποθαγεῖν καὶ τοῦ δεδέσθαι, 
ἔτι αὐτοῦ ἐπιστρέφῃ ;---Οὔ. —Zov οὖν ἐστὶν 
ἔργον τὸ καταφρονεῖν θανάτου ἢ ἢ οὐ σόν; -- Εμόν. 

— ov dpa ἐστὶ Kal τὸ ὁρμῆσαι ἢ οὔ ;—" “Koto 
ἐμόν.----Τὸ δ᾽ ἀφορμῆσαιν Tivos ; σὸν καὶ τοῦτο.---- 
Τί οὖν, ἂν ἐμοῦ ὁρμήσαντος περιπατῆσαι ἐκεῖνός 
με κωλύσῃ ;---Τ σου κωλύσει ; μή τι τὴν 
συγκατάθεσιν ;---Οὔ: ἀλλὰ τὸ copdrioy.—Nai, 
ὡς λίθον.--- Εστω" arn οὐκέτι ἐγὼ περιπατῶ.-- 


266 


BOOK IV. 1 66-72 


your control, or not?—It is not—And when you 
want it to be well >—Nor that, either.—And to live 
or to die ?—_Nor that, either.—Therefore, your body 
is not your own possession, it is subject to everyone 
who is stronger than you are.—Granted.—And your 
farm, is it under your control to have it when you 
want, and as long as you want, and in the condition 
that you want >—No.—And your paltry slaves P—No. 
—-And your clothes >—No.—And your paltry house? 
—No.—And your horses ?—None of these things.— 
And if you wish by all means your children to live, 
or your wife, or your brother, or your friends, is the 
matter under your control ?>—No, nor that, either. 
Have you, then, nothing subject to your authority, 
which is under your control and yours only, or do you 
have something of that sort?—-1 do not know.— 
Look, then, at the matter this way, and consider it. 
No one can make you assent to what is false, can he ? 
—No one.—Well, then, in the region of assent you 
are free from hindrance and restraint.—Granted.— 
Come, can anyone force you to choose something 
that you do not want?—He can; for when he 
threatens me with death or bonds, he compels me 
to choose.—If, however, you despise death and bonds, 
do you pay any further heed to him?—No,—Is it, 
then, an act of your own to despise death, or is it 
not your own act ?—It is mine.—So it is your own 
act to choose, or is it not >—-Granted that it is mine. 
—And to refuse something? This also is yours.— 
Yes, but suppose I choose to go for a walk and the 
other person hinders me?—-What part of you. will 
he hinder? Surely not your assent?—No; but my 
poor body.—Yes, as he would a stone.—Granted 
that, but I do not proceed to take my walk.—But 


267 


~T 


or 


“1 =] 
oS 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


Tis δέ σοι εἶπεν “τὸ περιπατῆσαι σὸν ἔργον 
ἐστὶν ἀκώλυτον" ἡ ἐγὼ γὰρ ἐκεῖνο ἔλεγον ἀκώλυ- 
TOV μόνον τὸ ὁρμῆσαι: ὅπου δὲ σώματος χρεία 
καὶ τῆς ἐκ τούτου συνεργείας, πάλαι ἀκήκοας, 
ὅτι οὐδέν ἐστι σόν.--- Ἔστω καὶ ταῦτα.--- Ὃρέ- 
γεσθαι δέ σε οὗ μὴ θέλεις τις ἀναγκάσαι δύνα- 
ται Στ ὐδείς.---ἰΠπροθέσθαι δ᾽ ἢ ἐπιβαλέσθαι τίς 
ἢ ἁπλῶς χρῆσθαι ταῖς προσπιπτούσαις φαν- 
τασίαις --τοὺὐδὲ “οῦτο' ἀλλὰ ὁρεγόμενόν με 
κωλύσει τυχεῖν οὗ ὀρέγομαι.---- “Avy τῶν σῶν τινὸς 
ὀρέγῃ καὶ τῶν ἀκωλύτων, πῶς σε κωλύσει ;-- 
Οὐδαμῶς .---Τίς οὖν σοι λέγει, ὅτι ὁ τῶν ἀλλο- 
τρίων ὀρεγόμενος ἀκώλυτός ἐστιν; 

“Ὑγείας οὖν μὴ ὀρέγωμαι ;---Μηδαμῶς, μηδ᾽ 
ἄλλου ἀλλοτρίου μηδενός. a) yap οὐκ ἔστιν ἐπὶ 
σοὶ παρασκευάσαι ἢ τηρῆσαι ὅτε θέλεις, τοῦτο 
ἀλλότριόν ἐστιν. μακρὰν ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ οὐ μόνον 
τὰς χεῖρας, ἀλλὰ πολὺ πρότερον τὴν ὄρεξιν' εἰ 
δὲ μή, παρέδωκας σαυτὸν δοῦλον, ὑπέθηκας τὸν 
τράχηλον, ὃ τιΐ ἂν θαυμάσῃς τῶν μὴ σῶν, ᾧ τινι 
ἂν τῶν ὑπευθύνων καὶ θνητῶν προσπαθῇς. —H 
χεὶρ οὐκ ἔστιν ἐμή "Μέρος ἐ ἐστὶ σόν, φύσει δὲ 
πηλός, κωλυτόν, ἀναγκαστόν, δοῦλον παντὸς τοῦ 
ἰσχυροτέρου. καὶ τί σοι λέγω χεῖρα ; ὅλον τὸ 
σῶμα οὕτως ἔχειν σε δεῖ ὡς ὀνάριον ,ἐπίσεσαγ- 
μένον, ἐφ᾽ ὅσον ἂν οἷόν TE; ἐφ᾽ ὅσον ἂν διδῶται" 
ἂν δ᾽ ἀγγαρεία ἢ καὶ στρατιώτης ἐπιλάβηται, 
ἄφες, μὴ ἀντίτεινε μηδὲ γόγγυζξε. εἰ δὲ “μή, 
πληγὰς λαβὼν οὐδὲν ἧττον ἀπολεῖς καὶ τὸ ὀνά- 


LB rt added by Elter: τράχηλον, ἂν θαυμάσης τῶν ri (later 
erased) μή 8, 


268 


BOOK IV. τ 73-79 


who told you, “It is your own act to take a walk 
unhindered’? As for me, I told you that the only 
unhindered thing was the desire ; but where there is 
ause of the body and its co- -operation, you have heard 
long ago that nothing is your own.—Granted that 
also.—Can anyone force you to desire what you do 
not want ?—No one.—Or to purpose or plan, or, ina 
word, to deal with the impressions that come’ to 
you ?—No, nor that, either ; but he will hinder me, 
when I set my desire upon something, from achieving 
what I desire.—If you desire something which is your 
own and not subject to hindrance, how will he hinder 
you ?—Not at all.—Who, then, tells you that the 
man who sets his desire upon what is not his own is 
free from hindrance ? 

Shall I not, then, set my desire on health ?—No, 
not at all, nor on anything else which is not your 
own, For that which is not in your power to 
acquire or to keep is none of yours. Keep far away 
from it not merely your hands, but above all your 
desire; otherwise, you have delivered yourself into 
slavery, you have bowed your neck to the burden, if 
you admire anything that is not your own, if you 
conceive a violent passion for anything that is in 
subjection to another and mortal.—lIs not my hand 
my own?—It is a part of you, but by nature it is 
clay, subject to hindrance and compulsion, a slave to 
everything that is stronger than you are. And why 
do I name you the hand? You ought to treat your 
whole body like a poor loaded-down. donkey, as long 
as it is possible, as long as it is allowed; and if it be 
commandeered and a soldier lay hold of it, let it go, 
do not resist nor grumble. If you do, you will get 
a beating and lose your little donkey just the same. 


269 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


δ μ ~ a, 
80 prov. ὅταν δὲ πρὸς τὸ σῶμα οὕτως ἔχειν σε δέῃ, 


81 


83 


89 


84 


? , δ a 
ὅρα, Ti ἀπολείπεται περὶ Ta ἄλλα, ὅσᾳ TOD 
¢ δ ΨᾺ 
σώματος ἕνεκα παρασκευάζεται. ὅταν ἐκεῖνο 
9 f icy μὴ ; 7 * 3 - 
ὀνάριον ἢ, τἄλλα γίνεται χαλινάρια TOD ὀναρίου, 
σαγμάτια, ὑποδημάτια, κριθαΐ, χόρτος. ἄφες 
κἀκεῖνα, ἀπόλνε θᾶττον καὶ εὐκολώτερον ἢ τὸ 
ὀνάριον. 
Καὶ ταύτην τὴν παρασκευὴν παρασκευασάμενος 
\ “ 
Kal THY ἄσκησιν ἀσκήσας τὰ ἀλλότρια ἀπὸ τῶν 
+A? fA \ Ἀ b 3 \ a % ζ΄ 
ἰδίων διακρίνειν, τὰ κωλυτὰ ἀπὸ τῶν ἀκωλύτων, 
ταῦτα πρὸς σαυτὸν ἡγεῖσθαι, ἐκεῖνα μὴ πρὸς 
f ra \ 
σαυτόν, ἐνταῦθα ἐπιστρόφως ἔχειν τὴν ὄρεξιν, 
ἐνταῦθα τὴν ἔκκλισιν, μή τε ἔτε φοβῇ τινώ ;— 
7 , ’ A 
Οὐδένα.----ΠΠερὶ τίνος yap φοβήσῃ; περὶ τῶν 
σεαυτοῦ, ὅπου σοι ἡ οὐσία τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ καὶ τοῦ 
“A f 7 
κακοῦ ; καὶ τίς τούτων ἐξουσίαν ἔχει; Tis ἀφε- 
λέσθαι αὐτὰ δύναται, τίς ἐμποδίσαι; οὐ μᾶλλον 
ΓΙ % f 3 3 ¢ X “ ? ἈΝ fal 
ἢ τὸν θεὸν. adr ὑπὲρ τοῦ σώματος καὶ τῆς 
a ¢ % “~ , ῇ ¢ \ *~ b Ἀ 
κτήσεως; ὑπὲρ τῶν ἀλλοτρίων ; ὑπὲρ τῶν οὐδὲν 
πρὸς σέ; καὶ τί ἄλλο ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἐμελέτας ἢ δια- 
r \ 
κρίνειν τὰ σὰ καὶ οὐ σώ, τὰ ἐπὶ σοὶ καὶ οὐκ ἐπὶ 
¥ % 4 \ 9 ΄ ἢ Ἀ δ’ 
Gol, τὰ κωλυτὰ καὶ ἀκώλυτα ; τίνος δὲ ἕνεκα 
προσῆλθες τοῖς φιλοσόφοις; ἵνα μηδὲν ἧττον 
ἀτυχῆς καὶ δυστυχῆς; οὐκ οὖν ὃ ἄφοβος μὲν οὕτως 
bid 4 3 éf 4 eX i Ν f . οἱ 
ἔσει καὶ ἁτάραχος. λύπη δὲ τί πρὸς GE; ὧν 


1 Elter : οὐκοῦν S, 


27° 


BOOK IV. 1. 79-84 


But when this is the way in which you should act as 
regards the body, consider what is left for you to do 
about all the other things that are provided for the 
sake of the body. Since the body is a little donkey, 
the other things become little bridles for a little 
donkey, little pack-saddles, little shoes, and barley, 
and fodder. Let them go too, get rid of them more 
quickly and cheerfully than of the little donkey itself. 

Once prepared and trained in this fashion to 
distinguish what is not your own from what is your. 
own possession, the things which are subject to 
hindrance from those which are free from it, to 
regard these latter as your concern, and the former 
as no concern of yours, diligently to keep your 
desire fixed on the latter, and your aversion directed 
toward the former, then have you any longer any- 
one to fear >—No one.—Of course; what is there to 
be fearful about? About the things that are your 
own, wherein is the true nature of good and evil for 
you? And who has authority over these? Who 
can take them away, who can hinder them, any 
more than one can hinder God? But shall you be 
fearful about your body and your property? About 
the things that are not your own? About the 
things that are nothing to you? And what else 
have you been studying, from the very outset, but 
how to discriminate between what is your own and 
what is not your own, what is under your control 
and what is not under your control, what is subject 
to hindrance and what is free from it? For. what 
purpose did you go to the philosophers? That you 
might no less than before be unfortunate and 
miserable? You will not, then, in that case, be free 
from fear and perturbation. And what has pain to 


271 


86 


87 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


yap προσδοκωμένων φόβος, γίνεται ἷ καὶ λύπη 
παρόντων. ἐπιθυμήσεις δὲ τίνος ἔτι; τῶν μὲν 
γὰρ προαιρετικῶν ἅτε καλῶν ὄντων καὶ πὰρόντων 
σύμμετρον ἔχεις καὶ καθισταμένην τὴν ὄρεξιν, 
τῶν δ᾽ ἀπροαιρέτων οὐδενὸς ὁ ὀρέγῃ, ἵνα καὶ τόπον 
σχῇ τὸ ἄλογον ἐκεῖνο καὶ ὠστικὸν καὶ παρὰ τὰ 
μέτρα ἡπειγμένον. 

ταν οὖν πρὸς τὰ πράγματα. οὕτως ἔχῃς, τίς ἔτι 
ἄνθρωπος δύναται φοβερὸς εἶναι; τί γὰρ ἔχει 
ἄνθρωπος ἀνθρώπῳ φοβερὸν ἢ ἢ ὀφθεὶς ἢ λαλήσας 
ἢ ὅλως συναναστραφείς ; Ov μᾶλλον ἢ ἵππος 
ἵππῳ ἢ κύων κυνὶ ἣ μέλισσα μελίσσῃ. ἀλλὰ τὰ 
πράγματα ἑκάστῳ φοβερά ἐστιν" ταῦτα δ᾽ ὅταν 
περιποιεῖν τις δύνηταί τινι ἢ ἀφελέσθαι, τότε καὶ 
αὐτὸς φοβερὸς γίνεται. 

Πῶς οὖν ἀκρόπολις καταλύεται ; οὐ σιδήρῳ 
οὐδὲ πυρί, ἀλλὰ δόγμασιν. ἂν γὰρ τὴν οὖσαν ἐν 
τῇ πόλει καθέλωμεν, μή τι καὶ τὴν τοῦ πυρετοῦ, 
μὴ τι καὶ τὴν τῶν καλῶν γυναικαρίων, μή τε 
ἁπλῶς τὴν ἐν ἡμῖν ἀκρόπολιν καὶ τοὺς ἐν ἡμῖν 
τυράννους ἀποβεβλήκαμεν, ods ἐφ᾽ ἑκάστοις καθ᾽ 
ἡμέραν ἔχομεν, ποτὲ μὲν τοὺς αὐτούς, ποτὲ δ᾽ 
ἄλλους; ἀλλ᾽ ἔνθεν ἄρξασθαι δεῖ καὶ ἔνθεν 
καθελεῖν τὴν ἀκρόπολιν, ἐκβάλλειν τοὺς τυράν- 
yous: TO σωμάτιον ἀφεῖναι, τὰ μέρη αὐτοῦ, τὰς 


1 The punctuation is by Capps; φόβος γίνεται, καί is 
the ordinary reading. 





* Probably a reference to some proverb, or well-known 
saying, like that of Alcaeus, “‘ Valiant men are the tower of 
a city” (Smyth, Greek Melic Poets, frag. 15).—The citadel is 
the keep, or tower, from which a tyrant is represented as 
overawing a city. 


272 


BOOK IV. 1. 84-87 


do with you? For fear of things anticipated be- 
comes pain when these things are present. And 
what will you any longer passionately seek? For 
you possess a harmonious and regulated desire for 
the things that are within the sphere of the moral 
purpose, as being excellent, and as being within your 
reach ; and you desire nothing outside the sphere 
of the moral purpose, so as to give place to that 
other element of unreason, which pushes you along 
and is impetuous beyond all measure. 

Now when you face things in this fashion, what 
man can inspire fear in you any longer? For what 
has one human being about him that is calculated to 
inspire fear in another human being, in either his 
appearance, or conversation, or intercourse in general, 
any more than one horse, or dog, or bee inspires fear 
in another horse, or dog, or bee? Nay, it is things 
that inspire man with fear; and when one person 
is able to secure them for another, or to take them 
away, then he becomes capable of inspiring fear. 

How, then, is a citadel destroyed?! Not by iron, 
nor by fire, but by judgements. For if we capture 
the citadel in the city, have we captured the citadel 
of fever also, have we captured that of pretty wenches 
also, in a word, the acropolis within us, and have we 
cast out the tyrants within us, whom we have lord- 
ing it over each of us® every day, sometimes the 
same tyrants, and sometimes others? But here is 
where we must begin, and it is from this side that we 
must seize the acropolis and cast out the tyrants; we 
must yield up the paltry body, its members, the 


* So Schweighiuser; but there is some uncertainty about 
the meaning of ἐφ᾽ ἑκάστοις, which Schegk, Wolf, and Upton 
take to refer to matters, or affairs (πράγματα, as in ὃ 85). 


273 
VOL. 11, τ 


88 


89 


90 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


δυνάμεις, τὴν κτῆσιν, τὴν φήμην, ἀρχάς, τιμάς, 
τέκνα, ἀδελφούς, φίλους, πάντα ταῦτα ἡγήσασθαι 
ἀλλότρια. κἂν ἔνθεν ἐκβληθῶσεν οἱ τύραννοι, τί 
ἔτι ἀποτειχίζω τὴν ἀκρόπολιν ἐμοῦ γε ἕνεκα; 
ἑστῶσα γὰρ τί μοι ποιεῖ; τί ἔτι ἐκβάλλω τοὺς 
δορυφόρους ; ποῦ γὰρ αὐτῶν αἰσθάνομαι; ἐπ᾿ 
ἄλλους ἐ ἔχουσιν τὰς ῥάβδους καὶ τοὺς κοντοὺς καὶ 
τὰς μαχαίρας. ἐγὼ δ᾽ οὐπώποτ᾽ οὔτε θέλων 
ἐκωλύθην οὔτ᾽ ἠναγκάσθην μὴ θέλων. καὶ πῶς 
τοῦτο δυνατόν ; προσκατατέταχά μου τὴν ὁρμὴν 
τῷ θεῷ. θέλει μ᾽ ἐκεῖνος πυρέσσειν' κἀγὼ 
θέλω. θέλει ὁρμᾶν ἐπί τι: κἀγὼ θέλω. θέλει 
ὀρέγεσθαι" κἀγὼ θέλω. θέλει με τυχεῖν τινός" 
κἀγὼ βούλο; μαι. οὐ θέλει" οὐ βούλομαι. ἀπο- 
θανεῖν οὖν θέλω: στρεβλωθῆναι οὖν θέλω. τίς 
ἔτι με κωλῦσαι δύναται παβὰ τὸ ἐμοὶ φαινόμενον 
ἢ ἀναγκάσαι; οὐ μᾶλλον ἢ τὸν Δία. 

Οὕτως ποιοῦσι καὶ τῶν ὁδοιπόρων οἱ ἀσῴφα- 
λέστεροι. ἀκήκοεν ὅτι λῃστεύεται ἡ ὁδός" μόνος 
οὐ τολμᾷ καθεῖναι, ἀλλὰ περιέμεινεν συνοδίαν ἢ ” 
πρεσβευτοῦ ἢ ταμίον ἢ ἀνθυπάτον καὶ προσ- 





1 The metaphor in this passage is complicated. I take it 
to mean, using wealth as a convenient example, something 
like this: The tyrant is a false judyement (δόγμα) about 
wealth ; the acropolis and the bodyguard are wealth itself, 
which is dangerous only so long as the false judgement pre- 
vails. Once that is overthrown, actual wealth itself need 
not be destroyed, at least for the man who is freed from the 
false judgement about it, because wealth as such has no 
longer any power over him. Other people may be menaced 
by it, but every man has a ready means of defence, which is 
to secure a correct Judgement about the thing itself, Many 
matters or affairs (πράγματα) like death and disease cannot, 


274 


BOOK IV. 1. 87-91 


faculties, property, reputation, offices, honours, 
children, brothers, friends—count 4}} these things 
as alien tous. And if the tyrants be thrown out of 
the spot, why should I any longer raze the fortifica- 
tions of the citadel, on my own account, at least? 
For what harm does it do me by standing? Why 
should I go on and throw out the tyrant’s body- 
guard? For where do I feel them? Their rods, 
their spears, and their swords they are directing 
against others. But I have never been hindered in 
the exercise of my will, nor have I ever been sub- 
jected to compulsion against my will And how 
is this possible? I have submitted my freedom of 
choice unto God. He wills that I shall have fever ; 
it is my will too. He wills that I should choose 
something; it is my will too. He wills that I 
should desire something; it is my will too. He 
wills that I should get something; it is iny wish 
too. He does not will it; I do not wish it. There- 
fore, it is my will to die; therefore, it is my will to 
be tortured on the rack, Who can hinder me 
any longer against my own views, or put com- 
pulsion upon me? That is no more possible in my 
ease than it would be with Zeus, 

This is the way also with the more cautious 
among travellers. A man has heard that the road 
which he is taking is infested with robbers; he does 
not venture to set forth alone, but he waits for a 
company, either that of an ambassador, or of a 
quaestor, or of a proconsul, and when he has attached 


in any event, be destroyed. It is vain labour to try to 
destroy the things themselves, when it is only the false judge- 
ments that are dangerous, and these any man can himself 
overcome. 


275° 
Tr 2 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ἴω A 
92 κατατάξας ἑαυτὸν παρέρχεται ἀσφαλῶς. οὕτως 
“ -" e Ν 
καὶ ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ ποιεῖ ὁ φρόνιμος. “πολλὰ 
fa a ? > \ 
λῃστήρια, τύραννοι, χειμῶνες, ἀπορίαι, ἀποβολαὶ 
“ nn A ᾿ 
93 τῶν φιλτάτων. ποῦ τις καταφύγῃ ; πῶς ἀλήστευ- 
7 
τος παρέλθῃ; ποίαν συνοδίαν περιμείνας ἀσφα- 
; “ ὃ - θ . ? Op ἐξ f i “ 
94X05 OLEN ἢ 9 τινι TWPOTKATATAZaAS EaUTOY; TH 
δεῖνι, TH πλουσίῳ, TH ὑπατικῷ ; καὶ τί μοι 
bid > \ ᾽ ᾽7 > , “ 7 1 
ὄφελος ; αὐτὸς ἐκδύεται, οἰμώξει, πενθεῖ. τί d, 
φ f ‘ , 
ἂν ὁ συνοδοιπόρος αὐτὸς ἐπ᾽ ἐμὲ στραφεὶς λῃστῆς 
"» f 7 
95 μου γένηται; τί ποιήσω; φίλος ἔσομαι Katoa- 
ρος" ἐκείνου με ὄντα ἑταῖρον οὐδεὶς ἀδικήσει. 
πρῶτον μέν, ἵνα γένωμαι, πόσαϊ με δεῖ τλῆναι 
-" f nw 
καὶ παθεῖν, ποσάκις καὶ ὑπὸ πόσων λῃστευθῆναι" 
> 4 t N Ὁ ᾿ 5 ro Ἄ 
96 εἶτα ἐὰν γένωμαι, καὶ οὗτος θνητὸς ἐστιν. ἂν 
5 7 
δ᾽ αὐτὸς ἔις τινος περιστάσεως ἐχθρός μου γένηται, 
» ΄»Ν 7 
ἀναχωρῆσαί πού ποτε κρεῖσσον ; εἰς ἐρημίαν ; 
ead ἊΝ a i ° 
97 ἄγε, ἐκεῖ πυρετὸς οὐκ ἔρχεται ; Ti οὖν γένηται ; 
ray » ᾿ 
οὐκ ἔστιν εὑρεῖν ἀσφαλῆ σύνοδον, πίστον, ἰσχυ- 
f bl # 23 2 > ? \ 
98 pov, ἀνεπιβούλευτον ;” οὕτως ἐφίστησιν καὶ 
ἐννοεῖ, ὅτι, ἐὰν τῷ θεῷ προσκατατάξῃ ἑαυτόν, 
διελεύσεται ἀσφαλῶς. 
» Ἵ ἃ 
99 Πῶς λέγεις προσκατατάξαι; ---ἴν, ὃ ἂν 
* ” ? \ > NS f Sod ἋἉ 3 ~ 4 
ἐκεῖνος θέλῃ, Kal αὐτὸς θέλῃ, καὶ ὃ ἂν ἐκεῖνος μὴ 
100 θέλῃ, τοῦτο μηδ᾽ αὐτὸς θέλῃ.---Πὥς οὖν τοῦτο 
γένηται ;---[-Τῶς γὰρ ἄλλως ἢ ἐπισκεψαμένῳ τὰς 
ὁρμὰς τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ τὴν διοίκησιν ; τί μοι δέδωκεν 
ἐμὸν καὶ αὐτεξούσιον, τί αὑτῷ κατέλιπεν ; τὰ 
? Sehenkl: πρόσα 8, 
* After this word § repeats καὶ οὗτος θνητός. 


276 


# 


BOOK IV. 1 g1-100 


himself to them he travels along the road in safety. 
So in this world the wise man acts. Says he to 
himself: “There are many robber-bands, tyrants, 
storms, difficulties, losses of what is most dear. 
Where shall a man flee for refuge> How shall he 
travel secure against robbery? What company shall 
he wait for that he may pass through in safety? To 
whom shall he attach himself? To So-and-so, the 
rich man, or the proconsul? And what is the good 
of that? He himself is stripped, groans, sorrows. 
Yes, and what if my fellow-traveller himself turn 
upon me and rob me? What shall I do? I will 
become a friend of Caesar; no one will wrong me if 
Γ am a companion of his. But, in the first place, 
the number of things I must suffer and endure in 
order to become his friend! and the number of 
times, and the number of persons by whom I must 
first be robbed! And then, even if 1 do become his 
friend, he too is mortal. And if some circumstance 
lead him to become my enemy, where indeed had I 
better retire? To a wilderness? What, does not 
fever go there? What, then, is to become of me? 
[5 it impossible to find a fellow-traveller who is safe, 
faithful, strong, free from the suspicion of treachery ?”’ 
Thus he reflects and comes to the thought that, if 
he attach himself to God, he will pass through the 
world in safety. 

How do you mean “attach himself” :—Why, so that 
whatever God wills, he also wills, and whatever God 
does not will, this he also does not will.—How, then, 
ean this be done ?>—Why, how else than by observing 
the choices of God and His governance? What has 
He given me for my own and subject to my authority, 
and what has He left for Himself? Everything 


277 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


προαιρετικά μοι δέδωκεν, ἐπ᾽ ἐμοὶ πεποίηκεν, 
ἀνεμπόδιστα, ἀκώλυτα. τὸ σῶμα τὸ πήλινον 
πῶς ἐδύνατο ἀκώλυτον ποιῆσαι ; ὑπέταξεν οὖν τῇ 
τῶν ὅλων περιόδῳ, τὴν κτῆσιν, τὰ σκεύη, τὴν 
101 οἰκίαν, τὰ τέκνα, τὴν γυναῖκα. τί οὖν θεομα- 
yO; τί θέλω τὰ μὴ θελητά, τὰ μὴ δοθέντα μοι 
ἐξ ἅπαντος ἔχειν; ἀλλὰ πῶς; ὡς δέδοται 
καὶ ἐφ᾽ ὅσον δύναται. ἀλλ᾽ ὁ δοὺς ἀφαιρεῖται. 
τί οὖν ἀντιτείνω; οὐ λέγω, STL ἠλίθιος ἔσομαι 
τὸν ἰσχυρότερον βιαζόμενος, ἀλλ᾽ ἔτι πρότερον 
102 ἄδικος. πόθεν yap ἔνων αὐτὰ ἦλθον; ὁ πατήρ 
μου αὐτὰ ἔδωκεν. ἐκείνῳ δὲ τίς ; τὸν ἥλιον δὲ 
τίς πεποίηκε, τοὺς καρποὺς δὲ τίς, τὰς δ᾽ ὥρας 
τίς, τὴν δὲ πρὸς ἀλλήλους συμπλοκὴν καὶ κοινω- 
νίαν τίς ; 
103. Kita σύμπαντα εἰληφὼς παρ᾽ ἄλλου καὶ αὐτὸν 
σεαυτόν, ἀγανακτεῖς καὶ μέμφῃ τὸν δόντα, ἄν σού 
104τὸ ἀφέληται ; τίς ὧν καὶ ἐπὶ τί ἐληλυθώς ; οὐχὶ 
ἐκεῖνός σε εἰσήγαγεν ; οὐχὶ τὸ φῶς ἐκεῖνός σοι 
ἔδειξεν ; οὐ συνεργοὺς δέδωκεν ; οὐ καὶ αἰσθήσεις ; 
οὐ λόγον ; ὡς τίνα δὲ εἰσήγαγεν ; οὐχ ὡς θνητόν ; 
οὐχ ὡς μετὰ ὀλίγον σαρκιδίου ζήσοντα ἐπὶ γῆς 
καὶ θεασόμενον τὴν διοίκησιν αὐτοῦ καὶ συμπομ- 
πεύσοντα αὐτῷ καὶ συνεορτάσοντα πρὸς ὀλίγον ; 


1 δέδοται 56, But cf. explanatory note. 





> 6 


1 Very similar is the phrase ἐφ᾽ ὅσον ἂν οἷόν re ἢ in ὃ 79 
above. 

3 As Job i. 21: ‘*The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken 
away.’ 


8 "Rhat is, God, 
278 


BOOK IV. 1. roo—ro4 


within the sphere of the moral purpose He has given 
me, subjected them to my control, unhampered and 
unhindered. My body that is made of clay, how 
could He make that unhindered? Accordingly He 
has made subject to the revolution of the universe 
my property, my furniture, my house, my children, 
my wife. Why, then, shall I strive against God? 
Why shall I will what is not in the province of the 
will, to keep under all circumstances what has not 
been given me outright? But how should I keep 
them? In accordance with the terms upon which 
they have been given, and for as long as they can be 
given. But He who gave also takes away.” Why, then, 
shall I resist? I do not say that I shall be a fool for 
trying to use force upon one who is stronger than Jam, 
‘but before that [ shall be wicked. For where did I 
get these things when I came into the world? My 
father gave them to me. And who gave them to 
him? Who has made the sun, who the fruits, who 
the seasons, who the union and fellowship of men 
one with another ? 

And so, when you have received everything, and 
your very self, from Another,? do you yet complain 
and blame the Giver, if He take something away 
from you? Who are you, and for what purpose 
have you come? Did not He bring you into the 
world? Did not He show you the light? Did not 
He give you fellow-workers? Did not He give 
you senses also and reason? And as what did Fle 
bring you into the world? Was it not as a mortal 
being? Was it not as one destined to live upon 
earth with a little portion of paltry flesh, and for a 
little while to be a spectator of His governance, and 
to join with Him in His pageant and holiday? Are 


279 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


105 οὐ θέλεις οὗν, ἕως δέδοταί σοί, θεασάμενος τὴν 
πομπὴν καὶ τὴν πανήγυριν εἶτα, ὅταν σ᾽ ἐξάγῃ, 
πορεύεσθαι προσκυνήσας καὶ εὐχαριστήσας ὑπὲρ 
ὧν ἤκουσας καὶ εἶδες ; “οὔ ἀλλ᾽ ἔτι ἑορτάξειν 

106 ἤθελον." καὶ γὰρ οἱ μύσται μυεῖσθαι, τάχα καὶ 
οἱ ἐν Ὀλυμπίᾳ ἄλλους ἀθλητὰς βλέπειν' ἀλλὰ ἡ ἦ 
πανήγυρις πέρας ἔχει" ἔξελθε, ἀπαλλάγηθι ὡς 
εὐχάριστος, ὡς αἰδήμων" δὸς ἄλλοις τόπον' δεῖ 
γενέσθαι καὶ ἄλλους, καθάπερ καὶ σὺ ἐγένου, καὶ 
γενομένους ἔχειν χώραν καὶ οἰκήσεις, τὰ ἐπιτήδεια. 
ἂν δ᾽ οἱ πρῶτοι μὴ ὑπεξάγωσιν, τί ὑπ ολείπεται ; 
τί ἄπληστ os εἶ ; τί ἀνίκανος ; τί στενοχωρεῖς 
τὸν κόσμον; ; 

101 Ναί: ἀλλὰ τὰ τεκνία μετ᾽ ἐμαυτοῦ. εἶναι θέλω καὶ 
τὴν γυναῖκα.--- -Σὰ γάρ ἐστιν; οὐχὶ τοῦ δόντος ; ; 
οὐχὶ καὶ τοῦ σὲ πεποιηκότος ; ; εἶτα οὐκ ἐκστήσῃ 
τῶν ἀλλοτρίων ; > ov παραχωρήσεις τῷ κρείσσονι; ; 

10s—Te οὖν μ᾽ εἰσῆγεν ἐπὶ τούτοις ;---Καὶ εἰ μὴ 
ποιεῖ σοι, ἔξελθε: οὐκ ἔχει χρείαν θεατοῦ μεμψι- 
μοίρου. τῶν συνεορταζόντων δεῖται, τῶν συγχο- 
ρευόντων, ἵν᾽ ἐπικροτῶσιε μᾶλλον, ἐπιθειάξωσιν, 

109 ὑμνῶσι δὲ τὴν πανήγυριν. τοὺς ἀταλαυπώρους ᾿ 
δὲ καὶ δειλοὺς οὐκ ἀηδῶς ὄψεται ἀπολελειμμένους 
τῆς πανηγύρεως οὐδὲ γὰρ παρόντες ὡς ἐν ἑορτῇ 
διῆγον οὐδ᾽ ἐξεπλήρουν τὴν χώραν τὴν πρέπουσα, 
ἀλλ᾽ ὠδυνῶντο, ἐμέμφοντο τὸν δαίμονα, τὴν 
τύχην, τοὺς συνόντας" ἀναίσθητοι καὶ ὧν ἔτυχον 


1 Schweighauser: ταλαιπώρους 5. 





1 Or possibly, “ἘΠ does ποῦ suit you,” as Capps suggests. 
280 


BOOK IV. 4. 105-109 


you not willing, then, for so long as has been given 
you, to be a spectator of His pageant and His 
festival, and then when He leads you forth, to go, 
after you have made obeisance and returned thanks 
for what you have heard and seen? “No,” you say, 
“but I wanted to go on with the holiday.” Yes, 
and so do the initiates in the mysteries want to go 
on with the initiation, and no doubt the spectators 
at Olympia want to see still other athletes; but the 
festival has come to an end; leave, depart as a 
grateful and reverent spectator departs; make room 
for others; yet others must be born, even as you 
were born, and once born they must have land, and 
houses, and provisions. But if the first-comers do 
not move along, what is left for those who follow 
after? Why are you insatiate> Why never satisfied ? 
Why do you crowd the world? 

Yes, but I want my little children and my wife to 
be with me.—Are they yours? Do they not belong 
to Him who gave them? To Him who made you? 
Will you not, therefore, give up what is not your 
own? Will you not yield to your superior >—Why, 
then, did He bring me into the world on these 
conditions >And if they do! not suit you, leave; 
God has no need of a fault-finding spectator. He 
needs those who join in the holiday and the dance, 
that they may applaud rather, and glorify, and sing 
hymns of praise about the festival. But the peevish 
and the cowardly He will not be distressed to see 
left out of the festival; for when they were present 
they did not act as though they were on a holiday, 
nor did they fill the proper réle; but they were dis- 
tressed, found fault with the Deity, with fate, and 
with the company; insensible to what had been 


“81 





ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


καὶ τῶν ἑαυτῶν δυνάμεων, as εἰλήφασι πρὸς Ta 
ἐναντία, μεγαλοψυχίας, γενναιότητος, ἀνδρείας, 
1τὸ αὐτῆς τῆς νῦν ζητουμένης ἐλευθερίας.--- Emi τί 
οὖν εἴληφα ταῦτα ;---  ρησόμενος.---Μέχρι τίνος ; 
---ΜΙέχρις ἂν ὁ χρήσας θέλῃ.---ἰ Ἂν οὖν ἀναγκαῖα 
μοι ἢ;--Μὴ πρόσπασχε αὐτοῖς καὶ οὐκ ἔσται. 
σὺ αὐτὰ αὑτῷ μὴ εἴπῃς ἀναγκαῖα καὶ οὐκ ἔστιν. 
111 Ταύτην τὴν μελέτην ἕωθεν εἰς ἑσπέραν μελετᾶν 
ἔδει. ἀπὸ τῶν μικροτάτων, ἀπὸ τῶν εὐεπηρεασ- 
τοτάτων ἀρξάμενος, ἀπὸ χύτρας, ἀπὸ ποτη- 
ρίου, εἶθ᾽ οὕτως ἐπὶ χιτωνάριον πρόσελθε, ἐπὶ 
κυνάριον, ἐπὶ ἱππάριον, ἐπὶ ἀγρίδιον: ἔνθεν ἐπὶ 
σαυτόν, τὸ σῶμα, τὰ μέρη τοῦ σώματος, τὰ τέκνα, 
112 τὴν γυναῖκα, τοὺς ἀδελφούς. πανταχοῦ περι- 
βλέψας ἀπόρριψον ἀπὸ σεαυτοῦ: κάθηρον τὰ 
δόγματα, μή TL προσήρτηταί σοι τῶν οὐ σῶν, μή 
τὸ συμπέφυκεν, μή τι ὀδυνήσει σ᾽ ἀποσπώμενον. 
113 καὶ Aéye γυμναζόμενος καθ᾽ ἡμέραν, ὡς ἐκεῖ, μὴ 
ὅτι φιλοσοφεῖς (ἔστω φορτικὸν τὸ ὄνομα), ἀλλ᾽ 
ὅτε καρπιστὴν δίδως" τοῦτο γάρ ἐστιν ἡ ταῖς 
4 ἀληθείαις ἐλευθερία. ταύτην ἠλευθερώθη Ato- 
γένης παρ᾽ ᾿Αντισθένους καὶ οὐκέτι ἔφη καταδου- 
115 λωθῆναι δύνασθαι ὑπ᾽ οὐδενός. διὰ τοῦτο πῶς 
ἑάλω, πῶς τοῖς πειραταῖς ἐχρῆτο" μή τι κύριον 


πον 





1 ΤῸ is tempting to conjecture καρπιστείαν, “making pro- 
vision for your emancipation,” since every man must win his 
own freedom for himself. But Epictetus probably is think- 
ing here of a man being won to freedom by following some 
great philosopher, who is his emancipator, as in the famous 
illustration in the next sentence. Itis interesting to observe 
how, with all its insistence upon individual responsibility, 
even Stoicism at this time was becoming a religion of books, 
examples, and saviours. 


282 


BOOK IY. 1. rog-115 


vouchsafed them, and to their own powers which 
they had received for the very opposite use—high- 
mindedness, nobility of character, courage, and the 
very freedom for which we are now seeking.—For 
what purpose, then, did I receive these gifts>—To 
use them.—How long?—For as long as He who lent 
them to you wills.—But what if they are necessary 
to me ?>—Do not set your heart upon them, and they 
will not be necessary to you. Do not say to yourself 
that they are necessary, and they will not be. 

This is what you ought to practise from morning 
till evening. Begin with the inost trifling things, 
the ones most exposed to injury, like a pot, or a cup, 
and then advance to a tunic,a paltry dog, a mere 
horse, a bit of land; thence to yourself, your body, 
and its members, your children, wite, brothers, Look 
about on every side and cast these things away from 
you. Purify your judgements, for fear lest something 
of what is not your own may be fastened to them, or 
grown together with them, and may give vou pain 
when it is torn loose. And every day while you are 
training yourself, as you do in the gymnasium, do 
not say that you are “ pursuing philosophy ” (indeed 
an arrogant phrase!), but that you are a slave 
presenting your emancipator in court;! for this is 
the true freedom. ‘This is the way in which Diogenes 
was set free by Antisthenes,? and afterwards said 
that he could never be enslaved again by any 
man. How, in consequence, did he behave when 
he was captured!® How he treated the pirates! 

2 See LT. 24, 67. 

3 A very famous incident in the life of the philosopher. 
See especially, Musonius frag. 9(p. 49, ὃ Εἰ, Hense): Gellius, 
Il, 18, 9-10; Lucian, τέ. duct. 7; Diogenes Laertius, 6, 30 ; 
36; 74; Ps.-Crates, Hpist. 34; and above, IIT. 24, 66. ἥ 

253 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


εἶπέν τινα αὐτῶν ; καὶ οὐ λέγω τὸ ὄνομα. οὐ γὰρ 
τὴν φωνὴν φοβοῦμαι, ἀλλὰ τὸ πάθος, ap οὗ ἡ 
116 φωνὴ ἐκπέμπεται. TOS ἐπιτιμᾷ αὐτοῖς, ὅτι 
κακῶς ἔτρεφον τοὺς ἑαλωκότας" πῶς ἐπράθη" 
μή τι κύριον ἐξήτει ; ἀλλὰ δοῦλον. πῶς δὲ 
πραθεὶς ἀνεστρέφετο πρὸς τὸν δεσπότην" εὐθὺς 
διελέγετο πρὸς αὐτόν, OTL οὐχ οὕτως ἐστολίσθαι 
ὃεῖ αὐτόν, οὐχ οὕτως κεκάρθαι, περὶ τῶν υἱῶν, 
117 πῶς δεῖ αὐτοὺς διάγειν. καὶ τί θαυμαστόν ; εἰ 
γὰρ παιδοτρίβην ἐώνητο, ἐν τοῖς παλαιστρικοῖς 
ὑπηρέτῃ ἂν αὐτῷ ἐχρῆτο ἢ κυρίῳ ; ; εἰ δ᾽ ἰατρόν, 
ὡσαύτως, εἰ δ᾽ ἀρχιτέκτονα. καὶ οὕτως ἐφ᾽ 
ἑκάστης ὕλης τὸν ἔμπειρον τοῦ ἀπείρου κρατεῖν 
118 πᾶσα ἀνάγκη. ὅστις οὖν καθόλου τὴν meph βίον 
ἐπιστήμην κέκτηται, τί ἄλλο ἢ τοῦτον εἶναι δεῖ 
τὸν δεσπότην ; τίς γάρ ἐστιν ἐν νηὶ κύριος "τὰς Ὁ 
κυβερνήτης.--- Διὰ τί; ὅτι ὁ ἀπειθῶν αὐτῷ ζη- 
119 μιοῦται.---Αλλὰ δεῖραί με δύναται.---Μή τι οὖν 
ἀξημίως :--Οὕτως μὲν κἀγὼ ἔκρινον.---- Αλλ᾽ ὅτι 
οὐκ ἀζημίως, διὰ τοῦτο οὐκ ἔξεστιν" οὐδενὶ δ᾽ 
190 ἀζήμιόν ἐστι τὸ ποιεῖν τὰ ἄδικα .---Καὶ τίς ” 
ζημία τῷ δήσαντι τὸν αὑτοῦ δοῦλον, ἢν δοκῇ ; ; 
-- Τὸ δῆσαι: τοῦτο ὃ καὶ σὺ ὁμολογήσεις, ἂν 
θέλῃς σῴξειν, ὃ ὅτι ἄνθρωπος οὐκ ἔστι "θηρίον, ἀλλ᾽ 
12] ἥμερον ζῷον. ἐπεὶ wor “ἄμπελος πράσσει κακῶς ; 
ὅταν παρὰ τὴν ξαυτῆς φύσιν πράσσῃ. πότ᾽ 


1 Matheson: ἣν δοκεῖς S. 





; The phrase is from Plato, SepAistes, 222 B. See also IV. 
5, 10, 


284 


BOOK IV. 1. rrs—raz 


He called none of them master, did he? And I am 
not referring to the name! it is not the word that I 
fear, but the emotion, which produces the word. 
Fiow he censures them because they gave bad food 
to their captives! How he behaved when he was 
sold! Did he look for a master? No, but for a 
slave. And how he behaved toward his master after 
he had been sold! He began immediately to argue 
with him, telling him that he ought not to dress 
that way, or have his hair cut that way, and about 
his sons, how they ought to live. And what is there 
strange about that? Why, if he had bought a 
gymnastic trainer, would he have employed him as a 
servant, or as a master, in the exercises of the 
palaestra? And if he had bought a physician, or a 
master-builder, the same would have been true. 
And thus in every subject-matter, it is quite un- 
avoidable that the man of skill should be superior to 
the man without skill. In general, therefore, whio- 
ever possesses the scieuce of how to live, how can 
he help but be the master? For who is master in a 
ship?—-The helmsman.—Why? Because the man 
who disobeys him is punished.—But my master is 
able to give me a sound Hogging.—He cannot do so 
with impunity, can he ?—So 1 thought.—But because 
he cannot do so with impunity, therefore he has no 
authority to do it; no man can do wrong with im- 
punity.—And what is the punishment that befalls 
the man who has put his own slave in chains, when 
he felt like it?—The putting of him in chains; this 
is something which you will admit yourself, if you 
wish to maintain the proposition that man is not a 
wild beast but a tame animal.t For when is a vine 
faring badly? When it is acting contrary to its own 


285 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF -EPICTETUS 


122 ἀλεκτρυών; ὡσαύτως. οὐκοῦν καὶ ἄνθρωπος. 
τίς οὖν αὐτοῦ ἡ φύσις ; δάκνειν καὶ λακτίξειν καὶ 
εἰς φυλακὴν βάλλειν καὶ ἀποκεφαλίξειν ; οὔ' 
ἀλλ᾽ εὖ ποιεῖν, συνεργεῖν, ἐπεύχεσθαι. τότ᾽ οὖν 
κακῶς πράσσει, ἄν τε θέλῃς ἄν τε μή, ὅταν 
ἀγνωμογνῇ. 

13 ἝὭστε Σωκράτης οὐκ ἔπραξε κακῶς ;---Οὔ, 
ἀλλ’ οἱ δικασταὶ καὶ οἱ κατήγοροι.--- Οὐδ᾽ ἐν 
Ῥώμῃ ᾿Βλουΐδιος ; ---Οὔ, ἀλλ᾿ ὁ ἀποκτείνας 

124 αὐτόν.---Πῶς λέγεις ;--ἰῶς καὶ σὺ ἀλεκτρυόνα 
οὐ λέγεις κακῶς πρᾶξαι τὸν νικήσαντα καὶ 
κατακοπέντα, ἀλλὰ τὸν ἀπλῆγα ἡττηθέντα" 
οὐδὲ κύνα εὐδαιμονίξεις τὸν μήτε διώκοντα μήτε 

ἴω 3 > oF id a“ "ἢ ω > 7 
πονοῦντα, ἀλλ᾽ ὅταν ἱδρῶντα ἴδῃς, ὅταν ὀδυνώ- 

125 μενον, ὅταν ῥηγνύμενον ὑπὸ τοῦ δρόμου. τί 
παραδοξολογοῦμεν, εἰ λέγομεν παντὸς κακὸν 
εἶναι τὸ παρὰ τὴν ἐκείνου φύσιν; ; τοῦτο παρά- 
δοξόν ἐστιν; σὺ γὰρ αὐτὸ ἐπὶ πάντων τῶν 
ἄλλων οὐ λέγεις ; διὰ τί ἐπὶ μόνον οὖν τοῦ 

198 ἀνθρώπου ἄλλως φέρῃ ; ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι λέγομεν 

ἥμερον εἶναι τοῦ ἀνθρώπου τὴν φύσιν καὶ 
φιλάλληλον καὶ πιστήν, τοῦτο “παράδοξον οὐκ 

127 ἔστιν "Οὐδὲ τοῦτο. --Ηῶς. οὗν ἔτι οὐ δερόμενος 
βλάπτεται ἢ ἢ δεσμευόμενος ἢ ἢ ἀποκεφαλιξζόμενος ; ; 
οὐχὶ οὕτως μέν" εἰ γενναίως πάσχει, καὶ 
προσκερδαίνων καὶ προσωφελούμενος ἀπέρχεται, 
ἐκεῖνος δὲ ὁ 3 βλαπτόμενός ἐ ἐστιν ὁ τὰ οἰκτρότατα 
πάσχων καὶ αἴσχιστα, ὁ ἀντὶ ἀνθρώπου λύκος 
γινόμενος ἢ ἔχις ἢ σφήξ; 

2 εἰ added by Schenk! (after Upton). 3 ὁ added by Blass, 





1 A prominent Stoic senator at Rome. See 1, 2, 10 Κ᾽, 


286 


BOOK IV. 1 121-127 


nature. When is a cock faring badly? Under the 
same conditions. So also man. What, then, is his 
nature? To bite, and kick, and throw into prison, 
and behead? No, but to do good, to work together, 
and to pray for the success of others, Therefore, he 
is faring badly, whether you will or no, when he acts 
unfeelingly. 

You imply, then, that Socrates did not fare badly ? 
—He did not; it was his judges and accusers who 
fared badly.—Nor Helvidius? at Rome ?—-No, but the 
man who put him to death How so?—Just as vou 
too do not say that the cock which has won a victory, 
even though he be severely cut up, has fared badly, 
but rather the one who has been beaten without 
suffering a blow, Nor do you call a dog happy 
when he is neither in pursuit nor toiling hard, but 
when you see him sweating, suffering, bursting from 
the chase. What is there paradoxical in the state- 
ment, if we say that everything's evil is what is 
contrary to its own nature? Is that paradoxical > 
Do you not say it yourself in the case of everything 
else? Why, then, do you take a different course in 
the case of man alone? But our statement that the 
nature of man is gentle, and affectionate, and faithful, 
is this not paradoxical >—No, that is not paradoxical, 
either.—How, then, does it come about that he 
suffers no harm, even though he is soundly flogged, 
or imprisoned, or beheaded? Is it not thus—if he 
bears it all in a noble spirit, and comes off with in- 
creased profit and advantage, while the other man is 
the one who suffers harm, the man who is subjected 
to the most pitiful and disgraceful experience, who 
becomes a wolf, or a snake, or a wasp, instead of a 
human being? 

287 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


a \ 
128 “Ave οὗν ἐπέλθωμεν τὰ ὡμολογημένα. ὁ 
ἀκώλυτος ἄνθ ἐλεύθ 5 πρό 
ς ἄνθρωπος ἐλεύθερος, ᾧ πρόχειρα τὰ 
7 e ? ἃ > + Ὰ a Ἃ 
πράγματα ὡς βούλεται. ὃν δ᾽ ἔστιν ἢ κωλῦσαι ἢ 
> ᾽ A Σ ? a» >» of 4 n 
ἀναγκάσαι ἢ ἐμποδίσαι ἢ ἄκοντα εἴς τι ἐμβαλεῖν, 
199 δοῦλός ἐστιν. τίς & ἀκώλυτος ; ὁ μηδενὸς τῶν 
ἀλλοτρίων ἐφιέμενος. τίνα δ᾽ ἀλλότρια; ἃ οὐκ 
3᾽ 5. εὉ Cc om vy 3. ΨΚ MA ‘ sd 3} 
ἔστιν ἐφ ἡμῖν οὔτ ἔχειν οὔτε μὴ ἔχειν οὔτε 
180 ποιὰ ἔχειν ἢ πῶς ἔχοντα. οὐκοῦν τὸ σῶμα 
3 f \ ? ? ~ 3 a ιν a) 
ἀλλότριον, TA μέρη αὐτοῦ ἀλλότρια, ἡ KTH 
’ , K 5 Ὰ 7 ς sae 
ἀλλοτρία. ἂν οὖν τινὶ τούτων ὡς ἰδίῳ προσ- 
παθῇς, δώσεις δίκας ἃς ἄξιον τὸν τῶν ἀλλοτρίων 
181 ἐφιέμενον. αὕτη ἡ ὁδὸς ἐπ᾽ ἐλευθερίαν ἄγει, 
αὕτη μόνη ἀπαλλαγὴ δουλείας, τὸ δυνηθῆναί 
4 + ἴα 5 cf a ‘ 
mor εἰπεῖν ἐξ ὅλης ψυχῆς τὸ 
ἊὉ , 
ἄγου δέ μ᾽, ὦ Ζεῦ, καὶ σύ γ᾽ ἡ Ἰϊεπρωμένη, 
ὅποι ποθ᾽ ὑμῖν εἰμὶ διατετωγμένος. 
132 ᾿Αλλὰ τί λέγεις, φιλύσοφε; καλεῖ σε ὁ 
τύραννος ἐροῦντά TL ὧν οὐ πρέπει σοι. λέγεις 
/ 
ἢ οὐ λέγεις ; εἰπέ μοι.-- Ades σκέψωμαι..---- 
“ 4 ε 5.2 ™ a 4 ‘3? ’ 
Nov σκέψῃ ; ὅτε δ᾽ ἐν τῇ σχολῇ ἧς, Te ἐσκέπτου ; 
Ν 
οὐκ ἐμελέτας, τίνα ἐστὶ τὰ ἀγαθὰ καὶ τὰ κακὰ 
f 
133 καὶ τίνα οὐδέτερα ;—Eoxerropny.—Tiva οὖν 
a ‘ ‘ 
ἤρεσκεν ὑμῖν;---[ἃ δίκαια καὶ καλὰ ἀγαθὰ 
4 1 » ΝΠ \ , ΑΚ “ \ 
εἶναι, τὰ ἄδικα καὶ αἰσχρὰ Kkaxa.—M Te TO 
; a ’ 
Civ ἀγαθόν ;---Οὔ.--- Μὴ τε τὸ ἀποθανεῖν κακὸν; 





1 From the Hymn οἵ Cleanthes. See on 11. 23, 42. 


288 


BOOK IV. τι 128~133 


Come, now, and let us review the points on which we 
have reached agreement. The unhampered man, who 
finds things ready to hand as he wants them, is free. 
But the man who can be hampered, or subjected to 
compulsion, or hindered, or thrown into something 
against his will, is a slave. And who is unhampered ἢ 
The man who fixes his aim on nothing that is not 
his own. And what are the things which are not 
our own? All that are not under our control, either 
to have, or not to have, or to have of a certain 
quality, or under certain conditions. Therefore, the 
body is not our own, its members are not our own, 
property is not our own. If, then, you conceive a 
strong passion for some one of these things, as 
though it were your immediate possession, you will 
be punished as he should be who fixes his aim upon 
what is not his own. This is the road which leads 
to freedom, this is the only surcease of slavery, to 
be able to say at any time with your whole heart, 


Lead thou me on, O Zeus, and Destiny, 
To that goal long ago to me assigned.+ 


But what say you, philosopher? The tyrant calls 
upon you to say something that is unworthy of you. 
Do you say it, or not say it? Tell me.-—Let me 
think about it.—Think about it now? But what 
were you thinking about when you were attending 
lectures? Did you not study the questions, what 
things are good, and what bad, and what are 
neither good nor bad?-—I did——What conclusions 
were approved, then, by you and your fellows? 
—That thiags righteous and excellent were good, 
things unrighteous and disgraceful bad.—Life is not 
a good thing, is it?—No.—Nor death a bad thing? 

289 

VOL, 11. υ 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


᾿ / ‘ 
Ov.—M te φυλακή ;—O’.—Adyos δ᾽ ἀγεννὴς 
Ἁ "ἢ Ν f ? \ ᾽ 
καὶ ἄπιστος καὶ φίλου προδοσία καὶ κολακεία 
134 τυράννου τί ὑμῖν ἐφαίνετο ;---Κακά.---Γ οὖν; 
οὐχὶ σκέπτῃ, οὐχὶ δ᾽ ἔσκεψαι καὶ βεβούλευσαι. 
΄ \ / 3 , a Ν 
ποία γὰρ σκέψις, εἰ καθήκει μοι δυναμένῳ τὰ 
t = mn 
μέγιστα ἀγαθὰ ἐμαυτῷ περιποιῆσαι, τὰ μέγιστα 
‘ “- 
κακὰ μὴ περιποιῆσαι; καλὴ σκέψις καὶ ἀναγ- 
Kala, πολλῆς βουλῆς δεομένη. τί ἡμῖν ἐμπαί- 
of % 3 f 7 / f 
Ces, ἄνθρωπε; οὐδέποτε τοιαύτη σκέψις γίνεται. 
135 οὐδ᾽ εἰ ταῖς ἀληθείαις κακὰ μὲν ἐφαντάξου τὰ 
αἰσχρά, τὰ δ' ἄλλα οὐδέτερα, ἦλθες ἂν ἐπὶ 
f \ > , CNS 3 / δ Ἵ 3 , 
ταύτην τὴν ἐπίστασιν, οὐδ᾽ ἐγγύς" ἀλλ᾽ αὐτόθεν 
/ = ef bd ral , ῇΐ 
136 διακρίνειν εἶχες, ὥσπερ ὄψει, τῇ διανοίᾳ. πότε 
‘ , 2 Ν ?. é μι 3 ἈΝ 
γὰρ σκέπτῃ, εἰ τὰ μέλανα λευκῶ ἐστιν, εἰ τὰ 
7 Ἂ Ἁ a 5 A / 
βαρέα κοῦφα; οὐχὶ δὲ τοῖς ἐναργῶς φαινομένοις 
Ε] “ a > “ f f 
ἐπακολουθεῖς ; πῶς οὖν viv σκέπτεσθαι λέγεις, 
Tell τὰ οὐδέτερα τῶν κακῶν φευκτότερα; ἀλλ᾽ 
οὐκ ἔχεις τὰ δόγματα ταῦτα, ἀλλὰ φαίνεταί σοι 
"ἢ “ Ns $ \ \ 4 fd 
οὔτε ταῦτα οὐδέτερα, ἀλλὰ τὰ μέγιστα κακά, 
138 οὔτ᾽ ἐκεῖνα κακά,3 ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲν πρὸς ἡμᾶς. οὕτως 
4 3 3 os of ? a4 ἴον > 7, > 
yap ἐξ ἀρχῆς εἴθισας σεαυτόν" “ov εἰμι, ἐν 
σχολῇ. καὶ ἀκούουσέ μου τίνες; λέγω μετὰ τῶν 
φιλοσόφων, ἀλλ᾽ ἐξελήλυθα τῆς σχολῆς" ἄρον 


1 giadded by Wolf. 5 κακά added by Upton. 
290 


BOOK IV. τὸ 133-138 


— No. — Nor ee >—No,— But ignoble 
speech and faithless, and betrayal of a friend, and 
flattery of a tyrant, what did you and your fellows 
think of these?—We thought them evil—What 
then? You are not thinking about the question 
now, nor have vou thought about it and considered 
it hitherto. Why, what kind of inguiry is it, to 
raise the question whether it is fitting, when it is 
in my power to get for myself the greatest goods, 
not to get for myself the greatest “evils! Α fine 
and necessary question, forsooth, that requires a 
great deal of deliberation. Why are you making 
fun of us, man? Such an inquiry is never made. 
Besides, if vou had honestly imagined that dis- 
graceful things were bad, and all else indifferent, 
you would never have approached this inquiry, no, 
nor anything near it; but you would have been able 
to settle the question on the spot, by intuition, just 
as in a case involving sight. Why, when do you 
stop to “think about it,” if the question is, Are 
black things white, or, Are heavy things light? 
Do you not follow the clear evidence of your senses ? 
How comes it, then, that now you say you are 
thinking it over, whether things indifferent are 
more to be avoided than things bad? But you do 
not have these judgements; on the contrary, im- 
prisonment and death do not appear to you to be 
indifferent, but rather the greatest evils, and dis- 
honourable words and deeds are not bad in your 
sight, but rather things that do not concern us. 
For that is the habit which you developed from the 
start. “ Where am I?” you say. “In school. And 
who are listening to me? I am talking in the coim- 
pany of philosophers. But now I have left the 


201 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ἐκεῖνα τὰ τῶν σχολαστικῶν καὶ τῶν μωρῶν." 
οὕτως καταμαρτυρεῖται φίλος ὑπὸ φιλοσόφου, 
139 οὕτως παρασιτεῖ φιλόσοφος, οὕτως ἐπ᾽ ἀργυρίῳ 
ἐκμισθοῖ ἑαυτόν, οὕτως ἐν συγκλήτῳ τις οὐ 
λέγει τὰ φαινόμενα" ἔνδοθεν τὸ δόγμα αὐτοῦ 
140 βοᾷ, οὐ ψυχρὸν καὶ ταλαΐπωρον ὑπολη- 
ψείδιον ἐκ λόγων εἰκαίων ° ὡς ἐκ τριχὸς PTI 
μένον, ἀλλὰ ἰσχυρὸν καὶ χρηστικὸν καὶ ὑπὸ 
τοῦ διὰ τῶν ἔργων γεγυμνάσθαι μεμυημένον. 
14] παραφύλαξον σαυτόν, πῶς ἀκούεις----οὐ λέγω, 
ὅτι τὸ παιδίον σου ἀπέθανεν" πόθεν σοι; ἀλλ᾽ 
ὅτε σου τὸ ἔλαιον ἐξεγέθη, ὁ οἶνος ἐξεπόθη, 
145 ἵνα τις ἐπιστὰς διατεινομένῳ σοι τοῦτ᾽ αὐτὸ 
μόνον εἴπῃ “ φιλόσοφε, ἄλλα λέγεις ἐν τῇ 
σχολῇ" τί ἡμᾶς ἐξαπατᾷς ; τί σκώληξ ὧν 
148 λέγεις, ὅτε ἄνθρωπος εἶ;" ἤθελον ἐπιστῆναί 
τινι αὐτῶν συνουσιάξοντι, ἵνα ἴδω, n TAS TEVETAL 
καὶ ποίας φωνὰς ἀφίησιν, εἰ μέμνηται τοῦ 
ὀνόματος αὐτοῦ, τῶν λόγων ods ἀκούει ἢ λέγει 
ἢ ἀναγιγνώσκει. 
144 Καὶ τί ταῦτα πρὸς ἐλευθερίαν j—Ove ἄλλα 
μὲν οὖν ἢ ταῦτ᾽, ἄν τε θέλητε ὑμεῖς οἱ πλούσιοι 
148 ἄν τε μή. --Καὶ τί ὃ σοι “μαρτυρεῖ ταῦτα "τί 
γὰρ ἄλλο ἢ αὐτοὶ ὑμεῖς οἱ τὸν κύριον τὸν μέγαν 
ἔχοντες καὶ πρὸς τὸ ἐκείνου νεῦμα καὶ κίνημα 
ξῶντες, κἄν τινα ὑμῶν ἴδῃ μόνον συνεστραμμένῳ 
βλέμματι, ἀποψυχόμενοι, τὰς γραίας θεραπεύον- 


1 Schweighduser: σύ 8. 2 Reiske: εἰ καὶ ὦ» 8, 
3. Schenk!: τίς 8. 





1 Possibly an allusion to Egnatins Celer, who accused his 
friend, Barea Soranus, in the - reign of Nero, A.D, 66, when 


292 


BOOK IV. τὸ 138-145 


school; away with those sayings of pedants and 
fools!”’ That is how a friend is condemned on the 
testimony of a philosopher, that is how a philosopher 
turns parasite, that is how he hires himself out for 
money, that is how at a meeting of the senate a man 
does not say what he thinks, while within his breast 
his judgement shouts loudly, no cold and miserable 
remnant suspended from idle argumentations as by 
a hair, but a strong and serviceable judgement, and 
familiar with its business by having been trained in 
action. Watch vourself, and see how vou take the 
word—I do not say the word that your child is 
dead; how could you possibly bear that ?—but the 
word that your oil is spilled, or vour wine drunk up. 
Well might someone stand over you, when you are 
in this excited condition, and say simply,“ Philosupher, 
vou talk differently in the school; why are you de- 
ceiving us? Why, when you are a worm, do you 
claim that you area man?” [ should like to stand 
over one of these philosophers when he is engaged 
in sexual intercourse, so as to see how he exerts 
himself, what manner of words he utters, whether 
he remembers his own name, or the arguments that 
he hears, or repeats, or reads ! 

And what has all this to do with freedom ?—Nay, 
nothing but all this has to do with freedom, whether 
you rich people so wish or not.—And w hat is your 
witness to this ?—Why, what else but you yourselves 
who have this mighty master,’ and live at his nod 
and gesture, who faint away if he but look at one 
of you with a scowl on his face, paying court to the 


Epictetus was a Loy. See Tacitus, Annals, 16, 32, and 
Juvenal, ἃ, 116f. 
ee ‘the Emperor. 


293 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 
Tes καὶ τοὺς γέροντας καὶ λέγοντες ὅτι “ οὐ 
146 δύναμαι τοῦτο ποιῆσαι' οὐκ ἔξεστί wow; διὰ 
τί οὐκ ἔξεστίν σοι; οὐκ ἄρτι ἐμάχου μοι λέγων 
ἐλεύθερος εἶναι ; “ἀχλὰ ᾿Απρυλλά με κεκώλυ- 
κεν. eye οὖν τὰς ἀληθείας, δοῦλε, καὶ μὴ 
δραπέτευε σου τοὺς κυρίους μηδ᾽ ἀπαρνοῦ μηδὲ 
τόλμα καρπιστὴν διδόναι τοσούτους -ἔχων τῆς 
147 δουλείας ἐλέγχους. καΐτοι τὸν μὲν ὑπ᾽ ἔρωτος 
ἀνωγκαζόμενόν τί ποιεῖν παρὰ τὸ φαινόμενον 
καὶ ἅμα μὲν ὁρῶντα τὸ ἄμεινον, ἅμα δ᾽ οὐκ 
ἐξευτονοῦντα ἀκολουθῆσαι αὐτῷ ἔτι μᾶλλον ἄν 
τις συγγνώμης ἄξιον ὑπολάβοι, ἄθ᾽ ὑπό τίνος 
βιαίου καὶ τρόπον τινὰ θείου ᾿κατεσχημένον. 
148 σοῦ δὲ τίς ἀνάσχοιτο τῶν γραῶν ἐρῶντος καὶ 
τῶν γερόντων καὶ ἐκείνας ἀπομύσσοντος καὶ 
ἀποπλύνοντος καὶ δωροδοκοῦντος καὶ ἅμα μὲν 
νοσούσας θεραπεύοντος ὡς δούλου, ἅμα δ᾽ ἀπο- 
θανεῖν εὐχομένου καὶ τοὺς ἰατροὺς διακρίνοντος, 
εἰ ἤδη θανασίμως ἔχουσιν ; ἢ πάλιν ὅταν. ὑπὲρ 
τῶν μεγάλων. τούτων καὶ σεμνῶν ἀρχῶν καὶ 
τιμῶν τὰς χεῖρας τῶν ἀλλοτρίων δούλων KATO 
149 φιλῇς, ἵνα μηδ᾽ ἐλευθέρων δοῦλος ἧς; εἶτά μοι 
σεμνὸς περιπατεῖς στρατηγῶν, ὑπατεύων. οὐκ 
οἶδα, πῶς ἐστρατ τήγησας, πόθεν τὴν ὑπατείαν 
150 ἔλαβες, τίς σοι αὐτὴν ἔδωκεν ; ἐγὼ μὲν οὐδὲ 
ζῆν ἤθελον, εἰ διὰ Φηλικίωνα ἔδει ζῆσαι τῆς 
ὀφρύος αὑτοῦ καὶ τοῦ δουλικοῦ φρυάγματος 
ἀνασχόμενου" οἶδα γάρ, τί ἐστὶ δοῦλος εὐτυχῶν 
ὡς δοκεῖ καὶ τετυφωμένος. 





1 Obviously some rich old woman. 
2 See § 113 and note. 
3 4 freedman of Nero’s, See 1, 17, 19, 20 and 21. 


294 


BOOK IV. 1. 145-150 


old women and the old men, and saying, “I cannot 
do this; I am not allowed”? Why are you not 
allowed? Were you not just now arguing with me 
and claiming that you were free? But Aprulla? 
has prevented me.” Tell the truth, then, slave, and 
do not run away from your masters, nor make denial, 
nor dare to present your emancipator,? when you 
have so many proofs to convict you of slavery. And, 
indeed, when a man out of passionate love is under 
the compulsion to do something contrary to his 
opinion, all the time seeing the better thing but 
lacking the strength to follow, one might be all the 
more inclined to regard him as deserving pity, 
because he is in the grip of something violent, and, 
in a manner of speaking, divine. Bat who could 
endure you with your passion for old women and 
old men, wiping the noses and washing the faces of 
old women, corrupting them with presents, and all 
the while you are nursing them, like a slave,in some 
illness, praying for them to die, and asking the 
physicians if they are finally on their deathbed? 
Or again, when for the sake of these mighty and 
dignified offices and honours you kiss the hands of 
other men’s slaves, so as to be the slave of men who 
are not even free? And then, God save the mark, 
you wallx around in your dignity as a praetor or a 
consul! Don’t I know how you came to be praetor, 
how you got your consulship, who gave it to you? 
As for me, I should not care even to live, if I had 
to owe my life to Felicio putting up with his 
insolence and slavish arrogance; for 1 know what a 
slave is, who is prosperous as the world goes, and 
puffed up with pride.4 

4 A pretty clear reference to his experiences with his 
master, Epaphroditus, who had been a slave of Nero. 


295 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


4 ic} / ? 
151 Σὺ οὖν, φησίν, ἐλεύθερος εἰ ;—OéAw νὴ τοὺς 
\ Σ 
θεοὺς καὶ εὔχομαι, ἀλλ’ οὔπω δύναμαι ἀντι- 
/ va) “κ᾿ 
βλέψαι τοῖς κυρίοις, ἔτι τιμῶ τὸ σωμάτιον, 
¢ έ »»ἭἬ ἴω 
ὁλόκληρον αὐτὸ ἔχειν ἀντὶ πολλοῦ ποιοῦμαι 
τ 
152 καίτοι μηδ᾽ ὁλόκληρον ἔχων. ἀλλὰ δύναμαί σοι 
δεῖξαι ἐλεύθερον, ἵνα μηκέτι ζητῇς τὸ παρά- 
δείγμα. Διογένης ἣν ἐλεύθερος. πόθεν τοῦτο; 
3 ef > 3 / ων 3 \ y 3 3 χὰ 
ovy ὃτι ἐξ ἐλευθέρων ἣν, οὐ γὰρ ἣν, GAN ὅτι 
αὐτὸς ἣν, ὅτι ἀποβεβλήκει πάσας τὰς τῆς 
t Ὁ 
δουλείας λαβὰς} οὐδ᾽ ἦν, ὅπως τις προσέλθῃ 
‘ 3 \ 3) ef ¢ Ἀ ‘ 
πρὸς αὐτὸν οὐδ᾽ ὅθεν λάβηται πρὸς TO KaTa- 
168 δουλώσασθαι. πάντα εὔλυτα εἶχεν, πάντα 
μόνον προσηρτημένα. εἰ τῆς κτήσεως ἐπελάβου, 
αὐτὴν ἀφῆκεν ἄν oot μᾶλλον ἢ ἠκολούθησεν 
δι αὐτήν" εἰ τοῦ σκέλους, τὸ σκέλος" εἰ ὅλου 
τοῦ σωματίου, ὅλον τὸ σωμάτιον" οἰκείους, 
φίλους, πατρίδα ὡσαύτως. ἤδει, πόθεν ἔχει καὶ 
\ 3 
lid παρὰ τίνος καὶ ἐπὶ τίσιν λαβών. τοὺς μέν ¥ 
ἀληθινοὺς προγόνους, τοὺς θεούς, καὶ τὴν τῷ 
ὄντε πατρίδα οὐδεπώποτ᾽ ἂν ἐγκατέλιπεν, οὐδὲ 
f # “ [4 3 » 
παρεχώρησεν ἄλλῳ μᾶλλον πείθεσθαι αὐτοῖς 
f 
καὶ ὑπακούειν, οὐδ᾽ ὑπεραπέθανεν ἂν εὐκολώτερον 
“ [ὃ x” Ἵ ᾿ Moe 7 \ δό 2% 
155 τῆς πατρίδος ἄλλος. οὐ γὰρ ἐζήτει ποτὲ δόξαι 
Te ποιεῖν ὑπὲρ τῶν ὅλων, ἀλλ᾽ ἐμέμνητο, ὅτι 
,»"" bd a 
πᾶν τὸ γενόμενον ἐκεῖθέν ἐστιν καὶ ὑπὲρ 
a “ n~ na 
ἐκείνης πράττεταε καὶ ὑπὸ τοῦ διοικοῦντος 


1 8b: βλαβάς 5. 2 Meibom: δόξει δ, 
3. Schweighiuser: ὑπ᾽ § 





1 Alluding to his lameness, as the Scholiast observes. See 
Vol. J, Introd., pp. ix—x. 


2 That is, not grown to him so as to cause pain when torn 
loose, as in ὃ 112, 


296 


BOOK IV. 1. 151-155 


Are you, then, free, says someone ?—By the gods 
I wish to be, and pray to be, but I am not yet able 
to look into the face of my masters, I still honour 
my paltry body, I take great pains to keep it sound, 
although it is not sound in any case.1 But I can 
show you a free man, so that you will never again 
have to look for an example. Diogenes was free. 
How did that come? It was not because he was 
born of free parents, for he was not, but because he 
himself was free, because he had cast off all the 
handles of slavery, and there was no way in which 
a person could get close and lay hold of him to 
enslave him. Everything he had was easily loosed, 
everything was merely tied on.? If you had laid 
hold of his property, he would have let it go rather 
than followed you for its sake; if you had laid hold 
of his leg, he would have let his leg go; if of his 
whole paltry body, his whole paltry body; and so 
also his kindred, friends, and country. He knew 
the source from which he had received them, and 
from whom, and upon what conditions. His true 
ancestors, indeed, the gods, and his real Country? 
he would never have abandoned, nor would he have 
suffered another to yield them more obedience and 
submission, nor could any other man have died more 
cheerfully for his Country. For it was never his 
wont to seek to appear to do anything in behalf of 
the Universe,* but he bore in mind that everything 
which has come into being has its source there, and 
is done on behalf of that Country, and is entrusted 


3 Clearly, from what follows, the Universe. 

ὁ Compare Marcus Aurelius, 7, 73: ‘tWhen thou hast 
done well to another ... why go on like the foolish to 
look for . . . the credit of having done well?” (Haines). 


297 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


αὐτὴν παρεγγυᾶται. τοιγαροῦν ὅρα, τί λέγει 
1δο αὐτὸς καὶ ypdder “διὰ τοῦτό σοι," φησίν, 
7 a [οὶ »- 
“ἔξεστιν, ὦ Διόγενες, καὶ τῷ Περσῶν βασιλεῖ 
καὶ ᾿Αρχιδάμῳ τῷ Λακεδαιμονίων ὡς βούλει 
~ > cy 
157 διαλέγεσθαι." ἄρά y ὅτι ἐξ ἐλευθέρων ἦν; 
πάντες γὰρ ᾿Αθηναῖοι καὶ πάντες Λακεδαιμόνιοι 
καὶ Κορίνθιοι διὰ τὸ ἐκ δούλων εἶναι οὐκ 
ΤΑ ᾿ » ¢ ? 7 f 
ἠδύναντο αὐτοῖς ὡς ἠβούλοντο διαλέγεσθαι, 
6K ee 28 ὃ / \ 24 ΄ 3 ὃ \ / * 
158 ἃ ἐδεοοίκεσαν καὶ eVEpaTrEevoY; OLA TL OUD, 
- Ν 
φησίν, ἔξεστιν; “ὅτι τὸ σωμάτιον ἐμὸν οὐχ 
ἡγοῦμαι, ὅτε οὐδενὸς δέομαι, ὅτε ὁ νόμος μοι 
7 2 Ν \ 3 δέ 33 -Ὁ cy ‘ 
πάντα ἐστὶ καὶ ἄλλο οὐδέν" ταῦτα ἦν τὰ 
ἐλεύθερον ἐκεῖνον ἐάσαντα. 
ry , 
159 Καὶ ἵνα μὴ δόξῃς, ὅτι παράδενγμα δείκνυμι 
ἀνδρὸς ἀπεριστάτου μήτε γυναῖκα ἔχοντος μήτε 
y f ? a , * road ig > 
τέκνα μήτε πατρίδα ἢ φίλους ἢ συγγενεῖς, vd 
bal ᾽ \ ἴω > - / 
ὧν κάμπτεσθαι καὶ περισπᾶσθαι ἠδύνατο, λάβε 
Σωκράτη καὶ θέασαι γνναῖκα καὶ παιδία ἔχοντα, 
ἀλλὰ ὡς ἀλλότρια, πατρίδα, ἐφ᾽ ὅσον ἔδει καὶ 
ὡς ἔδει, φίλους, συγγενεῖς, πάντα ταῦτα ὑποτέ- 
ταχότα τῷ νόμῳ καὶ τῇ πρὸς ἐκεῖνον εὐπειθείᾳ. 
60 διὰ τοῦτο, στρατεύεσθαι μὲν ὁπότ᾽ ἔδει, πρῶτος 
3 ῇ 3 om > éf > f 7 Ν f 
ἀπήει κἀκεῖ ἐκινδύνευεν ἀφειδέστατα' ἐπὶ Λέοντα 
δ᾽ ὑπὸ τῶν τυράννων πεμφθείς, ὅτε αἰσχρὸν 
ζ ΤᾺ sO) 1 f 3 ‘of * ~ 
ἡγεῖτο, οὐδ᾽ ἐπεβουλεύσατο εἰδώς, ὅτι ἀποθανεῖν 
/ * of , a , 2 “ δ 
161 δεήσει, ἂν οὕτως τύχη. καὶ τί αὐτῷ διέφερεν ; 
1 Salmasius: ἀλλοτρίαν S, 





1 A leader of the opposition, whom the Thirty Tyrants 
wished to murder. See Plato, Apology, 832 Ο, 


298 


BOOK IV. 1. 155-161 


to us by Him who governs it. Therefore, see what 
he himself says and writes: “ For this reason,” he 
says, “you are permitted, O Diogenes, to converse 
as you please with the king of the Persians and with 
Archidamus, the king of the Lacedaemonians.” Was 
it, indeed, because he was born of free parents? 
No doubt it was because they were all the children 
of slaves that the Athenians, and Lacedaemonians, 
and Corinthians were unable to converse with these 
monarchs as they pleased, but were afraid of them 
and paid court to them! Why, then, someone asks, 
are you permitted? “ Because I do not regard my 
paltry body as my own; because I need nothing; 
because the law, and nothing else, is everything to 
me.” This it was which allowed him to be a free 
man, 

And that you may not think I am showing you 
an example of a man who was solitary, and had 
neither wife, nor children, nor country, nor friends, 
nor kinsmen, who might have bent him and diverted 
him from his purpose, take Socrates and observe a 
man who had a wife and little children, but re- 
garded them as not his own, who had a couatry, as 
far as it was his duty, and in the way in which it 
was his duty, and friends, and kinsmen, one and all 
subject to the law and to obedience to the law. 
That is why, when it was his duty to serve as a 
soldier, he was the first to leave home, and ran the 
risks of battle most ungrudgingly; and when he 
was sent by the Tyrants to fetch Leon,! because he 
regarded it as disgraceful, he never deliberated 
about the matter at all, although he knew that he 
would have to die, if it so chanced. And what 
difference did it make to him? For there was 


299 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


f ΄ t 
ἄλλο yap Te σῴξειν ἤθελεν: ov τὸ σαρκίδιον, 
Ἀ νΝ ~ 
ἀλλὰ TOV πιστόν, τὸν αἰδήμονα. ταῦτα ἀπαρεγ- 
id 3 “ sf) ω Y 3 “A 
162 χείρητα, ἀνυπότακτα. εἶθ᾽ ὅτ᾽ ἀπολογεῖσθαι 
a »΄ὦα / 
ἔδει ὑπὲρ τοῦ ζῆν, μή TL ὡς τέκνα ἔχων ἀναστρέ- 
a f 
PETAL, μή τι ὡς γυναῖκα; GAN ὡς μόνος. τί δ᾽, 
ὅτε πιεῖν ἔδεε τὸ φάρμακον, πῶς ἀναστρέφεται; 
f “ \ a ᾽ὔ » ΜᾺ 
163 δυνάμενος διασωθῆναι καὶ τοῦ Κρίτωνος αὐτῷ 
λέγοντος ὅτι “ἔξελθε διὰ τὰ παιδία" τί λέγει; 
Ψ e “ 3 i i 2 XN Ν ” 
ἕρμαιον ἡγεῖτο αὐτό ; πόθεν; ἀλλὰ TO εὔσχημον 
“ > b] xo ¢ Cal 7 Oo 3 ᾽ὔ 2 
σκοπεῖ, τἄλλα δ᾽ οὐδ᾽ ὁρᾷ, οὐδ᾽ ἐπιλογίζεται. οὐ 
Ν af , ἴω Ν f 2 3 
yap ἤθελεν, φησίν, σῶσαι TO σωμάτιον, ἀλλ 
ἐκεῖνο, ὃ τῷ δικαίῳ μὲν αὔξεται καὶ σῴξεται, τῷ 
164 δ᾽ ἀδίκῳ μειοῦται καὶ ἀπόλλυται. Σωκράτης δ᾽ 
" n ? , ς . ἋΣ , 2, 7 
αἰσχρῶς οὐ σῴζεται, ὁ μὴ ἐπεψηφίσας ᾿Αθηναίων 
κελευόντων, ὁ τοὺς τυράννους ὑπεριδών, ὁ τοιαῦτα 
᾿ "Ὁ , 
περὶ ἀρετῆς καὶ καλοκἀγαθίας διαλεγόμενος" 
“A ? 3} ἴω 3 “» ᾽ > ? f 
165 τοῦτον οὐκ ἔστι σῶσαι αἰσχρῶς, ἀλλ᾽ ἀποθνήσκων 
\ e ‘ 
σῴζεται, οὐ φεύγων. καὶ γὰρ ὁ ἀγαθὸς ὑποκριτὴς 
va tad / “ δ 
παυόμενος ὅτε δεῖ σῴξετανι μᾶλλον ἢ ὑποκρινό- 
166 μενος παρὰ καιρόν. τί οὖν ποιήσει τὰ παιδία ; 
ec? ‘ ἢ ͵ ,. ἢ 9 
εἰ μὲν εἰς Θετταλίαν amnew, ἐπεμελήθητε 
ΣΦ δὰ 1 ὁ fA 3 ὃ ; 3 \ 
auTay: εἰς “Διδου δέ μου ἀποδημήσαντος οὐδεὶς 
ἔσται ὁ ἐπιμελησόμενος ;” ὅρα, πῶς ὑποκορίξεται 
% ’ 4 4 » > x» κ \ \ 
167 καὶ σκώπτει tov θάνατον. εἰ ὃ ἐγὼ καὶ OU 


ΠΣ 





1 A free paraphrase of Plato, Crito, 41 D. 

2 Τὴ the illegal action of the assembly after the battle of 
Arginusae, See Xenophon, Memorabilia, I. 1, 18; Plato, 
Apology, 32 B. 

* A singular parallel to ‘“‘He that loseth his life for my 
sake shall find it” (Matt. x. 39), 

4 A paraphrase of Plate, Crito, 54.4. 


400 


BOOK IV. 1. 161-167 


something else that he wished to preserve; not his 
paltry flesh, but the man of honour, the man of 
reverence, that he was. These are things which 
are not to be entrusted to another, not to be made 
subject. Later on, when he had to speak in defence 
of his life, he did not behave as one who had 
children, or a wife, did he? Nay, but as one who 
was alone in the world. Yes, and when he had to 
drink the poison, how does he act? When he might 
have saved his life, and when Crito said to him, 
“Leave the prison for the sake of your children,’’ 
what is his reply? Did he think it a bit of good luck ? 
Impossible! No, he regards what is fitting, and as 
for other considerations, he does not so much as 
look at or cénsider them. For he did not care, he 
says, to save his paltry body, but only that which 
is increased and preserved by right conduct, and is 
diminished and destroyed by evil conduct. Socrates 
does not save his life with dishonour, the man who 
refused to put the vote when the Athenians de- 
manded it of him,? the man who despised the 
Tyrants, the man who held such noble discourse 
about virtue and moral excellence; this man it is 
impossible to save by dishonour, but he is saved by 
death, and not by flight. Yes, and the good actor, 
too, is saved when he stops at the right time, rather 
than the one who acts out of season. What, then, 
will the children do? “If I had gone to Thessaly, 
you would have looked after them; but when I 
have gone down to the house of Hades, will there 
be no one to look after them?”* See how he 
calls death soft names,5 and jests at it. But if it 
5 «*¥ have been half in love with easeful Death, 
Call'd him soft names in many ἃ muséd rime.” 
Keats, Ode to a Nightingale. 
301 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ἥμεν, εὐθὺς av καταφιλοσοφήσαντες ὅτι “ τοὺς 
ἀδικοῦντας δεῖ τοῖς ἴσοις ἀμύνεσθαι" καὶ προσ- 
θέντες ὅτι “ὄφελος ἔσομαι πολλοῖς ἀνθρώποις 
θ ; 3 θ x δ᾽ 70 #39 > ¢ 31 £5 ὃ \ 
σωθείς, ἀποθανὼν οὐδενί," εἰ ap? ἔδει διὰ 
τ , 2 , 2 ἢ ” \ a x 
108 τρώγλης ἐκδύντας, ἐξήλθομεν ἄν. καὶ πῶς av 
ὠφελήσαμέν τινα ; ποῦ γὰρ ἄν, εἰ ἔτι ἔμενον ἐκεῖ ; 7 
x 23 sf > 3 7 by N ‘ ἴω 
ἢ εἰ" ὄντες Huey ὠφέλιμοι, οὐχὶ πολὺ μᾶλλον 
ἀποθανόντες ἂν ὅτε ἔδει καὶ ὡς ἔδει ὠφελήσαμεν 
169 ἀνθρώπους; καὶ νῦν Σωκράτους ἀποθανόντος 
% Ν w Ἂ Ἀ fad 3 A ? > 3 , 
οὐθὲν ἧττον ἢ Kal πλεῖον ὠφέλιμός ἐστιν ἀνθρώ- 
ποις ἡ μνήμη ὧν ἔτει av ἔπραξεν ἢ εἶπεν. 
“ ἊΝ f 4 
170 Ταῦτα μελέτα, ταῦτα τὰ δόγματα, τούτους 
τοὺς λόγους, εἰς ταῦτα ἀφόρα τὰ παραδείγματα, 
? - 3 f » > 9 θ wi 3 > gf 
εἰ θέλεις ἐλεύθερος εἶναι, εἰ ἐπιθυμεῖς κατ᾽ ἀξίαν 
171 τοῦ πράγματος. καὶ τί θαυμαστόν, εἰ τηλικοῦτο 
πρᾶγμα τοσούτων καὶ τηλικούτων ὠνῇ; ὑπὲρ 
“ x / ¢ ΄ 
τῆς νομιζομένης ἐλευθερίας ταύτης οἱ μὲν ἀπάγ- 
i 
χονται, οἱ δὲ κατακρημνίζουσιν αὑτούς, ἔστι 
cd Ν Υ ef 3 ᾿ ¢ ‘ nm > 
l720Te καὶ πόλεις OAQL ἀπώλοντο ὑπὲρ τῆς a- 
ληθινῆς καὶ ἀνεπιβουλεύτου καὶ ἀσφαλοῦς 
a “ “ ~ 9 
ἐλευθερίας ἀπαιτοῦντι τῷ θεῷ ἃ δέδωκεν οὐκ 
ἡ 
ἐκστήσῃ ; οὐχ, ὡς Πλάτων λέγει, μελετήσεις 
οὐχὶ ἀποθνήσκειν μόνον, ἀχχὰ καὶ στρεβλοῦσθαι 
καὶ φεύγειν καὶ δέρεσθαι καὶ πάνθ' ἁπλῶς 
? ? 3 f Δ’ ’ “a 3 
173 ἀποδιδόναι τἀλλότρια ; ἔσει τοίνυν δοῦλος ἐν 
la > ‘ 
δούλοις, κἂν μυριάκις ὑπατεύσῃς, κἂν εἰς TO 
1 Schenk]: γάρ S. 2 Capps: ἂν ἔτι ἔμενον ἐκεῖνοι 8. 


3 Salmasius: **ol &. 
* Schenkl (apparently) : οὐκ Ἐστήσηι S. 





1 This is probably the best emendation that has been 
suggested for a corrupt passage, but I do not feel certain 
that it is what Epictetus actually said. 


302 


BOOK IV. τ΄ 167-173 


had been you or I, we should forthwith have fallen 
into the philosophic vein, and said, “One ought to 
repay evil-doers in kind,” and added, “If I save my 
life I shall be useful to many persons, but if I die 
I shall be useful to no one”; yes, indeed, and if 
we had had to crawl out through a hole to escape, 
we should have done so! And how should we 
have been of use to anybody? For where could 
we have been of use, if the others still remained 
in Athens?! Or if we were useful to men by 
living, should we not have done much more good to 
men by dying when we ought, and as we ought? 
And now that Socrates is dead the memory of him 
is no less useful to men, nay, is perhaps even 
more useful, than what he did or said while he still 
lived. 

Study these things, these judgements, these 
arguments, look at these examples, if you wish to 
be free, if you desire the thing itself in proportion 
to its value. And what wonder is there if you buy 
something so great at the price of things so many 
and so great? For the sake of what is called 
freedom some men hang themselves, others leap 
over precipices, sometimes whole cities perish; for 
true freedom, which cannot be plotted against and 
is secure, will you not yield up to God, at His 
demand, what He has given? Will you not, as 
Plato? says, study not merely to die, but even to be 
tortured on the rack, and to go into exile, and to 
be severely flogged, and, in a word, to give up 
everything that is not yourown? If not, you will 
be a slave among slaves; even if you are consul 
ten thousand times, even if you go up to the 


2 Phaedo, θά A, and Hepudblic, II. 361 ἘΠ, 
393 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


παλάτιον ἀναβῇς, οὐδὲν ἧττον' καὶ αἰσθήσει, 
ὅτι παράδοξα μὲν ἴσως φασὶν οἱ φιλόσοφοι, 
καθάπερ καὶ ὁ Κλεάνθης ἔλεγεν, οὐ μὴν παρά- 
174 Kova. ἔργῳ γὰρ εἴσῃ, ὅτι ἀληθῆ ἐστὶ καὶ τού- 
των τῶν θαυμαζομένων καὶ σπουδαζομένων 
ὄφελος. οὐδέν ἐστι τοῖς ,τυχοῦσι' τοῖς δὲ μηδέπω 
τετευχόσι φαντασία γίνεται, ὅτι παραγενομένων 
αὐτῶν ἅπαντα παρέσται αὐτοῖς τὰ ἀγαθά: εἶθ᾽ 
ὅταν παραγένηται, τὸ καῦμα ἶσον, 6 ῥιπτασμὸς 
ὁ αὐτός, ἡ ἄση, ἡ} τῶν οὐ παρόντων ἐπιθυμία. 
175 οὐ γὰρ ἐκπληρώσει τῶν ἐπιθυμουμένων ἐλευθερία 
παρασκευάζεται, ἀλλὰ ἀνασκευῇ τῆς ἐπιθυμίας. 
176 καὶ ἵν εἰδῇς, ¢ ὅτι ἀληθῆ ταῦτά ἐστιν», ὡς ἐκείνων 
ἕνεκα πεπόνηκας, οὕτως καὶ ἐπὶ ταῦτα μετάθες 
τὸν πόνον' ἀγρύπνησον ἕνεκα τοῦ δόγμα περι- 
177 ποιήσασθαι ἐλευθεροποιόν, θεράπευσον ἀντὶ 
γέροντος πλουσίου φιλόσοφον, περὶ θύρας 
ὄφθητι τὰς τούτου" οὐκ ἀσχημονήσεις ὀφθείς, 
οὐκ ἀπελεύσῃ κενὸς οὐδ᾽ ἀκερδής, ἂν ὡς δεῖ 
προσέλθῃς. εἰ δὲ μή, πείρασόν γ᾽ οὐκ ἔστιν 
αἰσχρὰ ἡ πεῖρα. 


β΄. ILepi συμπεριφορᾶς.3 
] Τούτῳ τῷ τόπῳ πρὸ πάντων σε δεῖ προσέχειν, 
“ ποτε ἄρα τῶν προτέρων συνήθων ἢ φίχων 


1 ἡ added by Wolf. 
* Bentley (and the index of chapters): συμφορᾶς S here. 





2 A somewhat similar remark ascribed to Zeno (Gnomod. 
Vat., ed. Sternbach, 295) has in the second clause “ contrary 
to law,” a much less pointed remark, and true only with 
important qualifications, 


301 


BOOK IV, 1. 193-11. 1 


Palace—a slave none the less; and you will perceive 
that, as Cleanthes! used to say, “ Possibly the 
philosophers say what is contrary to opinion, but 
assuredly not what is contrary to reason.” For you 
will learn by experience that what they say is true, 
and that none of these things which are admired 
and sought after are of any good to those who attain 
them; while those who have not yet attained them 
get an impression that, if once these things come 
to them, they will be possessed of all things good, 
and then, when they do come, the burning heat is 
just as bad, there is the same tossing about on the 
sea, the same sense of surfeit, the same desire for 
what they do not have. For freedom is not acquired 
by satisfying yourself with what you desire, but by 
destroying your desire. And that you may learn 
the truth of all this, as you have toiled for those 
other things, so also transfer your toil to these; 
keep vigils for the sake of acquiring a judgement 
which will make you free, devote yourself to a 
philosopher instead of to a rich old man, be seen 
about fis doors; it will be no disgrace to be so 
seen, you will not retire thence empty and without 
profit, if you approach him in the right fashion. 
Anyway, try it at least; there is no disgrace in 
making the attempt. 


CHAPTER II 
Of social intercourse 


To this topic you ought to devote yourself before 
every other, how, namely, you may avoid ever being 
so intimately associated with some one of your 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


5 a ‘ 4 [χὰ 9 > 5) > 4 
ἀνακραθῆς τινὶ οὕτως, MTT εἰς TA αὐτὰ συγκατα- 


~ n \ 3 ad 
2 βῆναι αὐτῷ" εἰ δὲ μή, ἀπολεῖς σεαυτόν. ἂν δέ σ᾽ 


ὑποτρέχη ὅτι “ ἀδέξιος αὐτῷ φανοῦμαι καὶ ov: 
ρέχῃ ς αὐτά μαι καὶ οὐχ 
et td f t 3 f Cal 
ὁμοίως ἕξει ὡς πρότερον, μέμνησο, ὅτε προῖκα 
3 Ν a “ Ὁ at Ν ν ν > \ 
οὐδὲν γίνεται οὐδ᾽ ἔστι δυνατὸν μὴ Ta αὐτὰ 
΄ὩὉ a 3 4 - lal f id “~ =) 
TOLOULTa τὸν αὑτὸν εἰνᾶν TH ποτέ. ENOV οὖν 
f ¢ ra) b ? 
πότερον θέλεις, ὁμοίως φιλεῖσθαι ὑφ᾽ ὧν πρότερον 
ε La f a“ 3 
ὅμοιος ὧν τῷ πρότερον σεαυτῷ ἢ κρείσσων ὧν 
μὴ τυγχάνειν τῶν ἴσων. εἰ γὰρ τοῦτο κρεῖσσον, 
αὐτόθεν ἀπόνευσον ἐπὶ τοῦτο μηδέ ce περι- 
σπάτωσαν οἱ ἕτεροι διαλογισμοί: οὐδεὶς γὰρ 
ἐπαμφοτερίζων δύναται προκόψαι, ἀλλ᾽ εἰ τοῦτο 
πάντων προκέκρικας, εἰ πρὸς τούτῳ μόνῳ θέλεις 
“ 3 o ᾿ Ἂ "ἢ e a 
εἰναι, εἰ τοῦτο ἐκπονῆσαι, apes ἅπαντα ταλλα" 
3 Ν ἕ i € 4 \ 3 7 4 1 
εἰ δὲ μή, οὗτος ὁ ἐπαμφοτερισμὸς ἀμφότερόν ἱ σοι 
» , 
ποιήσει, οὔτε προκόψεις κατ᾽ ἀξίαν οὔτ᾽ ἐκείνων 
τεύξῃ, ὧν πρότερον ἐτύγχανες. πρότερον γὰρ 
3 »Ἥ 3 ῇ a 3 ‘ 2 ye? e ‘ 
εἰλικριυῶς ἐφιέμενος τῶν οὐδενὸς ἀξίων ἡδὺς 
~ [ων 4 [ω 
ἧς τοῖς συνοῦσιν. οὐ δύνασαι δ᾽ ἐν ἀμφοτέρῳ τῷ 
εἴδει διενεγκεῖν ἀλλ᾽ ἀνάγκη, καθόσον ἂν τοῦ 
¢ ἢ a“ ? 4 / > 9% , 3 
ἑτέρου κοινωνῇς, ἀπολείπεσθαί σ᾽ ἐν θατέρῳ. οὐ 
δύνασαι μὴ πίνων μεθ᾽ ὧν ἔπινες ὁμοίως ἡδὺς 
᾿ o a δ fal f \ 
αὐτοῖς daiverbar ἑλοῦ οὗν, πότερον μεθυστὴς 
" 7 ν ἐδ ᾿ 3 é x , > , > 
εἶναι θέλεις καὶ ἡδὺς ἐκείνοις ἢ νήφων ἀηδὴς, οὐ 
» n 
δύνασαι μὴ ἄδων pel ὧν ἦδες ὁμοίως φιλεῖσθαι 


1 Oldfather: ἑκάτερον 8S. Cf. IV. 10, 25; πολ. 1, 4. 
306 


BOOK IV. um. 1-7 


acquaintances or friends as to descend to the same 
level with him; otherwise you will ruin yourself. 
But if there slips into your inind the thought, “ He 
will think me unmannerly and will not be as friendly 
us he used to be,’ remember that nothing is done 
without paying for it, and that it is impossible for 
aman to remain the same person that he used to 
be, if he does not do the same things. Chovose, 
therefore, which you prefer; either to be loved just 
as much as you used to be by the same persons, 
remaining like your former self, or else, by being 
superior “to vour former self, to lose the same 
affection. Because if this latter alternative is the 
better choice, turn forthwith in that direction, and 
let not the oiler considerations draw you away ; for 
no man is able to make progress when he is facing 
both ways. But if you have preferred this course 
to every other, if you wish to devote yourself to 
this alone, and labour to perfect it, give up every- 
thing else. Otherwise this facing both ways will 
bring about a double result: You will neither make 
progress as you ought, nor will you get what you 
used to get before. For before, when you frankly 
aimed at nothing worth while, you made a pleasant 
companion. You cannot achieve distinction along 
both lines, but you must needs fall short in the one 
to the degree in which you take part in the other. 
If you do not drink with those you used to drink 
with, you cannot in their eyes be as pleasant a com- 
panion as you used to be; choose, therefore, whether 
you wish to be a hard drinker and pleasant to those 
persons, or a sober man and unpleasant. If you do 
not sing with those you used to sing with, you can- 
not be loved by them as you used to be: choose, 

50] 

x 2 


10 


1 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


a ω a“ r 
tm αὐτῶν" ἐλοῦ οὖν καὶ ἐνταῦθα, πότερον θέλεις. 
Ν “ 
εἰ γὰρ κρεῖσσον τὸ αἰδήμονα εἶναι καὶ κόσμιον 
τοῦ εἰπεῖν τινὰ “ ἡδὺς ἄνθρωπος," ἄφες τὰ ἕτερα, 
ἀπόγνωθι, ἀποστράφηθι, μηδὲν σοὶ καὶ αὐτοῖς. 
> \ A 3 / ἴω [τς 2 > κὰ 
εἰ δὲ μὴ ἀρέσει ταῦτα, ὅλος ἀπόκλινον ἐπὶ 
7 ἴον “A lal a) 
TavavTia’ γενοῦ els τῶν κιναίδων, εἷς τῶν μουχῶν, 
/ a 
καὶ ποίει τὰ ἑξῆς καὶ τεύξῃ ὧν θέλεις. καὶ 
Ἂ ζω fal ? 
ἀναπηδῶν érixpatyale TO ὀρχηστῇ. διάφορα ὃ 
οὕτως πρόσωπα οὐ μίγνυται' οὐ δύνασαι καὶ 
é 
Θερσίτην ὑποκρίνασθαι καὶ ᾿Αγαμέμνονα. ἂν 
Θερσίτης εἶναι θέλῃς, κυρτόν σε εἶναι δεῖ, 
f * 3 la ra ‘ \ \ 
φαλακρον' av ᾿Αγαμέμνων, μέγαν καὶ καλὸν Kal 
3 
τοὺς ὑποτεταγμένους φιλοῦντα. 


/ 
γ. Τίνα τίνων ἀντικαταλλακτέον ; 


> a Po. ov ef \ > ? 
Ἐκεῖνο προχειρον ἔχε, ὅταν τινὸς ἀπολειπῃ 
fa) ow lay ων , 
TOV ἐκτός, TL ἀντ᾽ αὐτοῦ περιποιῇ" κἂν ἢ πλείονος 


2 ἄξιον, μηδέποτ᾽ εἴπῃς ὅτι “ ἐξζημίωμαι "" οὐδ᾽ av} 


PJ 4 wv tf 203 3 4 “ “ 2&5 

ἀντὶ ὄνου ἵππον, οὐδ᾽ ἀντὶ προβάτου βοῦν οὐδ 

3 \ f “” ? O° 2 \ 

ἀντὶ κέρματος πρᾶξιν καλήν, οὐδ᾽ ἀντὶ ψυχρο- 
f ¢ f “ “~ 3 Ὁ» 3 \ > 7 

λογίας ἡσυχίαν οἵαν δεῖ, οὐδ᾽ ἀντὶ αἰσχρολογίας 


83 αἰδῶ. τούτων μεμνημένος πανταχοῦ διασώσεις 


% “ ᾿ Ὄ 2ὲ ὃ ra % δὲ 
τὸ σαυτοῦ πρόσωπον οἷον ἔχειν σε δεῖ, εἰ δέ 

5» on Ἂι 
μή, σκόπει, ὅτε ἀπόλλυνται οἱ χρόνοι εἰκῆ καὶ 


1 av added by Schweighduser. 
308 


BOOK IV. wu. 7-111 3 


therefore, here also, which you wish. For if it is 
better to be a man of respectful and modest be- 
haviour than for someone to say of you, “ He is a 
pleasant fellow,” give up all other considerations, 
renounce them, turn your back upon them, have 
nothing to do with them. But if that does not 
please you, turn about, the whole of you, to 
the opposite; become one of the addicts to un- 
natural vice, one of the adulterers, and act in the 
corresponding fashion, and you will get what you 
wish. Yes, and jump up and shout your applause 
to the dancer. But different characters do not mix 
in this fashion: you cannot act the part of Thersites 
and that of Agamemnon too. If vou wish to be a 
-Thersites, you “ought to be huinpbacked and bald; 

if an Agamemnon, you ought to be tall and hand- 

some, and to love those who have been made subject 
to you. 


CHAPTER ΠῚ 


What things should be exchanged jor what things ? 


Here is a thought to keep ready at hand 
whenever you lose some external thing: What are 
you acquiring in its place? and if this be more 
valuable than the other, never say, “1 have suffered 
a loss.” You have lost nothing “if you get a horse 
for an ass, an ox for a sheep, a noble action for 
a small piece of money, the proper kind of peace 
for futile discourse, and self-respect for smutty talk. 
If you bear this in mind you will everywhere main- 
tain your character as it ought to be. If not, I 
would have you observe that your time is being 


5°9 


10 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ὅσα νῦν προσέχεις σεαυτῷ, μέλλεις ἐκχεῖν 
ἅπαντα ταῦτα καὶ ἀνατρέπειν. ὀλίγου δὲ χρεΐα 
ἐστὶ πρὸς τὴν ἀπώλειαν τὴν πάντων καὶ ἄνατρο- 
πήν, μικρᾶς ἀποστροφῆς τοῦ λόγου. ἵνα 0 
κυβερνήτης ἀνατρέψῃ τὸ πλοῖον, οὐ χρείαν ἔχει 
τῆς αὐτῆς παρασκευῆς, ὅσης εἰς τὸ σῶσαι" ἀλλὰ 
μικρὸν πρὸς τὸν ἄνεμον ἂν ἐπιστρέψῃ, ἀπώλετο. 


ΜΕ . 4 ee ¢ a Gt 2 ¢ 
κἂν μὴ αὐτὸς ἑκών, ὑποπαρενθυμηθῇ δ᾽, ἀπώλετο. 


τοιοῦτόν ἐστί τι καὶ ἐνθάδε: μικρὸν ἂν ἀπονυσ- 
τάξῃς, ἀπῆλθεν πώντα τὰ μέχρι νῦν συνειλεγ- 
μένα. πρόσεχε οὖν ταῖς φαντασίαις, ἐπαγρύπνει. 
οὐ γὰρ μικρὸν τὸ τηρούμενον, ἀλλ᾽ αἰδὼς καὶ 
πίστις καὶ εὐστάθεια, ἀπάθεια, ἀλυπία, ἀφοβία, 
ἀταραξία, ἁπλῶς ἐλευθερία. τίνων μέλλεις 
ταῦτα πωλεῖν; βλέπε, πόσου ἀξίων .--- Αλλ᾽ οὐ 
τεύξομαι τοιούτου τινὸς ἀντ᾽ αὐτοῦ.---- βλέπε καὶ 
τυγχάνων * πάλιν ἐκείνου, τί ἀντ᾽ αὐτοῦ λαμβά- 
yes.” “ ἐγὼ εὐκοσμίαν, ἐκεῖνος δημαρχίαν' ἐκεῖνος 
στρατηγίαν, ἐγὼ αἰδῶ. ἀλλ᾽ οὐ κραυγάξω, ὅπου 
ἀπρεπές" ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ἀναστήσομαι, ὅπου μὴ δεῖ. 
ἐλεύθερος γάρ εἰμι καὶ φίλος τοῦ θεοῦ, ἵν᾽ ἑκὼν 
πείθωμαι αὐτῷ. τῶν δ᾽ ἄλλων οὐδενὸς ἀντι- 
ποιεῖσθαί με δεῖ, οὐ σώματος, οὐ κτήσεως, οὐκ 
ἀρχῆς, οὐ φήμης, ἁπλῶς οὐδενός" οὐδὲ γὰρ 

1 ἀποτυγχάνων Reiske: τυγχάνοντος Elter. 

* λαμβάνει Schweighiuser. 





i This sense may conceivably be contained in the MS. 
reading, but it seems more probable that the text is corrupt, 
although no convincing correction has vet been made.—Capps 
reyvards ἐκείνου and ἐκεῖνος ($9) as referring to the same 
person.—The quotation following is what Epictetus sug- 
gests as appropriate comment for the man who has made 2 
wise choice, 


310 


BOOK IV. πὶ. 3-10 


spent to no purpose, and all the pains you are now 
taking with yourself vou are sure to spill out utterly 
and upset. Little is needed to ruin and upset 
everything, only a slight aberration from reason. 
For the helmsman to upset his ship he does not need 
the same amount of preparation that he does to 
keep it safe; but if he heads it a little too much 
into the wind, he is lost; yes, even if he does nothing 
by his own deliberate choice, but merely falls to 
thinking about something else for a moment, he is 
lost. In: life also it is very much the same ; if you 
doze but fora moment, all that you have amassed 
hitherto is gone. Pay attention, therefore, to your 
sense-impressions, and watch over them sleeplessly. 
For it is no smal] matter that you are guarding, but 
self-respect, and fidelity, and constancy, a state of 
mind undisturbed by passion, pain, fear, or con- 
fusion—in a word, freedom. What are the things 
for which you are about to sell ‘hese things? Look, 
how valuable are they ?—But, you say, I shall 
not get anything of that kind in return for what 
I am giving up.—Observe also, when you do get 
something in the exchange, just what it is you 
are getting for what you give up.) ‘I have a 
modest behaviour, he has a tribuneship; he has a 
praetorship, I have self-respect. But I do not shout 
where it is unseemly; 1 shall not stand up where I 
ought not; for 1 ama free man and a friend of God,* 

so as to obey Him of my own free will. No other 
thing ought I to claim, not body, or property, or 
office, or reputation—nothing, in short; nor does 


* Probably this was the phrase which suggested the point 
of the famous epigram: “ἡ. . . I, Epictetus, was the friend 
of God” (quoted Vol. I, Intred. p. vin). 


211 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


5 wn 7 7 > 2 “- θ 3 "“ .] 4 
ἐκεῖνος βούλεται μ᾽ ἀντιποιεῖσθαι αὐτῶν. εἰ yap 
of 3 \ A > ‘ x 3 / faa! γ 
ἤθελεν, ἀγαθὰ πεποιήκει αὐτὰ ἂν ἐμοί, νῦν ὃ 
οὐ πεποίηκεν' διὰ τοῦτο οὐδὲν δύναμαι παρα- 
“- a“ 3 “ 32} , \ 3 \ \ “ 
11 βῆναι τῶν ἐντολῶν." τήρει TO ἀγαθὸν τὸ σαυτοῦ 
3 , lal > \ \ , A 
ἐν παντί, τῶν δ᾽ ἄλλων κατὰ TO διδόμενον μέχρι 
τοῦ εὐλογιστεῖν ἐν αὐτοῖς, τούτῳ μόνῳ ἀρκού- 
μενος. εἰ δὲ μή, δυστυχήσεις, ἀτυχήσεις, κωλυ- 
f 3 f Φ [4 3 ἰφ 3 ~ 
12 θήσῃ, ἐμποδισθήσῃ. οὗτοί εἰσιν οἱ ἐκεῖθεν 
ἀπεσταλμένοι νόμοι, ταῦτα τὰ διατάγματα: 
τούτων ἐξηγητὴν δεῖ γενέσθαι, τούτοις ὑποτεταγ- 
μένον, οὐ τοῖς Macovpiouv καὶ Κασσίου. 


δ΄, Πρὸς τοὺς περὶ τὸ ἐν ἡσυχίᾳ διάγειν 
ἐσπουδακότας. 


1. Μέμνησο, ὅτι οὐ μόνον ἐπιθυμία ἀρχῆς καὶ 
πλούτου ταπεινοὺς ποιεῖ καὶ ἄλλοις ὑποτεταγ- 
μένους, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἡσυχίας καὶ σχολῆς καὶ ἀπο- 
δημίας καὶ φιλολογίας. ἁπλῶς γὰρ οἷον av! 7 

9 τὸ ἐκτός, ἡ τιμὴ αὐτοῦ ὑποτάσσει ἄλλῳ. τί οὖν 
διαφέρει συγκλήτον ἐπιθυμεῖν ἢ τοῦ μὴ εἶναι 
συγκλητικὸν; τί διαφέρει ἀρχῆς ἐπιθυμεῖν ἢ 
ἀναρχίας ; τί διαφέρει λέγειν Ste “ κακῶς μοί 
ἐστιν, οὐδὲν ἔχω τί πράξω, ἀλλὰ τοῖς βιβλίοις 
προσδέδεμαι ὡς νεκρός, ἢ λέγειν “ κακῶς pot 

8 ἐστιν, οὐκ εὐσχολῶ ἀναγνῶναι ἦ ; ὧς γὰρ ἄσπασ- 

+ Upton from his “codex” (after Schegk and Meibom): 


ἐάν §, 


312 


BOOK IV. ut ro-tv. 3 


He wish me to claim them. Had He sw desired 
He would have made them good for me. But as it 
is, He has not so made them; therefore I cannot 
transgress any of His commands.”’ Guard your own 
good in everything you do; and for the rest be 
content to take simply what has been given you, 
in so far as you can make a rational use of it. If 
you do not, you will have bad luck and no good 
luck, you will be hampered and hindered. These 
are the laws that have been sent you from God, 
these are His ordinances; it is of these you ought 
to become an interpreter, to these you ought to 
subject yourself, not the laws of Masurius and 
Cassius.} 


CHAPTER IV 
To those who have set their hearis upon living in peace 


REMEMBER that it is not merely desire for office 
and wealth which makes men abject and subservient 
to others, but desire also for peace, and leisure, and 
travel, and scholarship. For it makes no difference 
what the external object be, the value you set 
upon it makes you subservient to another. What 
difference, then, does it make for you to set your 
heart on the senate, or on not becoming a senator? 
What difference does it make to desire office or to 
desire not to hold office? What difference does it 
make to say, “1 am in a bad way, I have nothing to 
do, but am tied to my books as though I were a 
corpse,” or to say, “I am in a bad way, I have no 
leisure to read”? For just as salutations and office- 


1 Two distinguished jurists of the first half of the first 
_ century after Christ. 
313 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


4 μοὶ καὶ ἀρχὴ τῶν ἐκτός ἐστι καὶ ἀπροαιρέτων, 
οὕτως καὶ βιβλίον. ἢ τίνος ἕνεκα θέλεις a ἀναγνῶ- 
ναι; εἰπέ μοι. εἰ μὲν γὰρ ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸϊ καταστρέ- 
pers? TO ψυχαγωγηθῆναι. ue μαθεῖν τι, ψυχ ρὸς 
εἶ καὶ ἀταλαίπωρος." εἰ δ᾽ ἐφ᾽ ὃ δεῖ ἀναφέ- 
pets; τί τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν ἄλλο ἢ εὔροια; εἰ δέ σοι τὸ 
ἀναγιγνώσκειν εὔροιαν μὴ περιποιῇ, τί ὄφελος 

δ αὐτοῦ ae ᾿Αλλὰ περιποιεῖ, φησίν, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο 
ἀγανακτῶ. ὡς ἀπολειπό μενος αὐτοῦ.----ἰ αἱ τίς αὕτη 
ἡέ ὕροια, ἣν ὁ τυχὼν ἐμποδίσαι δύναται, ov eyo 
Καῖσαρ ἢ Καίσαρος φίλος, ἀλλὰ κόραξ, αὐλητής, 
πυρετός, ἄλλα τρισμύρια 5 ἡ δ᾽ εὔροια οὐδὲν οὕτως 
ἔχει ὡς τὸ διηνεκὲς καὶ ἀν ἐμπόδιστον. 

6 Noy καλοῦμαι πράξων TL, ἄπειμι νῦν προ- 
σέξων τοῖς μέτροις ἃ δεῖ τηρεῖν, ὅτι αἰδημόνως, 
ὅτι ἀσφαλῶς, ὅτι ,δίχα, ὀρέξεως καὶ ἐκκλίσεως 

Ἰ τῆς πρὸς τὰ ἐκτός, καὶ λοιπὸν προσέχω τοῖς 
ἀνθρώποις, τίνα φασί, πῶς κινοῦνται, καὶ τοῦτο 
οὐ κακοήθως οὐδ᾽ iva ἔχω ψέγειν ἢ καταγελῶ, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ ἐμαυτὸν ἐπιστρέφω, εἰ ταὐτὰ κἀγὼ 
ἁμαρτάνω. ““πῶς οὖν παύσωμαι ; ” τότε καὶ ἐγὼ 
ἡμάρτανον" νῦν δ᾽ οὐκέτι, χάρις τῷ θεῷ... .3 

1 Reiske: αὐτοῦ 8. 
3 The words én’ αὐτό after this were deleted by Schweig- 
hituser. 
5 Schweighiuser : ταλαίπωρος 8. 


* The lacuna marked by Oldfather. An answer to the 
question asked is obviously required. 





1 Answering the ae who complains because he has 
**nothing to do” (ὃ 

2 So Hoa. Sut Ἵ. 4, 136 ἢ ere ego tli 
imprudens olim faciam simile?’ Both were following the 
custom of Plato as recorded by Plutarch, De capienda ex 
inimicts utilitute, 5. 


314 


BOOK IV. vn. 3-7 


holding are among things external and those which 
lie outside the province of the moral purpose, so 
also is a book. Or for what purpose do you wish to 
read? Tell me. If you turn to reading merely for 
entertainment, or in order to learn something, you 
are futile and lazy. But if you refer reading to the 
proper standard, what else is this but a life of 
serenity? However, if reading does not secure for 
you a life of serenity, of what good is it >—Nay, it 
does secure me serenity, one says, and that is w hy 
{ am discontented because I am deprived of it— 
And what kind of serenity is this which any chance 
comer can impede, not merely Caesar, or a friend 
of Caesar, but a crow, a flutist, fever, thirty thou- 
sand other things? But no feature of serenity is 
so characteristic as continuity and freedom from 
hindrance. 

At this instant 1 am being called to do some- 
thing ;1 at this instant I shall go home with the 
purpose of observing the due measure which I 
ought to maintain, acting with self-respect, with 
security, apart from desire and avoidance of things 
external; and in the second place I observe men, 
what they say, how they move, and this in no 
malignant spirit, nor in order to have something to 
censure or ridicule, but I look at myself the while, 
to see if I too am making the same mistakes.? 
“ How, then, shall I cease to make mistakes?” 
There was a time when I too made mistakes, but 
now no longer, thanks be to God. . . .3 


3 The exact connection of these two sentences is obscure. 
Matheson, with a certain degree of plausibility, divides them 
between the interlocutor and Epictetus, but they are 
generally assigned to one person. — See also the crit. note, 


315 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


5 “ Ν 
8 “Aye, ταῦτα ποιήσας καὶ πρὸς τούτοις γενό- 
ἴω: 3 - f 
μενος χεῖρον ἔργον πεποίηκας ἢ χιλίους στίχους 
3 5 7 
ἀναγνοὺς ἢ γράψας ἄλλους τοσούτους ; ὅταν 
\ 
yap éobins, ἄνθη, ὅτε μὴ ἀναγιγνώσκεις ; οὐκ 
3 μ᾿ a + oA 5 ee a 3 f fel 7 
ἀρκῇ τῷ καθ᾽ ἃ ἀνέγνωκας ἐσθίειν ; ὅταν λούῃ ; 
ev f : , f/ 8 3A , > ¢ 
9 ὅταν γυμνάξῃ ; διὰ TL οὖν ἐπὶ πάντων οὐχ ὁμα- 
ld φΙ ΜᾺ 
λίζεις, καὶ ὅταν Καίσαρι προσίῃς καὶ ὅταν τῷ 
[4 % * ἮΝ 
δεῖνι; εἰ τὸν ἀπαθῇ τηρεῖς, εἰ τὸν ἀκατάπληκτον, 
10 εἰ τὸν κατεσταλμένον, εἰ βλέπεις μᾶλλον τὰ 
δὲ 3 “~ ἴω 
γένομενα ἢ βλέπῃ, εἰ μὴ φθονεῖς τοῖς προτιμω- 
μένοις, εἰ μὴ ἐκπλήσσουσίν σε αἱ ὗλαι, τί σοι 
[ο 
11 λείπει; βιβλία; πῶς ἢ ἐπὶ τί; οὐχὶ γὰρ ἐπὶ 
‘ ἴω r ~ 
τὸ βιοῦν παρασκευή tis ἐστιν αὕτη; τὸ βιοῦν 
3 3 3} ἴω A , a 
δ᾽ ἐξ ἄλλων τινῶν ἢ τούτων συμπληροῦται. 
a » Ff 9 \ ’ > \ ͵ 3 , 
οἷον ἂν εἰ ὁ ἀθλητὴς κλαίῃ εἰς TO στάδιον εἰσιών, 
ey iva \ ἂν ᾽ ¢ af 3 “ 
12 ore μὴ ἔξω γυμνάξεται. τούτων évexa ἐγυμνάξου, 
“~ nm 3 , 
ἐπὶ τοῦτο οἱ ἁλτῆρες, ἡ ἀφή, οἱ νεανίσκοι. καὶ 
“ δὰ ry ~ f 
νῦν ἐκεῖνα ξητεῖς, ὅτε τοῦ ἔργου καιρὸς ἐστιν; 
18 οἷον εἰ ἐπὶ τοῦ συγκαταθετικοῦ τόπου παριστα- 
f a“ mn fal ral 
μένων φαντασιῶν TOV μὲν καταληπτικῶν, TOV 
% 
δ᾽ ἀκαταλήπτων μὴ ταύτας διακρίνειν θέλοιμεν, 
2 ’ 
ἀλλ᾽ ἀναγιγνώσκειν τὰ Περὶ καταλήψεως. 
1 Ti δ ‘ v . of VE f ef 
4 ὑ OUY TO QLTLOV; OTL οὐδέποτε τούτου EVEKAa 
»} ν» 
ἀνέγνωμεν, οὐδέποτε τούτου ἕνεκα ἐγράψαμεν, 





1 In the absence of pages, as in the case of the papyrus 
roll, prose as well as poetry was counted by lines. 
2 See ITT 15, 4. 


316 


BOOK IV. uv. 8-14 


Come, if you have acted like this and devoted 
yourself to these things, have you done anything 
worse than reading a thousand lines, or writing a 
thousand’+ For when you eat, are you annoyed 
because you are not reading? Are you not satisfied 
to be eating in accordance with the principles you 
learned by reading? And when you bathe and 
take exercise? Why, then, are you not consistent 
in everything, both when you approach Caesar, and 
when you approach So-and-so? If you are maintain- 
ing the character of a man of tranquillity, of imper- 
turbability, of sedateness, if you are observing what 
happens rather than being yourself observed, if you 
are not envying those who are preferred in honour 
above you, if the mere subject-matter of actions does 
not dazzle you, what do you lack? Books? How, 
or for what end? What, is not the reading of books 
a kind of preparation for the act of living? But the 
full measure of the act of living is made up of things 
other than books. It is as though the athlete on 
entering the stadium were to fall a-wailing because 
he is not exercising outside. This was what you 
exercised for, this is the purpose of your Jumping- 
weights, your wrestler’s sand,? your young training 
partners. And are you now asking for these things, 
when the time for action is come? It is as if, 
when in the sphere of assent we were surrounded 
with sense-impressions, some of them convincing, 
and others not convincing, we should not wish to 
distinguish between them, but to read a treatise On 
Comprehension ! 

What, then, is the reason for this? It is because 
we have never read for this purpose, we have never 
written for this purpose—in our actions, to treat in 


317 


16 


19 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ἵν ἐπὶ τῶν ἔργων κατὰ φύσιν χρώμεθα ταῖς 
ἘΠ οΟσ ΠΤ Οὐ ἢ φαντασίαις, ἀλλ᾽ αὐτοῦ κατα- 
λήγομεν ἐν τῷ" μαθεῖν, τί λέγεται, καὶ ἄλλῳ 
δύνασθαι ἐξηγήσασθαι, τὸν συλλογισμὸν ἀνα- 
λῦσαι καὶ τὸν ὑποθετ τικὸν ἐφοδεῦσαι. διὰ τοῦτο 
ὅπου Κὰ σπουδή, ἐκεῖ καὶ ὁ ἐμποδισμός. θέλεις 
τὰ μὴ ἐπὶ σοὶ ἐξ ἅπαντος ; κωλύου τοίνυν, ἐμπο- 
δίζου, ἀποτύγχανε. εἰ δὲ τὰ Ἰ]ερὶ ὁρμῆς τούτου 
ἕνεκα ἀναγιγνώσκοιμεν, οὐχ ἃ iva, ἴδωμεν, τ τί λέγε- 
ται περὶ ὁρμὴς, ἀλλ᾽ ἵνα εὖ ὁρμῶμεν" τὰ Περὶ 
ὀρέξεως δὲ καὶ ἐκκλίσεως, t iva μήποτ᾽ ὀρεγόμενοι 
ἀποτυγχάνωμεν μῇτ ᾿ ἐκκλίνοντες περιπίπτωμεν" 
τὰ Περὶ καθήκοντος δ᾽, ἵνα μεμνημένοι τῶν 
σχέσεων μηδὲν ἀλογίστως μηδὲ Tap αὐτὰ ποιῶ- 
μεν: οὐκ ἂν ἠγανακτοῦμεν πρὸς τὰ ἀναγνώσματα 
ἐμποδιζόμει οι, ἀλλὰ τῷ τὰ ἔργα ἀποδιδόναι τὰ 
κατάλληλα ἠρκούμεθα καὶ ἡριθμοῦμεν ἂν οὐ 
ταῦτα, ἃ μέχρι νῦν ἀριθμεῖν εἰθίσμεθα, ' ᾿σήμερον 
ἀνέγνων στίχους τοσούσδε, ἔγραψα τοσούσδε," 

ὠλλὰ “ σήμερον ὁρμῇ ἐχρησάμην, ὡς παραγγέλ- 
λεται ὑπὸ τῶν φιλοσόφων, ὀρέξει οὐκ ἐχρησάμην, 
ἐκκλίσει πρὸς μόνα τὰ προαιρετικά, οὐ κατε- 
“τ λάγην τὸν δεῖνα, οὐκ ἐδυσωπήθην ὑπὸ τοῦ 
δεῖνος, τὸ ἀνειςτικὸν ἐγύμνασα, τὸ ἀφεκτικόν, τὸ 
συνεργητικόν," καὶ οὕτως ἂν ηὐχαριστοῦμεν τῷ 
Gea ἐφ᾽ οἷς δεῖ εὐχαριστεῖν. 

Νῦν δ᾽ ἡμεῖς οὐκ ἴσμεν, ὅτε καὶ αὐτοὶ ἄλλον 
τρόπον ὅμοιοι τοῖς πολλοῖς γινόμεθα. ἄλλος 
φοβεῖται, μὴ οὐκ ἄρξῃ" σύ, wy? ἄρξῃς. μηδα- 

1 ἐν τῷ added by Richards. 


5.Α late hand in S: ἵνα ὁ ξῶμεν ΚΑ, 
3 Wolf: μήσυν δ. 


BOOK IV. tv. 14-19 


accordance with nature the sense-impressions which 
come tous; but we stop with having learned what is 
said, and with the ability to explain it to someone 
else, and with analysing the syllogism, and examin- 
ing the hypothetical argument. That is why, where 
our heart is set, there also our impediment lies. 
Do you wish at any cost to have the things that 
are not under your control? Very well then, be 
hindered, be obstructed, fail. If we should read a 
treatise On Choice, not in order to know about the 
subject, but in order to make correct choices; a 
treatise On Desire and Aversion, in order that we 
may never fail in our desire nor fall into that which 
we are trying to avoid ; a treatise On Duty, in order 
that we may remember our relations in society and 
do nothing irrationally or contrary to the principles 
of duty; we should not be vexed by being hindered 
in regard to what we have read, but we should find 
satisfaction in doing the deeds required by our mutual 
relations, and we should be reckoning, not the things 
which we have been accustomed hitherto to reckon : 
“To-day I have read so many lines, I have written 
so many,” but, “ To-day I made a choice in the way 
that the philosophers teach, I did not entertain desire, 
I avoided only those things that are in the sphere of 
the moral purpose, I was not overawed by Sc-and-so, 
I was not put out of countenance by So-and-so, I 
exercised my patience, my abstinence, my co-opera- 
tion,” and thus we should be giving thanks to God for 
those things for which we ought to give Him thanks. 
But as it is, we do not realize that we ourselves, 
though in a different fashion, grow like the multi- 
tude. Another man is afraid that he will not have 
an office; you are afraid that you will. Do not so, 


319 


22 


23 


24 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


~ 3 * ω 
μῶς, ἄνθρωπε. ἀλλ᾽ ὡς καταγελᾷς τοῦ φοβου- 
μένου μὴ οὐκ ἄρξαι, οὕτως καὶ σαυτοῦ καταγέλα. 
οὐδὲν γὰρ διαφέρει ἢ διψῆν πυρέσσοντα ἢ ὡς 
, f % a 
λυσσώδη ὑδροφόβον εἶναι. ἢ πῶς ἔτι δυνήσῃ 
εἰπεῖν τὸ τοῦ Σωκράτους “ei ταύτῃ φίλον τῷ 
θεῷ, ταύτῃ γινέσθω"; δοκεῖς, Σωκράτης εἰ 
> “nt 3 ) A 2 Σ , ΄ 
ἐπεθύμει ἐν Λυκείῳ ἢ ἐν ᾿Ακαδημείᾳ σχολάξειν 
καὶ διαλέγεσθαι καθ᾽ ἡμέραν τοῖς νέοις, εὐκόλως 
τ 
ἂν ἐστρατεύσατο ὁσάκις ἐστρατεύσατο; οὐχὶ δ᾽ 
ὠδύρετ᾽ ἂν καὶ ἔστενεν “ τάλας ἐγώ, νῦν ἐνθάδ᾽ 
$ a + f b é ¢ ‘ 33 
ἀτυχῶ ἄθλιος δυνάμενος ἐν Λυκείῳ ἡλιάξεσθαι ” ; 
fal ἈΝ 
τοῦτο γάρ σου τὸ ἔργον ἣν, ἡλιάξεσθαι; οὐχὶ 
ral Ν 
δὲ τὸ εὐροεῖν, τὸ ἀκώλυτον εἶναι, τὸ ἀπαραπό- 
διστον; καὶ πῶς ἂν ere ἣν Σωκράτης, εἰ ταῦτα 
“ 3 ~ ῬᾺ on 
ὠδύρετο; πῶς ἂν ἔτει ἐν TH φυλακῇ παιᾶνας 
of 
ἔγραφεν; 
τ ~ i) Σ , 7 a Ἂ cc 
Απλῶς οὖν ἐκεῖνον μέμνησο, ὃτι, πᾶν ὃ ἔξω 
τῆς προαιρέσεως τῆς σαυτοῦ τιμήσεις, ἀπώλεσας 
oo 3 
τὴν προαέρεσιν. ἔξω δ᾽ ἐστὶν οὐ μόνον ἀρχή, 
ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀναρχία, οὐ μόνον ἀσχολία, ἀλλὰ καὶ 
σχολή. “νῦν οὖν ἐμὲ ἐν τῷ θορύβῳ τούτῳ 
“ 53 i f - 3 Cal 
διεξάγειν; τί λέγεις θορύβῳ; ἐν πολλοῖς 
> ἢ \ δ a , » 3 , 
ἀνθρώποις ; καὶ τί χαλεπὸν ; δόξον ἐν ᾿Ολυμπίᾳ 
Ν id “ 
εἶναι, πανήγυριν αὐτὸν ἥγησαι, κἀκεῖ ἄλλος 
f 
ἄλλο τι κέκραγεν, ἄλλος ἄλλο TL πράσσει, ἄλλος 


1 οὐκ added by Schweighiuser. 
1 Plato, Crito, 43 D (slightly modified). Compare I. 4, 24, 
where the quotation is exact. 
2 Referring to the famous gymnasia in these places. 
8 Plato, Phaedo, 60 D, says that he translated some fables 
of Aesop into verse and composed a hymn (προοίμιον) to 
Apollo. This latter composition is called a paean by 


320 





BOOK IV. ww. 19-24 


man! But just as you laugh at the man who is 
afraid he will not have an office,so also laugh at 
yourself. For it makes no difference whether a 
person is thirsty with fever, or is afraid of water 
like a man with the rabies. Or how can you any 
longer say with Socrates, “If so it please God, so 
be it”?2 Do you suppose that, if Socrates had 
yearned to spend his leisure in the Lyceum or the 
Academy,? and to converse daily with the young 
men, he would have gone forth cheerfully on all the 
military expeditions in which he served? Would 
he not have wailed and groaned, “ Wretched man 
that I am! here I am now in misery and mis- 
fortune, when I might be sunning myself in the 
Lyceum”? What, was this your function in life, 
to sun yourself? Was it not rather to be serene, 
to be unhampered, to be unhindered? And how 
would he have been Socrates any longer, if he had 
wailed like this? How would he have gone on to 

write paeans in prison ἢ 3 
In a word, then, remember this—that if you are 
going to honour anything at all outside the sphere 
of the moral purpose, you have destroyed your 
moral purpose. And outside the sphere of your 
moral purpose lie not merely office, but also 
freedom from office; not merely business, but also 
leisure. “Am I now, therefore, to pass my life in 
this turmoil ?”’ What do you mean by “turmoil”’? 
Among many people? And what is there hard about 
that? Imagine that you are in Olympia, regard the 
turmoil as a festival. There, too, one man shouts this 
and another that; one man does this and another 
ea Laertius, 2, 42, who professes to give the first line 

of it. 
321 
VOL. Il. 


25 


26 


27 


28 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


τῷ ἄλλῳ ἐνσείεται" ἐν τοῖς βαλανείοις ὄχλος. 
καὶ τίς ἡμῶν οὐ χαίρει τῇ πανηγύρει ταύτῃ καὶ 
ὀδυνώμενος αὐτῆς ἀπαλλάσσεται; μὴ γίνου 
δυσάρεστος μηδὲ κακοστόμαχος πρὸς τὰ ογινό- 
μενα. “τὸ ὄξος σαπρόν, δριμὺ yap”: “ τὸ μέλι 
σαπρόν, ἀνατρέπει γάρ μου τὴν ἕξιν" ee? λάχανα 
οὐ θέλω." οὕτως καὶ “ σχολὴν οὐ θέλω, ἐ ἐρημία 
ἐστίν," εἶ ὄχλον οὐ θέλω, θόρυβός ἐστιν. ἀλλ᾽ 
ἂν μὲν οὕτως φέρῃ τὰ πράγματα, ὥστε μόνον ἢ 
μετ᾽ ὀλίγων διεξαγαγεῖν, ἡ ἡσυχίαν αὐτὸ κάλει καὶ 
χρῶ τῷ πράγματι εἰς ὃ δεῖ" λάλει σεαυτῷ, 
γύμναξε τὰς φαντασίας, ἐξεργάξου τὰς προλή- 
ψεις. ἂν δ᾽ εἰς ὄχλον ἐμπέσῃς, ἀγῶνα αὐτὸ λέγε, 
πανήγυριν, ἑορτήν, συνεορτάξζειν πειρῶ τοῖς 
ἀνθρώποις. τί γάρ ἐστιν ἥδιον "θέαμα τῷ φιλαν- 
θρώπῳ ἢ ἄνθρωποι πολλοί ; ἵππων ἀγέλας ἢ 
βοῶν ἡδέως ὁρῶμεν, mola πολλὰ Brap ἴδωμεν, 
διαχεόμεθα: ἀνθρώπους πολλοὺς βλέπων τις 
ἀνιᾶται; “ ἀλλὰ κατακραυγάξουσί μου." οὐκοῦν 
ἡ ἀκοή σου ἐμποδίζεται. τί οὖν πρὸς σέ; μή τί 
καὶ δύναμις ἡ ταῖς φαντασίαις χρηστική ; καὶ 
τίς σε κωλύει ὀρέξει καὶ ἐκκλίσει χρῆσθαι κατὰ 
φύσιν, ὁρμῇ καὶ ἀφορμῇ; ποῖος θόρυβος πρὸς 
τοῦτο ἱκανός ;. 





1 Referring clearly, I believe, to the baths at Olympia, 
where the accommodation seems to have been inadequate. 
See I. 6, 26. 

2 Cf. “‘But when he saw the multitudes, he was moved 
with compassion on them ” (Matt. ix. 36); and the remark 
attributed to Abraham Lincoln: ‘‘God must have loved 
the common people; He made so many of them.” The 
characteristic emotions here indicated as arising at the con- 


322 


BOOK IV. rv. 24-28 


that; one man jostles another; there is a crowd in 
the baths.1 And vet who of us does not take delight 
in the Olympic festival and leave it with sorrow > 
Do not become peevish or fastidious towards events. 
« The vinegar is rotten, for it is sour.” “The honey 
is rotten, for it upsets my digestion.’ ‘I don’t like 
vegetables.” In the same fashion you say, “ I don’t 
like leisure, it is a solitude.” 441 don’t like a crowd, 
it is turmoil.” Say not so, but if cireumstances 
bring you to spend your life alone or in the com- 
pany of a few, call it peace, and utilize the condition 
tor its proper end; converse with yourself, exercise 
your sense-impressions, develop your preconceptions. 
If, however, you fall in with a crowd, call it games, 
a festival, a holiday, try to keep holiday with the 
people. For what is pleasanter to a man who loves 
his fellow-men than the sight of large numbers 
of them?? We are glad to see herds of horses or 
cattle ; when we see many ships we are delighted ; 
is a person annoyed at the sight of many human 
beings? “Yes, but they deafen me with their shout- 
ing.” Oh, well, it is your hearing that is interfered 
with! What, then, is that to you? Your faculty 
of employing external impressions is not interfered 
with, is it? And who prevents you from making 
natural use of desire and aversion, of choice and 
refusal? What manner of turmoil avails to do 
that? 


templation of large numbers of one’s fellow-men, though 
somewhat different in tone from that in Epictetus, as well 
as from one another, are still essentially at one with the 
Stoic ideal of sympathetic fellowship, and are fundamentally 
opposed to that selfish or snobbish aversion towards mankind, 
which became so prevalent, even in religious circles, during 
the great decadence of ancient civilization. 


323 


29 


30 


31 


33 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


\ f [οἱ κι 
Σὺ μόνον μέμνησο τῶν καθολικῶν" “τί ἐμόν, 
i i ~ 
τί οὐκ ἐμόν; τί μοι δίδοται ; τί θέλει με ποιεῖν 
e ‘ n 
ὃ Geos viv, τί ov θέλει; πρὸ ὀλίγου χρόνου 
ἢ rf “A mn 
ἤθελέν σε σχολάζειν, σαυτῷ λαλεῖν, γράφειν 
4 
περὶ τούτων, ἀναγιγνώσκειν, ἀκούειν, παρα- 
σκευάξεσθαι' ἔσχες εἰς τοῦτο ἱκανὸν χρόνον. νῦν 
ἤ al ᾿ “. 
σοι λέγει “ἐλθὲ ἤδη ἐπὶ τὸν ἀγῶνα, δεῖξον ἡμῖν, 
fd ἢ a 
τί ἔμαθες, πῶς ἤθλησας. μέχρι Tivos γυμνασ- 
, f [οὶ “ 
θήσῃ μόνος; ἤδη καιρὸς yvOvai σε, πότερον τῶν 
f Ὰ ¢ 
ἀξιονίκων εἶ τις ἀθλητῶν ἢ ἐκείνων, of τὴν οἰκου- 
μένην περιέρχονται νικώμενοι. τί οὖν ἀγανακ- 
a 2 ἡ Ἂ 5 Ἀ δί 1 θ , f 
Tels; οὐδεὶς ἀγὼν δίχα ορύβον γίνεται. 
% a Ν μ Χ 4 
πονλοὺς δεῖ προγυμναστὰς εἶναι, πολλοὺς τοὺς 
? f \ Ἅ ΄ ‘ 
ἐπικραυγάξοντας, πολλοὺς ἐπιστάτας, πολλοὺς 
θεατάς.--ὐλλ᾽ ἐγὼ ἤθελον ἐφ᾽ ἡσυχίας διάγειν. 
- Οἴμωξε τοίνυν καὶ στένε, ὥσπερ ἄξιος εἰ. τίς 
\ a? f 4 ἤ “ 2 
γὰρ ἄλλη μείζων ταύτης ζημία τῷ ἀπαιδεύτῳ 
καὶ ἀπειθοῦντι τοῖς θείοις διατάγμασιν ἢ τὸ 
λυπεῖσθαι, τὸ πενθεῖν, τὸ φθονεῖν, ἁπλῶς τὸ 
ἀτυχεῖν καὶ δυστυχεῖν ; τούτων οὐ θέλεις ἀπαλ- 
λάξαι σεαυτόν; 
Καὶ πῶς ἀπαλλάξω ;---Οὐ πολλάκις ἤκουσας, 
τ vf 4 ? -" “" Ἀ ” 
ὅτι ὄρεξιν Apa oe Cet παντελῶς, THY ἔκκλισιν 
ἐπὶ μόνα τρέψαι τὰ προαιρετικά, adelvai σε δεῖ 
σι n ‘ ’ Ν 
πάντα, τὸ σῶμα, τὴν κτῆσιν, τὴν φήμην, τὰ 
; ; > / 3 , , Ψ' eee 
βιβλία, θόρυβον, ἀρχάς, ἀναρχίαν ; ὅπου yap ἂν 
‘ a 
κλίνῃς, ἐδούλευσας, ὑπεταγης, κωλυτὸς ἐγένου, 
1 Ed. of Salamanca, Bentley, and Upton’s ‘‘ codex” (after 
Schegk): διά &. 
32-4 


BOOK IV. iv. 29-33 


Do but keep in remembrance your general prin- 
ciples: “ What is mine? What is not mine? What 
has been given me? What does God will that I do 
now, what does He not will?” A litth while ago 
it was His will for you to be at leisure, to converse 
with yourself, to write about these things, to read, 
to listen, to prepare yourself; you had time sufficient 
for that. Now God says to you, “Come at length 
to the contest, show us what you have learned, how 
you have trained yourself. How long will you exer- 
cise alone? Now the time has come for vou to discover 
whether you are one of the athletes who deserve 
victory, or belong to the number of those who travel 
about the world and are everywhere defeated.” 
Why, then, are you discontented? No contest is 
held without turmoil. There must be many train- 
ing-partners, many to shout applause, many officials, 
many spectators—But I wanted to live a life of 
peace.—Wail, then, and groan, as you deserve to do. 
For what greater penalty can befall the man who is 
uninstructed and disobedient to the divine injunc- 
tions than to grieve, to sorrow, to envy, in a word 
to have no good fortune but only misfortune? Do 
you not wish to free yourself from all this? 

And how shall I free myself?—Have you not 
heard over and over again that you ought to eradi- 
cate desire utterly, direct your aversion towards the 
things that lie within the sphere of the moral pur- 
pose, and these things only, that you ought to give 
up everything, your body, your property, your repu- 
tation, your books, turmoil, office, freedom from 
office? For if once you swerve aside from this 
course, you are a slave, you are a subject, you have 
become liable to hindrance and to compulsion, you 


325 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


84 ἀναγκαστός, ὅλος ἐπ᾿ ἄλλοις. ἀλλὰ τὸ Κλεά»- 
ἔ 
θους πρόχειρον 


f 2 a“ e 
ἄγου δέ μ᾽, ὦ Ζεῦ, καὶ ov γ᾽ ἡ Tlerpopeévn. 


θέλετ᾽ εἰς Ῥώμην ; εἰς Ῥώμην. εἰς Γύαρα ; εἰς 
Τύαρα. εἰς ᾿Αθήνας; εἰς ᾿Αθήνας. εἰς φυλα- 
35 κήν ; εἰς φυλακήν. ἂν ἅπαξ elans “πότε τις 
εἰς ᾿Αθήνας ἀπέλθῃ ;” ἀπώλου. ἀνάγκη ye ταύ- 
τὴν τὴν ὄρεξιν ἀτελῆ μὲν οὖσαν ἀτυχῆ σε ποιεῖν, 
τελειωθεῖσαν δὲ κενόν, ἐφ᾽ οἷς οὐ δεῖ ἐπαιρό- 
μενον: πάλιν ἂν ἐμποδισθῇς, δυστυχῆ, περι- 
80 πίπτοντα οἷς οὐ θέλεις. ἄφες οὖν ταῦτα πάντα. 
“ καλαὶ αἱ ᾿Αθῆναι. ἀλλὰ τὸ εὐδαιμονεῖν κάλ- 
λιον πολύ, τὸ ἀπαθῇ εἶναι, τὸ ἀτάραχον, τὸ ἐπὶ 
81 μηδενὶ κεῖσθαι τὰ σὰ πράγματα. “θόρυβος ἐν 
“Ῥώμῃ καὶ ἀσπασμοί.᾽ ἀλλὰ τὸ εὐροεῖν ἀντὶ 
πάντων τῶν δυσκόλων. εἰ οὖν τούτων καιρός 
ἐστιν, διὰ τί οὐκ αἴρεις αὐτῶν τὴν ἔκκλισιν ; τίς 
88 ἀνάγκη ὡς ὄνον ξυλοκοπούμενον ἀχθοφορεῖν ; εἰ 
é μή, ὅρα Str? δεῖ σε δουλεύειν ἀεὶ τῷ δυνα- 
μένῳ σοι διαπράξασθαι τὴν ἔξοδον, τῷ πᾶν 
ἐμποδίσαι δυναμένῳ, κἀκεῖνον θεραπεύειν ὡς 
Κακοδαίμονα. 
88 Μία ὁδὸς ἐπὶ εὔροιαν (τοῦτο καὶ ὄρθρου καὶ 
1 The second εἰς Ρώμην is supplied in the margin by Sd. 
2 Wolf (and Upton’s ‘‘codex”): τί ὃ, 





1 From a celebrated hymn. See on 11. 23, 42, 

2 An island used as a place of exile. See on I, 25, 10, 

8 There may be here an allusion (before Lucian and 
Apuleius) to the theme of a (bewitched) ass trying to escape 
from being an ass, and constantly being hindered. In the 
famous romance the ass is certainly often enough overloaded 
and soundly cudgelled. 


326 


BOOK IV. tv. 33-39 


are entirely under the control of others. Nay, the 
word of Cleanthes is ready at hand, 


Lead thou me on, O Zeus, and Destiny. ? 


Will ye have me goto Rome? I goto Rome. To 
Gyara? I go to Gyara.* To Athens? I go to 
Athens. To prison? 1 go to prison. If but once 
you say, “Oh, when may a man go to Athens?” 
you are lost. This wish, if unfulfilled, must neces- 
sarily make you unfortunate; if fulfilled, vain and 
puffed up over the wrong kind of thing; again, 
if you are hindered, you suffer a misfortune, falling 
into what you do not wish. Give up, then, all these 
things. “Athensis beautiful.” But happiness is much 
more beautiful, tranquillity, freedom from turmoil, 
having your own affairs under no man’s control. 
“There is turmoil in Rome, and salutations.’”” But 
serenity is worth all the annoyances. If, then, the 
time for these things has come, why not get rid of 
your aversion for them? Why must you needs bear 
burdens like a belaboured donkey? Otherwise, I 
would have you see that you must be ever the slave 
of the man who is able to secure your release, to 
the man who is able to hinder you in everything,® 
and you must serve him as an Evil Genius.‘ 

There is but one way to serenity (keep this 


4 For this rare spirit of folk-lore, see Aristophanes, 
Equities, 111-12, where he is called the Δαΐίμαν Κακοδαίμων. 
His counterpart is the much commoner ’A-yaéds Δαίμων. The 
Evil Genius, though seldom referred to (and in fact ignored 
by many, if not all the standard works of reference, I 
believe), is presupposed by the association of the Kasodai- 
μονισταί (Lysias, frag. 53, 2, Thalheim), and by the very 
word κακοδαίμων itself. For similar devil-worship, οἵ, 1. 
19, 6, of the God Fever. 


327 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


pel” ἡμέραν καὶ νύκτωρ ἔστω πρόχειρον), 
f 
ἀπόστασις τῶν ἀπροαιρέτων, τὸ μηδὲν ἴδιον 
ἡγεῖσθαι, τὸ παραδοῦναι πάντα τῷ δαιμονίῳ, 
“ - [οἱ 
τῇ τύχῃ, ἐκείνους ἐπιτρόπους αὐτῶν ποιήσασθαι, 
& Ἁ e 4 , “> Ἁ Ν Ἁ δισι 
40 οὺς καὶ ὁ Ζεὺς πεποίηκεν, αὐτὸν δὲ πρὸς ἑνὶ 
i “ “ δ ἢ *~ > Νὰ \ bi 
εἶναι μόνῳ, TO ἰδίῳ, τῷ ἀκωλύτῳ, Kal ἀνα- 
a ζω \ 
γιγνώσκειν ἐπὶ τοῦτο ἀναφέροντα τὴν ἀνάγνωσιν 
4 f % 3 7 Ν ἴω .} A 
41 καὶ γράφειν καὶ ἀκούειν. διὰ τοῦτο οὐ δύναμαι 
εἰπεῖν φιλόπονον, ἂν ἀκούσω τοῦτο μόνον, ὅτι 
ἄναγιγνώσκει ἢ γράφει, κἂν προσθῇ τις, ὅτι 
[τὰ \ f ov f wt \ ᾿" \ 
ὅλας TAS νύκτας, οὕπω λέγω, ἂν μὴ γνῷ τὴν 
3 f 2ὯῸΝ \ 4 ta ἢ 4 
ἀναφοράν. οὐδὲ yap ov λέγεις φιλόπονον τὸν 
διὰ παιδισκάριον ἀγρυπνοῦντα' οὐ τοίνυν οὐδ᾽ 
42 ἐγώ. ἀλλ’ ἐὰν μὲν ἕνεκα δόξης αὐτὸ ποιῇ, λέγω 
Ἶ 
φιλόδοξον, ἂν δ᾽ ἕνεκα ἀργυρίου, φιλάργυρον, οὐ 
48 φιλόπονον. ἂν δ᾽ ἐπὶ τὸ ἴδιον ἡγεμονικὸν ἀνα- 
ft ἐᾷ ” 
φέρῃ τὸν πόνον, ty ἐκεῖνο κατὰ φύσιν ἔχῃ καὶ 
44 διεξάγῃ, τότε λέγω μόνον φιλόπονον. μηδέποτε 
γὰρ ἀπὸ τῶν κοινῶν μήτ᾽ ἐπαινεῖτε μήτε ψέγετε, 
μὴ ᾿ 3 % 7 [οἱ a 3 \ Ἅ 
ἀλλὰ ἀπὸ δογμάτων. ταῦτα γάρ ἐστι τὰ ἴδια 
φ tA 4 4 Ἀ 2 % Ἂ ἁ \ 
ἑκάστου, Ta καὶ τὰς πράξεις αἰσχρὰς ἢ καλὰς 
45 ποιοῦντα' τούτων μεμνημένος χαῖρε τοῖς πα- 
“ [οἷ “a 
46 ροῦσιν Kal ἀγάπα ταῦτα, ὧν καιρὸς ἐστιν. εἴ 
com Φ of x ra ἣ *~ fa 
τινὰ ὁρᾷς, ὧν ἔμαθες καὶ διεσκέψω, ἀπαντῶντά 
“ \ 
σοι εἰς Ta ἔργα, εὐφραίνου ἐπ᾽ αὐτοῖς. εἰ TO 
f 
κακόηθες καὶ λοίδορον ἀποτέθεισαι, μεμείωκας, 


328 


BOOK IV. tv. 30-46 


thought ready for use at dawn, and by day, and at 
night), and that is to yield up all claim to the things 
that lie outside the sphere of the moral purpose, to 
regard nothing as your own possession ; to surrender 
everything to the Deity, to Fortune ; to yield every- 
thing to the supervision of those persons whom 
even Zeus has made supervisors ; and to devote your- 
self to one thing only, that which is your own, that 
which is free from hindrance, and to read referring 
your reading to this end, and so to write and 
so to listen. That is why I cannot call a man 
industrious, if I hear merely that he reads or writes, 
and even if one adds that he sits up all night, I cannot 
yet say that the man is industrious, until I know 
for what end he does so. For neither do you call 
a man industrious who loses sleep for the sake of a 
wench ; no more do I. But if he acts this way for 
the sake of reputation, I call him ambitious ; if for 
the sake of money, 1 call him fond of money, not fond 
of toil. If, however, the end for which he toils is 
his own governing principle, to have it be, and live 
continually, in accordance with nature, then and 
then only I call him industrious. For 1 would not 
have you men ever either praise or blame a man for 
things that may be either good or bad, but only for 
judgements. Because these are each man’s own 
possessions, which make his actions either base or 
noble. Bearing all this in mind, rejoice in what 
you have and be satisfied with what the moment 
brings. If you see any of the things that you have 
Jearned and studied thoroughly coming to fruition 
for you in action, rejoice in these things. If you 
have put away or reduced a malignant disposition, 
and reviling, or impertinence, or foul language, or 


47 


48 


1 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


εἰ TO προπετές, εἰ TO αἰσχρολόγον, εἰ TO εἰκαῖον, 
εἰ τὸ ἐπισεσυρμένον, εἰ οὐ κινῇ ἐφ᾽ οἷς πρότερον, 
εἰ οὐχ ὁμοίως γ᾽ ὡς πρότερον, ἑορτὴν ἄγειν 
δύνασαι καθ᾽ ἡμέραν, σήμερον, ὅτε καλῶς ἀνε 
στράφης ἐν τῷδε τῷ ἔργῳ, αὔριον, ὅτε ἐν ἑτέρῳ. 
πόσῳ μείξων αἰτία θυσίας ἡ ὑπατεία ἡ ἐπαρχία. 
ταῦτα ἐκ σοῦ αὐτοῦ γίνεταί σοι καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν 
θεῶν. ἐκεῖνο μέμνησο, τίς ὁ διδούς ἐστι καὶ 
τίσιν καὶ διὰ τίνα. τούτοις τοῖς διαλογισμοῖς 
ἐντρεφόμενος ἔτι διαφέρῃ, ποῦ ὧν εὐδαιμονήσεις, 
ποῦ ὧν ἀρέσεις τῷ θεῷ; οὐ πανταχόθεν τὸ 
ἴσον ἀπέχουσιν; οὐ πανταχόθεν ὁμοίως ὁρῶσιν 
τὰ γινόμενα ; 


ε΄. Πρὸς τοὺς μαχίμους καὶ θηριώδεις. 


μ 3 , 
O καλὸς καὶ ἀγαθὸς οὔτ᾽ αὐτὸς payetai τινι 


’ oy ‘ 
2 οὔτ᾽ ἄλλον ἐᾷ κατὰ δύναμιν. παράδειγμα δὲ καὶ 


f ? 4 " ἡ id ¢ oo” Mi 
τούτου καθώπερ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων EXKELTAL ἡμῖν ὁ 
βίος ὁ Σωκράτους, ὃς οὐ μόνον αὐτὸς πανταχοῦ 
ἐξέφυγεν μώχην, ἀλλ᾽ οὐδ᾽ ἄλλους μάχεσθαι εἴα. 


Ρ 4 pune ” Ἴ a oS f r 
30pa Tapa Fevopovts ἐν τῷ Συμποσίῳ πόσας 


μάχας λέλυκεν, πῶς πάλιν ἠνέσχετο Θρασυ- 
μώχον, πῶς Πώλον, πῶς Καλλικλέους, πῶς τῆς 
γυναικὸς ἠνείχετο, πῶς τοῦ υἱοῦ ἐξελεγχόμενος 





1 The first in Plato’s Repudlic, Book I; the other two in 
his Gorgias. 


33° 


BOOK IV. τν. 46-v. 3 


recklessness, or negligence; if you are not moved 
by the things that once moved you, or at least not 
to the same degree, then you can keep festival day 
after day ; to-day because you behaved well in this 
action, to-morrow because you behaved well in 
another. How much greater cause for thanksgiving 
is this than a consulship or a governorship! These 
things come to you from your own self and from 
the gods. Remember who the Giver is, and to 
whom He gives, and for what end. If you are 
brought up in reasonings such as these, can you any 
longer raise the questions where you are going to be 
happy, and where you will please God? Are not 
men everywhere equally distant from God? Do 
they not everywhere have the same view of what 
comes to pass? 


CHAPTER V 
Against the contentious and brutal 


Tue good and excellent man neither contends 
with anyone, nor, as far as he has the power, does 
he allow others to contend. We have an example 
before us of this also, as well as of everything ‘else, 
in the life of Socrates, who did not merely himself 
avoid contention upon every occasion, but tried to 
prevent others as well from contending. See in 
Xenophon’s Symposium how many contentions he 
has resolved, and again how patient he was with 
Thrasymachus, Polus, and Callicles? and habitually 
so with his wife, and also with his son when the 
latter tried to confute him with sophistical argu- 


332 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


4 ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ, σοφιζόμενος. λίαν γὰρ ἀσφαλῶς 
ἐμέμνητο, ὅτι οὐδεὶς ἀλλοτρίου ἡγεμονικοῦ κυ- 

5 ριεύει. οὐδὲν οὖν ἄλλο ἤθελεν ἢ τὸ ἴδιον. τί 
δ᾽ ἐστὶ τοῦτο; οὐχ ἷκ..ος οὗτ τος .. εἦ κατὰ 
φύσιν' τοῦτο “γὰρ ἀλλότριον" ἀλλ᾽ ὅπως ἐκείνων 
τὰ ἰδια ποιούντων, ὡς αὐτοῖς δοκεῖ, αὐτὸς μηδὲν 
ἧττον κατὰ φύσιν ἕξει καὶ διεξάξει 5 μόνον τὰ 
αὑτοῦ ποιῶν πρὸς τὸ κἀκείνους ἐ ἔχειν κατὰ φύσιν. 

6 τοῦτο γάρ ἐστιν, ὃ ἀεὶ πρόκειται τῷ καλῷ καὶ 
ἀγαθῷ. στρατηγῆσαι ; οὔ: ἀλλ᾽, ἂν διδῶται, 
ἐπὶ ταύτης 1 τῆς ὕλης τὸ το ἢ ἡγεμονικὸν τηρῆσαι. 
γῆμαι; ov" ἄλλ᾽, ἂν διδῶται “γάμος, ἐν ταύτῃ 

τῇ ὕλῃ κατὰ φύσιν ἔχοντα αὑτὸν τηρῆσαι. ἂν 
δὲ θέλῃ, τὸν υἱὸν μὴ ἁμαρτάνειν ἢ τὴν γυναῖκα, 
θέλει τὰ ἀλλότρια “μὴ εἶναι ἀλλότρια. καὶ τὸ 
παιδεύεσθαι τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν, μανθάνειν τὰ ἴδια καὶ 
τὰ ἀλλότρια. 

8 Ποῦ οὖν ἔτι μάχης τόπος τῷ οὕτως ἔχοντι ; : 
μὴ γὰρ θαυμάξει τε τῶν γινομένων 5 μὴ γὰρ 
καινὸν αὐτῷ φαίνεται ; ; μὴ γὰρ οὐ χείρονα καὶ 
χαλεπώτερα π προσδέχεται, τὰ παρὰ τῶν φαύλων 
ἢ ἀποβαίνει αὐτῷ ; μὴ γὰρ οὐ κέρδος λογίξεται 
πᾶν ὃ τι ἀπολείπουσιν ὃ τοῦ ἐσχάτου; ἐ ἔλοι- 

0 δόρησέν σε ὁ Selva.” πολλὴ χάρις αὐτῷ, ὅτι 


1 Schenkl places a lacuna here: ik .. os οὗτος κατά S. 
2 Salmasius : ἐξάξει δι. 
8 Schenk]: ἀπολείπωσιν S. 


--ὦ 





1 This may be a reference to Xenophon, Memorabilia, 11. 
2, as is commonly supposed, but if so, it is a highly in- 
adequate presentation of the case there described, where 
Socrates is the ‘‘ confuter,” and the son merely makes a few 
natural and quite conventional attempts todefend himself. I 


3324 


BOOK IV. v. 3-9 


ments.t For Socrates bore very firmly in mind tha 
no one is master over another's governing principle 
He willed, accordingly, nothing but what was hi: 
own. And what is that? [Not to try to make 
other people act?] in accordance with nature, fo: 
that does not belong to one; but, while they are 
attending to their own business as they think best, 
himself none the less to be and to remain in a state 
of harmony with nature, attending only to his own 
business, to the end that they also may be in 
harmony with nature. For this is the object which 
the good and excellent man has ever before him. 
To become praetor? No; but if this be given him, 
to maintain his own governing principle in these 
circumstances. ‘To marry? No; but if marriage be 
given him, to maintain himself as one who in these 
circumstances is in harmony with nature. But if he 
wills that his son or his wife make no mistake, he 
wills that what is not his own should cease to be 
not hisown. And to be getting an education means 
this: To be learning what zs your own, and what is 
not your own, 

Where, then, is there any longer room for con- 
tention, if a man is in such a state? Why, he is 
not filled with wonder at anything that happens, is 
he? Does anything seem strange to him? Does 
he not expect worse and harsher treatment from 
the wicked than actually befalls him? Does he not 
count it as gain whenever they fail to go to the limit ? 
“ So-and-so reviled you.” Jam greatly obliged to 
suspect that Epictetus was referring (following Chrysippus, 
probably) to some other incident recorded in the very large 
body of Socratic dialogues that once existed. 


2 This is probably the general sense of a passage where 
something has evidently been lost. 
333 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


μὴ ἔπληξεν. “ἀλλὰ καὶ ἔπληξεν. πολλὴ 
¢ er . oF “2 \ \ oo” 23 
χάρις, OTL μὴ ξτρωσεν. ἄλλα καὶ ἔτρωσεν. 
4 f vd 4 3 ? f % 
10 πολλὴ χάρις, OTL μὴ ἀπέκτεινεν. πότε γὰρ 
v Δ Ν Ο nn 
ἔμαθεν ἢ παρὰ τίνι, ὅτε ἥμερόν ἐστι E@ov, ὅτι 
᾿ δ ~ “ 
φιλάλληλον, ὅτι μεγάλη βλάβη τῷ ἀδικοῦντι 
. ἃ “" 
αὐτὴ ἡ ἀδικία; ταῦτα οὖν μὴ μεμαθηκὼς μηδὲ 
Ω ‘ ”~ 
πεπεισμένος, διὰ TL μὴ ἀκολουθήσῃ TO hatvo- 
, e 
11 μένῳ συμφέροντι ; “ βέβληκεν ὁ γείτων λίθους." 
΄ 5 . oe 4 “2? ‘ <. Σ ¥ 
μὴ TL οὖν ov ἡμάρτηκας; “adda Ta ἐν οἰκῷ 
15 κατεάγη. σὺ οὖν σκευάριον εἶ; οὔ, ἀλλὰ 
᾿ ms ‘ 
προαίρεσις. τί οὖν σοι δίδοται πρὸς τοῦτο ; ὡς 
μὲν λύκῳ ἀντιδάκνειν καὶ ἄλλους πλείονας 
λίθους βάλλειν" ἀνθρώπῳ δ᾽ ἐὰν ζητῇς, ἐπί. 
7 ᾿ \ 6 oe ? ; : bY 
σκεψαί cov τὸ ταμιεῖον, ἴδε τίνας δυνάμεις ἔχων 
> , ᾿ s τῇ é \ 
ἐλήλυθας" μὴ te τὴν θηριώδη; μή τι τὴν μνησι- 
Ἑ tf a yy OF ? 3 ef 
13 κακητικὴν ; ἵππος οὖν πότ᾽ ἄθλιος ἐστιν; ὅταν 
» r Ἧ 
τῶν φυσικῶν δυνάμεων στέρηται' οὐχ ὅταν μὴ 
δύνηται κοκκύξειν, ἀλλ᾿ ὅταν μὴ τρέχειν. 
1 ὁ δὲ κύων ; ὅταν πέτεσθαι μὴ δύνηται; ἀλλ᾽ 
ὅταν μὴ ἰχνεύειν. μή ποτ’ οὖν οὕτως καὶ 
ἄνθρωπος δυστυχής ἐστιν οὐχ ὁ μὴ δυνάμενος 
λέοντας πνίγειν ἢ ἀνδριάντας περιλαμβάνειν (οὐ 
x Ἀ »" ΄ Ν xv ε f 
yap πρὸς τοῦτο δυνάμεις τινᾶς ἔχων ἐλήλυθεν 
παρὰ τῆς φύσεως), ἀλλ᾽ ὁ ἀπολωλεκὼς τὸ 
1 See TV. 1, 120. 
* A familiar idea in Plato, especially in the Crito, Gorgias, 
and Republic, but nowhere, as I recall, in exactly these words, 


though Crito 49 B and Republic 366 Εἰ and 367 D bear a close 
resemblance. 


35:1 





σατο 


BOOK IV. v. 9-14 


him for not striking me. “ Yes, but he struck yo 
too.” Iam greatly obliged to him for not woundin 
me. “ Yes,but he wounded you too.” I am great! 
obliged to him for not killing me. For when, or fror 
what teacher, did he learn that man is a tame animal, 
that he manifests mutual affection, that injustice i 
itself is a great injury to the unjust man??? f 
therefore, he has never learned this, or becom 
persuaded of this, why shall he not follow wha 
appears to him to be his advantage? “ My neigh 
bour has thrown stones.” You have not made . 
mistake, have you? “No, but my crockery i 
broken.” Are you apiece of crockery, then? Ne 
but you are moral purpose. What, then, has bee) 
given you with which to meet this attack? If you 
seek to act like a wolf, you can bite back and throv 
more stones than your neighbour did; but if you 
seek to act like a man, examine your store, see wha 
faculties you brought with you into the world 
You brought no faculty of brutality, did you? Ne 
faculty of bearing grudges, did you? When, then 
is a horse miserable P When he is deprived of hi: 
natural faculties. Not when he can’t sing “cuckoo!” 
but when he can’trun. Andadog? Is it when he 
can’t fly? No, but when he can’t keep the scent 
Does it not follow, then, that on the same principle: 
a man is wretched, not when he is unable to choke 
lions,® or throw his arms about statues ὁ (for no mar 
has brought with him from nature into this world 
faculties for this), but when he has lost his kind. 


3. That is, accomplish something almost superhuman, like 
Heracles. 

4 That is, in cold weather, as Diogenes was able to do, 
See ITT. 12, 2. | 


335 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


15 εὔγνωμον, ὁ τὸ πιστόν ; τοῦτον ἔδει συνελθόντας 
θρηνεῖν, εἰς ὅσα κακὰ . ἐλήλυθεν: οὐχὶ μὰ Δία 
τὸν φύντα ἡ τὸν ἀποθανόντα, GAN ᾧ ζῶντι 
συμβεβήκει ἀπολέσαι τὰ ἴδια, οὐ τὰ πατρῷα, 
τὸ ἀγρίδιον καὶ τὸ οἰκίδιον καὶ τὸ πανδοκεῖον 
καὶ τὰ δουλώρια (τούτων γὰρ οὐδὲν ἴδιον τῷ 
ἀνθρώπῳ ἐστίν, ἀλλὰ πάντα ἀλλότρια, δοῦλα, 
ὑπεύθυνα ἄλλοτε ἄλλοις διδόμενα ὑπὸ τῶν κυ- 
ploy, ἀλλὰ τὰ ἀνθρωπικᾶ, τοὺς χαρακτῆρας, 

16 abs ἔχων ἐν τῇ διανοίᾳ ἐλήλυθεν, οἵους καὶ ἐπὶ 
τῶν νομισμάτων ζητοῦντες, ἂν μὲν εὕρωμεν, δοκι- 
μάξομεν, ἂν δὲ μὴ εὕρωμεν, ῥιπτοῦμεν. “τίνος 

11 ἔχει τὸν χαρακτῆρα τοῦτο τὸ τετράσσαρον ; 
'Ῥραιανοῦ ; φέρε. Νέρωνος; ῥῖψον ἔξω, ἀδό- 
κιμὸν ἐστι», σαπρόν." οὕτως καὶ ἐνθάδε. τίνα 


γρρυασταν ον απο υσισνοτοπισρρου τι πτμε τυ συστ εκ πκέτκκοα 


1 The quotations (slightly modified) are from a famous 
passage in Euripides, cresphontes, frag. 449, Nauck®; ‘For 
we ought rather to come together to mourn for the one who 
is born, because of all the evils into which he is coming; 
but, on the other hand, the one who has died, we ought with 
joy and words of gladness to send forth from his former 
abode.” 

* The gods. 

3 This reference is most obscure, for the coins of Nero still 
preserved are numerous and excellent, and there was a great 
systematic reform of coinage in A.D. 64, which became ‘‘ the 
most complete monetary system of ancient times” (Mattingly 
and Sydenham, The Roman Imperial Coinage (1923), 1, 138). 
After the death of Caligula, indeed, the senate ordered all 
his bronze coinage to be melted down (Dio, LX. 22, 3), but 
nothing of the sort is recorded, so far as I know, for Nero. 
There was, of course, a slight reduction in weight for the 
aurens and the denarius, and ‘‘the amount of alloy in the 
silver was increased from 5 to about 10 per cent.,” changes 
which have been regarded as the first step in the process 


336 


BOOK IV. v. 14-27 


ness, and his faithfulness? This is the kind of 
person for whom “men should come together and 
mourn, because of all the evils into which he has 
come”; not, by Zeus, “the one who is born,” or 
“the one who has died,’! but the man whose 
misfortune it has been while he still Hves to lose 
what is his own ; not his patrimony, his paltry farm, 
and paltry dwelling, and his tavern, and his poor 
slaves (for none of these things is a man's own 
possession, but they all belong to others, are sub- 
servient and subject, given by their masters * now to 
one person and now to another); but the qualities 
which make him a human being, the imprints 
which he brought with him in his mind, such as 
we look for also upon coins, and, if we find them, 
we accept the coins, but if we do not find them, 
we throw the coins away. “ Whose imprint does 
this sestertius bear? Trajan’s? Give it to me. 
Nero’s? Throw it out, it will not pass, it is retten.’’? 
So also in the moral life. What imprint do his 


of debasement that reached its climax in the third century. 
See Εἰ, A. Sydenham, Num. Chron., ser. 4, vol. 16 (1916), 19. 
Nero’s particular system of brass and copper coinage was 
also discontinued after his death (ibid. p. 28). Yet it is 
scarcely credible that Epictetus can have had any trifles 
like these in mind.—Of course the mora? point here, which 
Dr. Page wishes to have emphasized, is that Trajan was the 
typically good man (felicior slugusto, melior T'ruianv was 
an acclamation in the Roman Senate for centuries after his 
death —Entropius, 8, δ), and Nero the opposite. But the 
difficulty in the passage is to understand how it ever 
occurred to Epictetus to imply that people actually refused 
to take coius of Nero, simply because they bore the imprint 
of a morally bad man, when, as a matter of fact, 1b Is 
extremely doubtful if any human being, except perhaps 
some hopeless fanatic, ever really did so refuse. 


R37 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ἔχει χαρακτῆρα τὰ δόγματα αὐτοῦ ; “ἥμερον, 
κοινωνικὸν, ἀνεκτίκον, φελώλληλον. φέρε, πα- 
ραδέχομαι, ποιῷ πολίτην τοῦτον, παραδέχομαι 
18 γείτονα, σὔύμπλουν. ὅρα μόνον, μὴ Νερωνιανὸν 
ἔχει χαρακτῆρα. μή τι ὀργίλος ἐστίν, μή τί 
μηνιτῆς, μή τι μεμψίμοιρος ; “ἂν αὐτῷ φανῇ, 
19 πατάσσει τὰς κεφαλὰς τῶν ἀπαντώντων." τί 
οὖν ἔλεγες, ὅτι ἄνθρωπός ἐστιν; μὴ γὰρ ἐκ 


” tal f ἕω 4“, “ 3 ἈΝ 
ψιλῆς μορφῆς κρίνεται τῶν ὄντων ἕκαστον ; ἐπεὶ 


τὰ Ω \ Ἁ ἐᾷ nm > \ 

20 οὕτως λέγε καὶ TO KNPLVOY μῆλον ElVAL Kab 

ὀδμὴν ἔχειν αὐτὸ δεῖ καὶ γεῦσιν οὐκ ἀρκεῖ ἡ 
¢ ἴω Ν 

ἐκτὸς περιγραφή. οὐκοῦν οὐδὲ πρὸς τὸν ἄνθρω- 

¢ ἐν > “ Ν ς..» f 9% > Ἃ ἈΝ 

Tov ἢ pis ἐξαρκεῖ καὶ οἱ ὀφθαλμοι, ἀλλ΄ ἂν τὰ 

31 δόγματα ἔχῃ ἀνθρωπικά. οὗτος οὐκ ἀκούει 
λόγου, οὐ παρακολουθεῖ ἐλεγχόμενος" ὄνος ἐστίν. 
τούτου τὸ αἰδῆμον ἀπονενέκρωται' ἄχρηστός 
ἐστιν, πρόβατον, πάντα μᾶλλον ἢ ἄνθρωπος. 
οὗτος ζητεῖ, τίνα ἀπαντήσας λακτίσῃ ἢ δάκῃ" 
oy xO # A OM 3 f ᾽ ν᾽ 
ὥστε οὐδὲ πρόβατον ἢ ὄνος, ἀλλά τί ποτε ἄγριον 

a Ν 
θηρίον. 

22 Τί οὖν; θέλεις pe καταφρονεῖσθαι ;— πὸ 
τίνων ; ὑπὸ εἰδότων ; καὶ πῶς καταφρονήσουσιν 
εἰδότες τοῦ πράον, τοῦ αἰδήμονος ; ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὸ τῶν 
» x 
ἀγνοούντων ; τί σοι μέλει; οὔ τινι yap ἄλλῳ 

23 τεχνίτῃ τῶν ἀτέχνων." --Αλλὰ πολὺ μᾶλλον 


1 πρόβατον added by C, Schenk! after Salmasius). 





1 Suetonius, Nero, 26. 

* It would seem that the beeswax used in leather sewing 
was familiarly called ‘‘thecobbler’s apple,” and when on sale 
may have been moulded in that shape. Such metaphors are 
common enough, as is also the habit of making things like 


338 


BOOK IV. v. 17-23 


judgements bear? “ He is gentle, generous, patient, 
affectionate.” Give him to me, I accept him, ! 
make this man a citizen, I accept him asa neighbour 
and a fellow-voyager. Only see that he does not 
have the imprint of Nero. Is he choleric. furious, 
querulous? “If he feels like it, he punches the 
heads of the people he meets.”2 Why, then, did 
you call him a human being? For surely every- 
thing is not judged by its outward appearance only, 
is it? Why, if that is so, you will have to eall 
the lump of beeswax an apple.2 No, it must have 
the smell of an apple and the taste of an apple; 
its external outline is not enough. Therefore, 
neither are the nose and the eyes sufficient to prove 
that one is a human being, but you must see whether 
one has the judgements that belong toa human being. 
Here is a man who dves not listen to reason, he 
does not understand when he is contuted; he is an 
ass. Here is one whose sense of self-respect has 
grown numb; he is useless, a sheep, anything but a 
human being. Here is a man who is looking for 
someone whom he can kick or bite when he meets 
him; so that 4e is not even a sheep or an ass, but 
some wild beast. 

What then? Do you want me to be despised 7—~ 
By whom? By men of understanding? And how 
will men of understanding despise the gentle and 
the self-respecting person? No, but by men without 
understanding? What difference is that to you? 
Neither you nor any other craftsman cares about 
those who are not skilled in his art.—Yes, but they 
will fasten themselves upon me all the more.—What 


vases, cakes, candy, pincushions, soap, etc., in the shape of 
fruits or animals. 


339 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


én ἐπιφυήσονταί, μοι.---Τί λέγεις τὸ ἐμοί; ; δύναταί 
τις τὴν προαίρεσιν τὴν σὴν βλάψαι ἢ κωλῦσαι 
ταῖς προσπιπτούσαις “φαντασίαις γρῆσθαι ὡς 

24 πέφυκε εν ὦν ἀμὴν οὖν ἔτι ταράσσῃ καὶ φοβε- 
ρὸν σαυτὸν θέλεις ἐπιδεικνύειν ; οὐχὶ δὲ σπα- 
ρελθὼν εἰς μέσον κηρύσσεις, ὅτι εἰρήνην ἄγεις 
πρὸς πάντας ἀνθρώπους, ὅ τι ἂν ἐκεῖνοι ποιῶσι, 
καὶ μάλιστ᾽ ἐκείνων καταγελᾷς, ὅσοι σε βλάπτειν 
δοκοῦσιν ; “ἀνδράποδα ταῦτα οὐκ οἶδεν οὐδὲ τίς 
εἰμὶ οὐδὲ ποῦ μου τὸ ἀγαθὸν καὶ τὸ κακόν' ov} 
πρόσοδος αὐτοῖς πρὸς τὰ ἐμά." 

2% Οὕτως καὶ ἐχυρὰν πόλιν οἱ 3 οἰκοῦντες κατα- 
γελῶσι τῶν πολιορκούντων' “νῦν οὗτοι τί 
πρᾶγμα ἔχουσιν ἐπὶ τῷ μηδενί ; ἀσφαλές ἐστιν 
ἡμῶν τὸ τεῖχος, τροφὰς ἔχομεν ἐπὶ πάμπολυν 

26 χρόνον, τὴν ἄλλην ἅπασαν παρασκευήν." ταῦτά 
ἐστι τὰ πόλιν ἐχυρὰν καὶ ἀνάλωτον ποιοῦντα, 
ἀνθρώπου δὲ ψυχὴν οὐδὲν ἄχλο ἢ δόγματα. 
ποῖον γὰρ τεῖχος οὕτως ἰσχυρὸν ἢ ποῖον σῶμα 
οὕτως ἀδαμάντινον ἢ ποία κτῆσις avadaipeTos ἢ 

27 ποῖον ἀξίωμα οὕτως ἀνεπιβούλεντον ; πάντα 
πανταχοῦ θνητά, εὐάλωτα, οἷς τισιν τὸν ὁπωσοῦν 
προσέχοντα πᾶσα ἀνάγκη ταράσσεσθαι, κακέλ- 
πιστεῖν, φοβεῖσθαι, πενθεῖν, ἀτελεῖς ἔχειν τὰς 

28 ὀρέξεις, περιπτωτικὰς ἔχειν τὰς ἐκκλίσεις. εἶτα 
οὐ θέλομεν τὴν μόνην δεδομένην ἡ ἡμῖν ἀσφάλειαν 
ἐχυρὰν ποιεῖν ; οὐδ᾽ ἀποστάντες τῶν θνητῶν καὶ 
δούλων τὰ ἀθάνατα καὶ φύσει ἐλεύθερα ἐκπο- 


1 Schenkl: ὅτι 8. 5. οἱ added by Schenkl. 





. Perhaps a reference to Xenophon, Cyropaedeia, VII. 
, 13. 


᾿ 


BOOK IV. v. 23-28 


do you mean by the word “‘me’’? Can anyone hurt 
your moral purpose, or prevent you from employing 
in a natural way the sense-impressions which come 
to you?—No.—-Why, then, are you any longer dis- 
turbed, and why do you want to show that you are 
a timid person? Why do you not come forth and 
make the announcement that you are at peace 
with all men, no matter what they do, and that 
you are especially amused at those who think 
that they are hurting your “These slaves do not 
know either who I am, or where my good and my 
evil are; they cannot get at the things that are 
mine.” 

In this way also those who inhabit a strong city 
laugh at the besiegers:+ “Why are these men taking 
trouble now to no end? Our wall is safe, we have 
food for ever so long a time, and all other supplies.” 
These are the things which make a city strong and 
secure against capture, and nothing but judgements 
make similarly secure the soul of man. For what 
manner of wall is so strong, or what manner of 
body so invincible, or what manner of possession so 
secure against theft, or what-manner of reputation 
so unassailable? For all things everywhere are 
perishable, and easy to capture by assault, and the 
man who in any fashion sets his mind upon any of 
them must needs be troubled in mind, be dis- 
couraged; suffer fear and sorrow, have his desires 
fail, and his aversions fall into what they would 
avoid. If this be so, are we not willing to make 
secure the one means of safety which has been 
vouchsafed us? And are we not willing to give 
up these perishable and slavish things, and devote 
our labours to those which are imperishable and by 


541 


91 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ἈΝ ἃ 


νεῖν; οὐδὲ μεμνήμεθα, ὅτι οὔτε βλάπτει ἄλλος 
ἄλλον οὔτε ὠφελεῖ, ἀλλὰ τὸ περὶ ἑκάστου τού- 
των δόγμα, τοῦτό ἐστε τὸ βλάπτον, τοῦτο τὸ 
ἀνατρέπον, τοῦτο μάχη, τοῦτο στάσις, τοῦτο 
πόλεμος ; ᾿Ετεοκλέα καὶ ἸΤολυνείκη τὸ πεποιηκὸς 
οὐκ ἄλλο ἢ τοῦτο, τὸ δόγμα τὸ περὶ τυραννίδος, 
τὸ δόγμα τὸ περὶ φυγῆς, ὅτι τὸ μὲν ἔσχατον 
τῶν κακῶν, τὸ δὲ μέγιστον τῶν ἀγαθῶν. φύσις 
δ᾽ αὕτη παντός, τὸ διώκειν τὸ ἀγαθόν, φεύγειν τὸ 
κακόν" τὸν ἀφαιρούμενον θατέρου καὶ περι- 
βώλλοντα τῷ ἐναντίῳ, τοῦτον ἡγεῖσθαι πολέμιον, 
ἐπίβουλον, κἂν ἀδελφὸς ἦ, κἂν υἱός, κἂν πατήρ" 
τοῦ γὰρ ἀγαθοῦ συγγενέστερον οὐδέν. λοιπὸν εἰ 
ταῦτα ἀγαθὰ καὶ κακά, οὔτε πατὴρ υἱοῖς φίλος 
οὔτ᾽ ἀδελφὸς ἀδελφῷ, πάντα δὲ πανταχοῦ μεστὰ 
πολεμίων, ἐπιβούλων, συκοφαντῶν. εἰ δ᾽ οἵα 
δεῖ προαίρεσις, τοῦτο μόνον ἀγαθόν ἐστιν, καὶ οἵα 
μὴ δεῖ, τοῦτο μόνον κακόν, ποῦ ἔτι μάχη, ποῦ 
λοιδορία; περὶ τίνων; περὶ τῶν οὐδὲν πρὸς 
ἡμᾶς ; πρὸς τίνας ; πρὸς τοὺς ἀγνοοῦντας, πρὸς 
τοὺς δυστυχοῦντας, πρὸς τοὺς ἠπατημένους περὶ 
τῶν μεγίστων ; 


83 Τούτων Σωκράτης μεμνημένος τὴν οἰκίαν τὴν 


® [ω wv \ > ? 
αὑτοῦ GKEL γυναικὸς ἀνεχόμενος τραχυτάτης, 


ΠῚ 


υἱοῦ ἀγνώμονος. τραχεῖα γὰρ πρὸς τί ἦν; ἵν 





1 Famous enemy brothers: cf. II, 22, 13~14. 
342 


BOOK IV. v. 28-33 


nature free? And do we not remember that no 
man either hurts or helps another, but that it is his 
judgement about each of these things which is the 
thing that hurts him, that overturns him; this is 
contention, and civil strife, and war? That which 
made Eteocles and Polyneices! what they were was 
nothing else but this—their judgement about athrone, 
and their judgement about exile, namely, that one 
was the greatest of evils, the other the greatest 
of goods. And this is the nature of every being, 
to pursue the good and to flee from the evil; 
and to consider the man who robs us of the one 
and invests us with the other as an enemy and 
an aggressor, even though he be a brother, even 
though he be a son, even though he be a father; 
for nothing is closer kin to us than our good. It 
follows, then, that if these externals are good or 
evil, neither is a father dear to his sons, nor a brother 
dear to a brother, but everything on all sides is full 
of enemies, aggressors, slanderers. But if the right 
kind of moral purpose and that alone is good, and 
if the wrong kind of moral purpose and that alone 
is bad, where is there any longer room for contention, 
where for reviling? About what? About the 
things that mean nothing to us? Against whom? 
Against the ignorant, against the unfortunate, against 
those who have been deceived in the most important 
values ? | 

All this is what Socrates bore in mind as he 
managed his house, putting up with a shrewish wife 
and an unkindly son For to what end was she 


2 Perhaps referring to Xenophon, Memoradilia, 11. 2; where 
his son Lamprocles is represented as having lost his temper 
at the constant scolding of Xanthippe. 


343 


be 


36 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ὕδωρ καταχέῃ τῆς κεφαλῆς ὅσον καὶ θέλει, t ἵνα 
Κατα ation τὸν πλακοῦντα" καὶ τί “πρὸς ἐμέ, ἂν 
ὑπολάβω, ὁ ὅτι ταῦτα οὐκ ἔστι πρὸς ἐμέ; τοῦτο O 
ἐμὸν ἔργον ἐστὶ καὶ οὔτε “τύραννος κωλύσει με 
θέλοντα οὔτε δεσπότης οὔτε οἱ πολλοὶ τὸν ἕνα 
οὔθ᾽ ὁ ἰσχυρότερος. τὸν ἀσθενέστερον" τοῦτο γὰρ 
ἀκώλυτον δέδοται t ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ é ἑκάστῳ. ταῦτα 
τὰ δόγματα ἐν οἰκίᾳ φιλίαν ποιεῖ, ἐν πόχει 
ὁμόνοιαν, ἐν ἔθνεσιν εἰρήνην, πρὸς θεὸν εὐχάρισ- 
τον, πανταχοῦ θαρροῦντα, ὡς περὶ τῶν ἀλλο- 
τρίων, ὡς περὶ οὐδενὸς ἀξίων. ἀλλ᾽ ἡμεῖς 
γράψαι μὲν καὶ ἀναγνῶναι ταῦτα καὶ ἀναγιγνω- 
σκόμενα ἐπαινέσαι ἱκανοί, πεισθῆναι δ᾽ οὐδ᾽ 
ἐγγύς. τοιγαροῦν τὸ περὶ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων 
λεγόμενον 


“οἴκοι λέοντες, ἐν Ἐφέσῳ δ᾽ ἀλώπεκες 
καὶ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῶν ἁρμόσει" ἐν σχολῇ λέοντες, ἔξω δ᾽ 
ἀλώπεκες. 


ς΄, Πρὸς τοὺς ἐπὶ τῷ ἐλεεῖσθαι ὀδυνωμένους. 


1 ᾿Ανιῶμαι, φησίν, ἐλεούμενος.--- Πότερον οὖν σὸν 
ἔργον ἐστὶ τὸ ἐλεεῖσθαί σε ἢ τῶν ἐλεούντων ; τί 
δ᾽; ἐπὶ σοί ἐστι τὸ παῦσαι αὐτό ;--- Ἐπ᾿ ἐμοΐ, ἂν 





1 Τὺ was a present from Alcibiades. For the incidents 
here referred to see Seneca, De Consfantia, 18, 5; Diogenes 
Laertius, 2, 36; Athenaeus, 5, 219 B and 14, 643 F; Aelian, 
Varia Historia, 11, 19), 


344 


BOOK IV. v. 33-v1. 1 


shrewish? ΤῸ the end that she might pour all the 
water she pleased over his head, and might trample 
underfoot the cake Yet what is that to me, if I 
regard these things as meaning nothing to me? But 
this control over the moral purpose is my true busi- 
ness, and in it neither shall] a tyrant hinder me against 
my will, nor the multitude the single individual, nor 
the stronger man the weaker; for this has been 
given by God to each man as something that cannot 
be hindered. These are the judgements which 
produce love in the household, concord in the State, 
peace among the nations, make a man thankful 
toward God, confident at all times, on the ground 
that he is dealing with things not his own, with 
worthless things. We, however, although we are 
capable of writing and reading these things, and 
praising them when read, are nowhere near capable 
of being persuaded of them. Wherefore, the proverb 
about the Lacedaemonians, 


Lions at home, but at Ephesus foxes,? 


will fit us too: Lions in the school-room, foxes 
outside. 


CHAPTER VI 
To those who are vexed at being pttied 


I am annoyed, says one, at being pitied.—Is it, 
then, some doing of yours that you are pitied, or 
the doing of those who show the pity? Or again; 
is it in your power to stop it ?—It is, if I can show 


2 Because of their ill-success in Asia Minor. See also the 
scholium on Aristophanes, Pux, 1189. 


345 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


# > cad & Lu 3 “ bd 9 7 
δεικνύω αὐτοῖς μὴ ἄξιον ἔλέου ὄντα ἐμαυτὸν.---- 


ὌΝ fa) Ν ‘\ > 
2 Πότερον & ἤδη cot ὑπάρχει τοῦτο, τὸ μὴ εἶναι 


9 


4 


5 


» ἢ A ᾿ 3 e # ‘ a ΚΜ of 
ἐλέου ἄξιον ἢ οὐχ ὑπάρχει ;---ΩΑἯοκῷὼ ἔγωγε, OTL 
¢ ͵ > 3 @ * o 9 3 ON , 3 a 
ὑπάρχει. GANA OVTOLY οὐκ ἐπὶ τούτοις ἐλεούσιν, 
Lan eed Φ ¥ Ld KY of 3 \ mn ξ 
ἐφ᾽ οἷς, εἴπερ ἄρα, ἣν ἄξιον, ἐπὶ τοῖς ἁμαρτανο- 
» 7 
μένοις, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ πενίᾳ καὶ ἀναρχίᾳ καὶ νόσοις 
‘ , . , ἕ ἤ 
καὶ θανάτοις Kai ἄλλοις ToLlovToU.—LlloTepovy οὖν 
πείθειν παρεσκεύασαι τοὺς πολλούς, ὡς ἄρα 
: Ὄ 7 
οὐδὲν τούτων κακόν ἐστιν, ἀλλ᾽ οἷόν τε καὶ πένητι 
a x 
Kat ἀνάρχοντι καὶ ἀτίμῳ εὐδαιμονεῖν, ἢ σαυτὸν 
ἐπιδεικνύειν αὐτοῖς πλουτοῦντα καὶ ἄρχοντα ; 
τούτων γὰρ τὰ μὲν δεύτερα ἀλαξόνος καὶ ψυχροῦ 
καὶ οὐδενὸς ἀξίου. καὶ ἡ προσποίησις ὅρα δι 
οἵων ἂν γένοιτο" δουλάριά oe χρήσασθαι δεήσει 
καὶ ἀργυρωμάτια ὀλίγα κεκτῆσθαι καὶ ταῦτα ἐν 
φανερῷ δεικνύειν, εἰ οἷόν τε, ταὐτὰ πολλάκις καὶ 
λανθάνειν πειρᾶσθαι ὅτε ταὐτά ἐστιν, καὶ ἱμα- 
“ὃ 4 4 * ἌΓ \ 4 x 
TLOLa OTLATVA καὶ τὴν ἄλλην πομπὴν Kat τὸν 
τιμώμενον ἐπιφαίνειν ὑπὸ τῶν ἐπιφανεστάτων 3 
καὶ δειπνεῖν πειρᾶσθαι παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς ἢ δοκεῖν γε, 
ὅτι δειπνεῖς, καὶ περὶ τὸ σῶμα δέ τινα κακοτεχ- 
» ἤ 
νεῖν, ὡς εὐμορφότερον φαίνεσθαι καὶ γενναιότε- 
pov τοῦ ὄντος" ταῦτ σε δεῖ μηχανᾶσθαι, εἰ τὴν 
Cer f a“ 
δευτέραν ὁδὸν ἀπιέναι θέλεις ὥστε μὴ ἐλεεῖσθαι. 
ἐπὶ a δὲ 4 9 + Ἢ , ae \ 
πρώτη δὲ καὶ ἀνήνυτος καὶ μακρά, ὃ ὁ Ζεὺς 
οὐκ ἠδυνήθη ποιῆσαι, τοῦτο αὐτὸ ἐπιχειρεῖν, 
Υ̓ ~ 
πάντας ἀνθρώπους πεῖσαι, τίνα ἐστὶν ἀγαθὰ καὶ 


1 Upton’s “‘codex”: ἄρχοντι &, 
* Elter ; ἐπιφανῶν τούτων 5. 


346 


BOOK IV, vi. 1-5 


them that I do not deserve their pity——And do you 
now possess the power of not being deserving of 
pity, or do you not possess it?—It seems to me, 
indeed, that I possess it. Yet these people do not 
pity me for what would deserve pity, if anything 
does, that is, my mistakes; but for poverty, and for 
not holding office, and for things like disease, and 
death, and the like.—Are you, then, prepared to 
convince the multitude that none of these things is 
bad, but that it is possible for a poor man, and 
one who holds no office or position of honour, to 
be happy; or are you prepared to show yourself off 
to them asa rich man and an official? Of these 
alternatives the second is the part of a braggart, 
and a tasteless and worthless person. Besides, 
observe the means by which you must achieve your 
pretence: You will have to borrow some paltry 
slaves ; and possess a few pieces of silver plate, and 
exhibit these same pieces conspicuously and fre- 
quently, if you can, and try not to let people know 
that they are the same; and possess contemptible 
bright clothes, and all other kinds of finery, and 
show yourself off as the one who is honoured by the 
most distinguished persons; and try to dine with 
them, or at least make people think that you dine 
with them; and resort to base arts in the treatment 
gf your person, so as to appear more shapely and of 
gentler birth than you actually are. All these con- 
trivances you must adopt, if you wish to take the 
way of the second alternative and avoid pity. 

But the first way is ineffectual and tedious—to 
attempt the very thing which Zeus himself has been 
unable to accomplish, that is, to convince all men of 
what things are good, and what evil. Why, that 


347 


ARRIAN'S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


a 


; % s 4 ? “~ 3 ΤΩ , 
κακά. μὴ yap δέδοται σοι τοῦτο ; ἐκεῖνο μόνον 
ΨᾺ ‘4 
σοι δέδοται, σαυτὸν πεῖσαι. καὶ οὕπω πέπεικας" 


ΓΙ Fa) > “ , \ + \ 
εἰτὰ μοι νῦν ETLYELPELS πείθειν τοὺς ἄλλους ; καὶ 


={ 


, al , 
τίς TOL τοσούτῳ χρόνῳ σύνεστιν ὡς σὺ σαυτῷ ; τίς 
δ “ Ν “ 
δὲ οὕτως πιθανὸς ἐστί σοι πρὸς TO πεῖσαι ὡς σὺ 
σαυτῷ ; τίς δ᾽ εὐνούστερον καὶ οἰκειότερον ἔχων ἢ 
8 σὺ σαυτῷ ; πῶς οὖν οὔπω πέπεικας σαυτὸν μαθεῖν ; 
νῦν οὐχὶ ἄνω κάτω; τοῦτ᾽ ἔστι περὶ ὃ ἐσπού- 
ὃ ‘ 77 A 4 ef 5 > ‘ 
KAS; οὐ" μανθάνειν, ὥστε ἄλυπος εἰναι καὶ 
2 f Ἀ Ἂ ; Ἀ ? 4 _ Ἀ 
9 ἀτάραχος καὶ ἁταπείνωτος καὶ ἐλεύθερος ; πρὸς 
ἴω } 2 3 “ er i > ‘ ¢ em et 
ταῦτα οὖν οὐκ ἀκήκοας, OTL μία ἐστὶν ἡ ὁδὸς ἡ 
”~ % f ” 
φέρουσα, ἀφεῖναι τὰ ἀπροαίρετα Kal ἐκστῆναι 
> or a + \ 9 f \ 5 
10 αὐτῶν καὶ ομολογῆσαι αὐτὰ ἀλλοτρία; τὸ οὖν 
ἄλλον τι ὑπολαβεῖν περὶ σοῦ ποίου εἴδους ἐστίν ; 
---[οὔ ἀπροαιρέτου.---Οὐκοῦν οὐδὲν πρὸς σέ;--- 
f 
Οὐδέν.---Ἔτε οὖν δακνόμενος ἐπὶ τούτῳ καὶ 
¢ 5 La) fal 
ταρασσόμενος oles πεπεῖσθαι περὶ ἀγαθῶν Kai 
κακῶν ; 
ky ¥ 4 [οὶ 
: Οὐ θέλεις οὖν ἀφεὶς τοὺς ἄλλους αὐτὸς σαυτῷ 
4 
γενέσθαι καὶ μαθητὴς καὶ διδάσκαλος ; “ ὄψονται 
οἱ ἄλλοι, εἰ λυσιτελεῖ αὐτοῖς παρὰ φύσιν ἔχειν 
ἈΝ 
καὶ διεξάγειν, ἐμοὶ δ᾽ οὐδείς ἐστιν ἐγγίων ἐμοῦ. 
12 r 8 a Ff 3 ? \ ‘ ἢ , 
2 τί οὖν τοῦτό ἐστιν, ὅτι τοὺς μὲν λόγους ἀκήκοα 
‘ δ Ld λ , x o 
Tous τῶν φιλοσόφων Kai συγκατατίθεμαι αὐτοῖς, 
1 οὐ added by Schenkl. 
348 


BOOK IV. vr. 5-12 


has not been vouchsafed to you, has it? Nay, this 
only has been vouchsafed—to convince yourself. 
And you have not convinced yourself yet! And 
despite that, bless me! are you now trying to 
convince all other men? Yet who has been living 
with you so long as you have been living with 
yourself? And who is so gifted with powers of 
persuasion to convince you, as you are to convince 
yourself? Who is more kindly disposed and nearer 
to you than you are to yourself? How comes it, 
then, that you have not persuaded yourself to learn ? 
Are not things now upside down? [5 this what you 
have been in earnest about? Not to learn how to 
get rid of pain, and turmoil, and humiliation, and so 
become free? Have you not heard that there is but 
a single way which leads to this end, and that is to 
give up the things which lie outside the sphere of 
the moral purpose, and to abandon them, and to 
admit that they are not yourown? To what class 
of things, then, does another’s opinion about you 
belong ?—To that which lies outside the sphere of 
the moral purpose.—And so it is nothing to you ?— 
Nothing.—Svo long, then, as you are stung and 
disturbed by the opinions of others, do you still 
fancy that you have been persuaded as to things 
good and evil? 

Will you not, then,:let other men alone, and 
become your own pupil and your own teacher? “* All 
other men shall see to it, whether it is profitable for 
them to be in a state out of accord with nature and 
so to live, but as for me no one is closer to myself 
than Jam. What does it mean, then, that I have 
heard the words of the philosophers and assent to 
them, but that in actual fact my burdens have 


349 


13 


4 


17 


18 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


a 3 +A ? f 5 f ef 
ἔργῳ 8 οὐδὲν γέγονα κουφότερος; py τι οὕτως 
\ 
ἀφυὴς εἰμι: Kat μὴν περὶ τὰ ἄλλα, ὅσα ἐβου- 
\ f \ 
λήθην, οὐ λίαν ἀφυὴς εὑρέθην, ἀλλὰ καὶ γράμ- 
ματα ταχέως ἔμαθον καὶ παλαίειν καὶ γεωμε- 
~ 7 
τρεῖν καὶ συλλογισμοὺς ἀναλύειν. μή τι οὖν οὐ 
f f t / Ν \ > v \ 
πέπεικε μὲ ὁ λόγος; καὶ μὴν οὐκ ἄλλα τινᾶ 
fon ra 3 a) 
οὕτως ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἐδοκίμασα ἢ εἱλόμην καὶ νῦν 
περὶ τούτων ἀναγυγνώσκω, ταῦτα ἀκούω, ταῦτα 
γράφω" ἄλλον οὐχ εὑρήκαμεν μέχρι νῦν ἰσχυ- 
ρότερον τούτου λόγον. τί οὖν τὸ λεῖπόν μοί 
ἐστίν ; μὴ οὐκ ἐξήρηται τἀναντία δόγματα; μὴ 
% ‘ x ¢ FA 3 tA f ? +O} > 
αὐταὶ αἱ ὑπολήψεις ὠγύμναστοί εἶσιν οὐδ᾽ εἰθεσ- 
ὔ + δ ἼΝ ν "' ᾿ > ς ἕ , 
μέναι uTavray ἐπὶ τὰ ἔργα, GAN ὡς οπλάρια 
¢ “ 
ἀποκείμενα ὃ κατίωται καὶ οὐδὲ περιαρμόσαι μοι 
wo ἴω 9 
δύναται; καίτοι οὔτ᾽ ἐπὶ τοῦ παλαίειν οὔτ᾽ ἐπὶ 
τοῦ γράφειν ἢ ἀναγιγνώσ κειν ἀρκοῦμαι τῷ μαθεῖν, 
> i 
ἀλλ᾽ ἄνω κάτω στρέφω τοὺς προτεινομένους Kal 
ww f \ f t , Ν a 
ἄλλους πλέκω καὶ μεταπίπτοντας ὡσαύτως. TAS 
ἀναγκαῖα θεωρήματα, ap ὧν ἔστιν ὁρμώμενον 
ot [4 » 7 a“ > , 
ἄλυπον γενέσθαι, ἀφοβον, ἀπαθῆ, ἀκώλυτον, 
ἐλεύθερον, ταῦτα δ᾽ οὐ γυμνάζω οὐδὲ μελετῶ 
κατὰ ταῦτα τὴν προσήκουσαν μελέτην. εἷἶτώ 
# ’ ¢ of . 3 a 3 “ 3 “ 
pot μέλει, TL OL ἄλλοι περὶ ἐμοῦ ἐροῦσιν, εἰ φανοῦ- 
”~ é “ 
par αὐτοῖς ἀξιόλογος, εἰ φανοῦμαι εὐδαίμων ;” 
, 
Ταλαίπωρε, ov θέλεις βλέπειν, τί od λέγεις 
[ο , f ad ”~ 
περὶ σαυτοῦ; τίς φαίνῃ σαυτῷ; τίς ἐν τῷ ὑὕπο- 
f ἔ .] ~ 3 f nw 
λαμβάνειν, τίς ἐν τῷ ὀρέγεσθαι, τίς ἐν τῷ ἐκκλί- 
ΐ rf 8 ¢t ~ aw 63 ων 
νειν" τῖίς ἐν ὁρμῇ, παρασκευῇ, ἐπιβολῇ, τοῖς ἄλλοις 
1 Reiske: ἐπικείμενα Αὶ, 
350 


tat 


BOOK IV. νι. 12~18 


become no lighter? Can it be that I am so dull? 
And yet, indeed, in everything else that I have 
wanted I was not found to be unusually dull, but I 
learned my letters rapidly, and how to wrestle, and 
do my geometry, and analyse syllogisms. Can it be, 
then, that reason has not convinced me? Why, 
indeed, there is nothing to which I have so given my 
approval from the very first, or so preferred, and 
now | read about these matters, and hear them, and 
write about them. Down to this moment we have 
not found a stronger argument than this. What is 
it, then, that I yet lack? Can it be that the 
contrary judgements have not all been put away ? 
Can it be that the thoughts themselves are unexer- 
cised and unaccustomed to face the facts, and, like 
old pieces of armour that have been stowed away, are 
covered with rust, and can no longer be fitted to me ἢ 
Yet in wrestling, or in writing, or in reading, I am 
not satisfied with mere learning, but I turn over and 
over the arguments presented to me, and fashion 
new ones, and likewise syllogisms with equivocal 
premisses. However, the necessary principles, those 
which enable a man, if he sets forth from them, to 
get rid of grief, fear, passion, hindrance, and become 
free, these I do not exercise, nor do | take the 
practice that is appropriate for them. After all that, 
am I concerned with what everyone else will say 
about me, whether I shall appear important or happy 
in their eyes?” 

O miserable man, will you not see what you are 
saying about yourself? What sort of a person are 
you in your own eyes? What sort of a person in 
thinking, in desiring, in avoiding; what sort of a 
person in choice, preparation, design, and the other 


351 


ats 
ant att 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


“ ~ x f f 
τοῖς ἀνθρωπικοῖς épyois; ἀλλὰ μέλει σοι, εἴ σε 
"a τ \ ‘ 5 ge? 
ἐλεοῦσιν of ἄλλοι ;—Nal ἀλλὰ παρὰ τὴν ἀξίαν 
5 ἴω 3 a 3.4 ΄ 48 a, ἢ δέ 
ἐλεοῦμαι.--- Οὐκοῦν ἐπὶ τούτῳ ὀδυνᾷ; ὁ O€ γε 
ὅ ΟΝ # 4 f 5 - ᾽ n cy »᾽ 
ὀδυνώμενος ἐλεεινὸς ἐστιν ;—Nat.—llos οὖν ἔτι 
i - a Φ \ 
παρὰ ἀξίαν é\en; αὐτοῖς yap οἷς περὶ τὸν ἔλεον 
πάσχεις κατασκευάξζξεις σεαυτὸν ἄξιον τοῦ ἐλεεῖ- 
ὔ = , Σ , a +R ἢ + ἡ 
σθαι. τί οὖν λέγει ᾿Αντισθένης ; οὐδέποτ᾽ ἤ- 
? » OPN 3 
κουσὰς ; “βασιλικόν, ὦ Κῦρε, πράττειν μὲν εὖ, 
Ἂ" 3 " 7 93 ἃ Ν e ἴω af \ 
κακῶς δ᾽ ἀκούειν. τὴν κεφαλὴν ὑγιᾶ ἔχω καὶ 
πάντες οἴονται ὅτι κεφαλαχλγῶ. τί μοι μέλει; 
ἀπύρετός εἶμι καὶ ὡς πυρέσσοντί μοι συνάχθον- 
ται' “πάλας, ἐκ τοσούτου χρόνου οὐ διέλειπες 
Ν 
πυρέσσων." λέγω καὶ ἐγὼ σκυθρωπάσας ὅτι 
aa ‘a rd γ θ ᾽ ¥ 3) Ὁ f 5 ge 
vats ταῖς ἀληθείαις πολὺς ἤδη χρόνος, ἐξ οὗ μοι 
a f 
κακῶς ἐστίν “ci οὖν γένηται; ὡς av ὁ 
θεὸς θέλῃ. καὶ ἅμα ὑποκαταγελῶ τῶν οἶκτει- 
᾽ 
ρόντων με. 
~ P " f f 
Ti οὖν κωλύει καὶ ἐνταῦθα ὁμοίως; πένης 
. F 4 1 ἢ ‘ , of 4 ἢ f 8 
εἰμί, ἀλλὰ ὀρθὸν δόγμα ἔχω περὶ πενίας. τί οὖν 
μοι μέλει, εἰ μ᾽ ἐπὶ τῇ πενίᾳ ἐλεοῦσιν ; οὐκ ἄρχω, 
ἄλλοι δ᾽ ἄρχουσιν. adr ὃ δεῖ ὑπειληφέναι, 
ω ” 
ὑπείληφα περὶ τοῦ ἄρχειν καὶ μὴ ἄρχειν. 
bd e663 “a f 2 N 3 id ‘ad »» 
ὄψονται οἱ ἐλεοῦντές με, ἐγὼ δ᾽ οὔτε πεινῷ οὔτε 
“ ἴω +) ~ 
δεψῶ οὔτε ῥιγῶ, ἀλλ’ ἀφ᾽ ὧν αὐτοὶ πεινῶσιν ἢ 
ta t ? a 
διψῶσιν οἴονται κἀμέ. τί οὖν αὐτοῖς ποιήσω; 
f , ᾿ 
περιερχόμενος κηρύσσω καὶ λέγω “μὴ πλα- 
“ “ἢ al f 
νᾶσθε, ἄνδρες, ἐμοὶ καλῶς ἐστίν: οὔτε πενίας 


μανμφνντθημκαν 





ῥ- 


1 §o also Marcus Aurelius, 7, 36; and cf. Diogenes 
Laertius, 6, 3. 


352 


BOOK IV. vi. 18-23 


activities of men? Yet you are concerned whether 
the rest of mankind pity you ?>—Yes, but I do not 
deserve to be pitied—And so you are pained at 
that? And is the man who is pained worthy of 
pity >—Yes.—How, then, do you fail to deserve pity 
after all? By*the very emotion which you feel con- 
cerning pity you make yourself worthy of pity. What, 
then, says Antisthenes? Have you never heard? 
‘Jt is the lot of a king, O Cyrus, to do well, but to 
be ill spoken of.”’1 My head is perfectly sound and 
yet everybody thinks I have a headache. What do 
I care? JI have no fever, and yet everybody 
sympathizes with me as though I had: “ Poor 
fellow, you have had a fever for ever so long.”’ I 
draw a long face too, and say, “ Yes, it truly is a 
long time that I have been in a bad way.” “ What 
is going to happen, then?” As God will, I reply, 
and at the same time I smile quietly to myself at 
those who are pitying me. 

What, then, prevents me from doing the same 
thing in my moral life also? JI am poor, but I have 
a correct judgement about poverty. Why, then, am 
I concerned, if men pity me for my poverty? I 
do not hold office, while others do. But I have the 
right opinion about holding office and not holding it, 
Let those who pity me look to it,? but as for myself, 
f am neither hungry, nor thirsty, nor cold, but from 
their own hunger and thirst they think I too am 
hungry and thirsty. What, then, am I to do for 
them? Shall I go about and make proclamation, 
and say, “* Men, be not deceived, it is well with me. 


* As in IV. 7, 23, and 8, 24, and Acts xviii. 15. Probably 
ὄψει, in 8, I. 4, 13, can be defended on the analogy of these 
other cases. 


353 


VOL, II. 


24 


28 


ARRLAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


bi f ”# 3 id "ἢ e an ” 
ἐπιστρέφομαι οὔτε ἀναρχίας οὔτε ἁπλῶς ἄλλου 
᾿ 3 # a a) J f 
οὐδενὸς ἢ δογμάτων ὀρθῶν' ταῦτα ἔχω ἀκώλυτα, 
Εν Ν ,; +d 3 ς Ἃ f cf , y 
οὐδενὸς πεφρόντικα ἔτι ; καὶ τίς αὕτη ddvapia; 
- " oer >. ft ra 
πῶς ἔτε ὀρθὰ δόγματα ἔχω μὴ ἀρκούμενος TO 
a “ 3 3 2 3 f ζ ᾿ ἴω Bo. ς 
εἶναι ὅς εἰμι, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπτοημένος ὑπὲρ τοῦ δοκεῖν ; 
"ARN ἄλλοι πλειόνων τεύξονται καὶ προτι- 
? ΠῚ \ 
unOnoovrat.—Te οὖν εὐχογώτερον ἢ τοὺς περί τι 
ἐσπουδακότας ἐν ἐκείνῳ πλεῖον ἔχειν, ἐν ᾧ ἐσπου- 
δάκασιν; περὶ ἀρχὰς ἐσπουδάκασιν, σὺ περὶ 
t 3 ~ Ν ~ 
δόγματα' καὶ περὶ πλοῦτον, σὺ περὶ τὴν χρῆσιν 
τῶν φαντασιῶν. ὅρα, εἰ ἐν τούτῳ σου πλέον 
«Δ nt +] 
ἔχουσιν, περὶ ὃ σὺ μὲν ἐσπούδακας, ἐκεῖνοι ὃ 
“ a ~ \ 
ὠμελοῦσιν' εἰ συγκατατίθενταε μᾶλλον περὶ τὰ 
% ? 
φυσικὰ μέτρα, εἰ ὀρέγονταί σου ἀναποτευκτότερον, 
é 4 
εἰ ἐκκλίνουσιν ἀπεριπτωτότερον, εἰ ἐν ἐπιβολῇ, 
¢ ~ » ἴων 
ἐν προθέσει, εἰ ἐν ὁρμῇ μᾶλλον εὐστοχοῦσιν, εἰ 
‘ ? »᾿ e e ΜᾺ 
τὸ πρέπον σῴζουσιν ὡς ἄνδρες, ὡς υἱοί, ὡς γονεῖς, 
“ΩΡ Chew ‘ ‘ ν᾿ * , > Ff 
εἶθ᾽ ἑξῆς κατὰ τὰ ἄλλα τῶν σχέσεων ὀνόματα. 
> δ᾽ ¥ bd - ‘ at 3 θέ ns 
εἰ δ᾽ ἄρχουσιν ἐκεῖνοι, ov οὐ θέλεις σαυτῷ 
Ν 3 Ρ + a ἐἦ 4 ‘ > Ν - 
τὰς ἀληθείας εἰπεῖν, OTL σὺ μὲν οὐδὲν τούτου 
ἕνεκα ποιεῖς, ἐκεῖνοι δὲ πάντα, ἀλογώτατον δὲ 
Ν bs f “ ov. f Ἂ % 
τὸν ἐπιμελούμενον Tivos ἔλαττον φέρεσθαι ἢ τὸν 
ἀμελοῦντα ; 
Ov,” ἀλλ᾽ ἐπειδὴ φροντίζω ἐγὼ δογμάτων 
5 -Φ > s , / 3 2} bd @ 
ὀρθῶν, evroywrepov μέ ἐστιν apyew.— Ev ᾧ 


1 Defended in apodosis by Reiske and Schenkl: Upton 
added ἀνιᾷ after δ᾽ and Schweighiuser od. 

* Transferred to this position by s from before # just 
above. 


354 


BOOK IV. v1. 23~28 


I take heed neither of poverty, nor lack of office, 
nor, in a word, anything else, but only correct 
judgements; these I possess free from hindrance, I 
have taken thought of nothing further’? And yet, 
what foolish talk is this? How do I any longer 
hold correct judgements when I am not satisfied 
with being the man that I am, but am excited about 
what other people think of me ? 

But others will get more than I do, and will be 
preferred in honour above me.—Well, and what is 
more reasonable than for those who have devoted 
themselves to something to have the advantage in 
that to which they have devoted themselves ? 
They have devoted themselves to office, you to 
judgements; and they to wealth, you to dealing 
with your sense-impressions. See whether they 
have the advantage over you in what you have 
devoted yourself to, but they neglect; whether 
their assent is more in accord with natural 
standards, whether their desire is less likely to 
achieve its aim than is yours, whether their aversion 
is less likely to fall into what it would avoid, 
whether in design, purpose, and choice they hit the 
mark better, whether they observe what becomes 
them as men, as sons, as parents, and then, in order, 
through all the other terms for the social relations. 
But if they hold office, will you not tell yourself the 
truth, which is, that you do nothing in order to get 
office, while they do everything, and that it is most 
unreasonable for the man who pays attention to 
something to come of with less than the man who 
neglects it? 

Nay, but because I greatly concern myself with 
correct judgements, it is more reasonable for me to 


355 


Aa 2 


30 


91 


33 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


φροντίξεις, ἐν δόγμασιν' ἐν ᾧ δ᾽ ἄλλοι μᾶλλόν 
σου πεφροντίκασιν, ἐκείνοις παραχώρει. οἷον εἰ 
διὰ τὸ δόγματα ἔ ἔχειν ὀρθὰ ἠξίους τοξεύων μῶλλον 
ἐπιτυγχάνειν τῶν τοξοτῶν ἢ χαλκεύων μᾶλλον 
τῶν χαλκέων. ἄφες οὖν τον περὶ τὰ δόγματα 
σπουδὴν καὶ περὶ ἐκεῖνα ἀναστρέφου, ἃ κτήσα- 
σθαι θέλεις, καὶ τότε κλαῖε, ἐάν σοι μὴ “προχωρῇ' 
κλαίειν γὰρ ἄξιος εἰ. νῦν δὲ πρὸς ἄλλοις 
γίνεσθαι λέγεις, ἄλλων ἐπιμελεῖσθαι, οἱ 5 πολλοὶ 
δὲ τοῦτο καλῶς λέγουσιν, ὅτε ἔργον ἔργῳ οὐ 
κοινωνεῖ. ὁ μὲν ἐξ ὄρθρου ἀναστὰς ζητεῖ, τίνα 
ἐξ οἴκου τοῦ Καίσαρος ὃ ἀσπάσηται, τίνι κεχα- 
ρισμένον λόγον εἴπῃ, τίνι δῶρον πέμψῃ, πῶς τῷ 
ὀρχηστῇ ἀρέσῃ, πῶς κακοηθισάμενος ἄλλον 
ἄλλῳ χαρίσηται. ὅταν εὔχηται, περὶ τούτων 
εὔχεται: ὅταν @un, ἐπὶ τούτοις Over: τὸ τοῦ 
Πυθαγόρου 


μὴ δ᾽ ὕπνον μαλακοῖσιν ἐπ᾿ ὄμμασι προσ- 


δέξασθαι 


5 ”~ f ἴω P 3 ζω] 
ἐνταῦθα παρατέθεικεν. πῇ παρέβην τῶν 
Ν f ΞΕ a4 f ¢ > 9 
πρὸς κολακείαν; ‘TL ἔρεξα; * μὴ TL ὡς ἐλεύθε- 
pos, μή τι ὡς γενναῖος ; ἡ κἂν εὕρῃ TL τοιοῦτον, 
ἐπιτιμᾷ ἑαυτῷ καὶ" ἐγκαλεῖ, “τί γάρ σοι καὶ 


εἴ 


1 σήν supplied Ly δ. 
; Upton: καί δ. 
ὃ rod Καίσαρος added by Wolf: ἐξιόντα suggested by 
Reiske, 
ὁ Salmasius: ἔρεξα &. 





1 Cf. IV. 10, 24. 
* Golden Verses, 40. See ITT. 10, 2 


356 


BOOK IV. vi. 28-33 


rule.—Yes, in what you greatly concern yourself 
with, that is, judgements: but in that with which 
other men have concerned themselves more greatly 
than you have, give place to them. It is as though, 
because you have correct judvements, vou insisted 
that you ought in archery to hit the mark better than 
the archers, or to surpass the smiths at their trade. 
Drop, therefore, your earnestness about judge- 
ments, and concern yourself with the things which 
you wish to acquire, and then lament if you do not 
succeed, for you have a right to do that. But as it is, 
you claim to be intent upon other things. to care for 
other things, and there is wisdom in what common 
people say, ‘‘ One serious business has no partnership 
with another.””? One man gets up at early dawn 
and looks for someone of the household of Caesar to 
salute, someone to whom he may make a pleasant 
speech, to whom he may send a present, how he may 
please the dancer, how he may gratify one person 
by maliciously disparaging another. When he prays, 
he prays for these objects, when he sacrifices, he 
sacrifices for these objects. The word of Pytha- 
goras,” 


Also allow not sleep to draw nigh to your languor- 
ous eyelids, 


he has wrested to apply here. “*‘ Where did I go 
wrong— 8 in matters of flattery? ‘What did I do?’ 
Can it be that 1 acted as a free man, or as a man of 
noble character?’’ And if he find an instance of the 
sort, he censures and accuses himself: “ Why, what 


3 The single quotation-marks enclose famous phrases from 
the Golden Verses, which Epictetus, with bitter irony, repre- 
sents such a self-seeker as employing in a sense appropriate 
to his own contemptible behaviour. 


357 


36 


37 


38 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


τοῦτο εὐπεῖν ; : οὐ γὰρ ἐνῆν ψεύσασθαι > λέγουσιν 
καὶ οἱ φιλόσοφοι, ὅτε οὐδὲν κωλύει ψεῦδος 
εἰπεῖν. σὺ oO εἴπερ ταῖς ἀληθείαις οὐδενὸς 
ἄλλου πεφρόντικας ἢ 1 χρήσεως οἵας δεῖ φαντα- 
σιῶν, εὐθὺς ἀναστὰς ἕωθεν ἐνθυμοῦ ἐς τίνα μοι 
λείπει πρὸς ἀπάθειαν; τίνα “πρὸς ἀταραξίαν ; 
τίς εἶμι; μή τι σωμάτιον, μή τι κτῆσις, μή τι 
φήμη; οὐδὲν τούτων. ἀλλὰ τί; λογικόν εἶμι 
EGov.” τίνα οὖν τὰ ἀπαιτήματα ; : ἀναπόλει τὰ 
πεπραγμένα. “Ἐ χῇ παρέβην᾽ τῶν πρὸς εὔροιαν; 
“τί ἔρεξα᾽ ἢ ἄφιλον ἢ ἀκοινώνητον ἢ ἄγνωμον; 
‘Tb μοι δέον οὐκ ἐτελέσθη᾽ πρὸς ταῦτα ; 

Τοσαύτης οὖν διαφορᾶς οὔσης τῶν ἐπιθυμου- 
μένων, τῶν ἔργων, τῶν εὐχῶν ἔτι θέλεις τὸ ἴσον 
ἔχειν ἐκείνοις, περὶ ἃ σὺ μὲν οὐκ ἐσπούδακας, 
ἐκεῖνοι δ᾽ ἐσπουδάκασιν ; εἶτα θαυμάξεις, εἴ σ᾽ 
ἐλεοῦσιν, καὶ ἀγανακτεῖς ; ἐκεῖνοι δ᾽ οὐκ ἀγα- 
νακτοῦσιν, εἰ σὺ αὐτοὺς ἐλεεῖς. διὰ τί; ὅτι 
ἐκεῖνοι μὲν πεπεισμένοι, εἰσίν, ὅτε ἀγαθῶν τυγ- 
χάνουσιν, σὺ δ᾽ οὐ πέπεισαι. διὰ τοῦτο σὺ 
μὲν οὐκ ἀρκῇ τοῖς σοῖς. ἀλλ᾽ ἐφίεσαι τῶν 
ἐκείνων" ἐκεῖνοι δ᾽ ἀρκοῦνται τοῖς ἑαυτῶν καὶ 
οὐκ ἐφίενται τῶν σῶν. ἐπεί Tor εἰ ταῖς 
ἀληθείαις ἐπέπεισο, ὅτι περὶ τὰ ἀγαθὰ σὺ ὁ 
ἐπιτυγχάνων εἶ, ἐκεῖνοι δ' ἀποπεπλάνηνται, οὐδ᾽ 
ἂν ἐνεθυμοῦ, τί λέγουσι περὶ σοῦ. 


1 # supplied by s. 


1 Of. Stobaeus, δεῖ, IL. 7, 11” (vol. ID. p. 111, 138 ff 
Wachsmuth): ‘They (the Stoics) think that he (the wise 
man) will upon occasion employ falsehood in a number of 
different ways.” 





358 


BOOK IV. vi. 33-38 


business did you have to say that? For wasn’t it 
possible to lie? Even the philosophers say that 
there is nothing to hinder one’s telling a lie.” Ὁ 
But if in all truth you have concerned yourself 
greatly with nothing but the proper use of sense- 
impressions, then as soon as you get up in the 
morning bethink you,“ What do I yet lack in order to 
achieve tr anquillity? What to achieve calm? What 
am Ir I am nota paltry body, not property, not 
reputation, am I? None of these. Well, what am 
I? A rational creature.” What, then, are the 
demands upon you? Rehearse your actions. 
«Where did I go wrong?’ in matters conducive 
to serenity? ‘What did I do’ that was unfriendly, 
or unsocial, or unfeeling? ‘What to be done was 
left undone’ in regard to these matters?” 

Since, therefore, there is so great a difference 
between the things which men desire, their deeds, 
and their prayers, do you still wish to be on an 
equal footing with them in matters to which you 
have not devoted yourself, but they have? And 
after all that, are you surprised if they pity you, and 
are you indignant? But they are not indignant if 
you pity them. And why? Because they are 
convinced that they are getting good things, while 
you are not so convinced in your own case. That is 
why you are not satisfied with what you have, but 
reach out for what they have. Because, if you 
had been truly convinced that, in the case of the 
things which are good, you are the one who is 
attaining them, while they have gone astray, you 
would not even have taken account of what they say 
about you. 


359 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ζ΄. Περὶ ἀφοβίας. 


1 Τί ποιεῖ φοβερὸν τὸν τύραννον ;—Oi δορυ- 
φόροι, φησίν, καὶ αἱ μάχαιραι αὐτῶν καὶ ὁ ἐπὶ 
τοῦ κοιτῶνος καὶ οἱ ἀποκλείοντες τοὺς εἰσιόντας. 

9. —Aid τί οὖν, ἂν παιδίον αὐτῷ Tpocayayns μετὰ 
τῶν δορυφόρων ὄντι, οὐ φοβεῖται; ἢ ὅτι οὐκ 

8 αἰσθάνεται τούτων τὸ παιδίον; ἂν οὖν τῶν 
δορυφόρων τὶς αἰσθάνηται καὶ ὅτι μαχαίρας 
ἔχουσιν, ἐπ᾿ αὐτὸ δὲ τοῦτο προσέρχηται αὐτῷ 
θέλων ἀποθανεῖν διά τινα περίστασιν καὶ ζητῶν 
im ἄλλου παθεῖν αὐτὸ εὐκόλως, μή τι φοβεῖται 
τοὺς δορυφόρους ;—Oéree γὰρ τοῦτο, δι ὃ φο- 

4 Bepoi eiow.—”Av οὖν τις μήτ᾽ ἀποθανεῖν μήτε 
ζῆν θέλων ἐξ ἅπαντος ἀλλ᾽ ὡς ἂν διδῶται, 
προσέρχηται αὐτῷ, τί κωλύει μὴ δεδοικότα 

5 προσέρχεσθαι αὐτόν ;—Ovdsé.—”" Av τις οὖν καὶ 
πρὸς τὴν κτῆσιν ὡσαύτως Eyn καθάπερ οὗτος 

% ‘ “ Ἀ \ x ᾿ \ ‘ 
πρὸς τὸ σῶμα, καὶ πρὸς τὰ τέκνα Kal THY 
γυναῖκα καὶ ἁπλῷς ὑπό τινος μανίας καὶ ἀπο- 
νοίας οὕτως 7 διακείμενος, ὥστ᾽ ἐν μηδενὶ 
ποιεῖσθαι τὸ ἔχειν ταῦτα ἢ μὴ ἔχειν, GX ὡς 
ὑστρακίοις τὰ παιδία παίξοντα περὶ μὲν τῆς 
παιδιᾶς διαφέρεται, τῶν ὀστρακίων δ᾽ οὐ πεφρόν- 
τίκεν, οὕτως δὲ καὶ οὗτος τὰς μὲν ὕλας παρ᾽ 
οὐδὲν ἡ πεποιημένος, τὴν παιδιὰν δὲ τὴν περὶ 
αὐτὰς καὶ ἀναστροφὴν ἀσπάξηται: ποῖος ἔτι 
τούτῳ τύραννος φοβερὸς ἢ ποῖοι δορυφόροι ἢ 
ποῖαι μάχαιραι αὐτῶν; 

360 


BOOK IV. vit. 1-5 


CHAPTER VII 
Of freedom from fear 


Wuat makes the tyrant an object of fear?—His 
guards, someone says, and their swords, and the 
chamberlain, and those who exclude persons who 
would enter.—Why, then, is it that, ifyou bring a child 
into the presence of the tyrant while he is with his 
guards, the child is not afraid? Is it because the 
child does not really feel the presence of the guards ἢ 
If, then, a man rea ily feels their presence, and that 
they have swords, but has come for that very 
purpose, for the reason that he wishes to die because 
of some misfortune, and he seeks to do so easily at 
the hand of another, he does not fear the guards, 
does he ?—No, for what makes them terrible is just 
what he wants,—If, then, a man who has set his 
will neither upon dying nor upon living at any cost, 
but only as it is given him to live, comes into the 
presence of the tyrant, what is there to prevent such 
aman from coming into his presence without fear ἢ 
—Nothing. —If, then, a man feel also about his 
property just as this other person feels about his 
body, and so about his children, and his wife, and if, 
in brief, he be in such a frame of mind, due to some 
madness or despair, that he cares not one whit about 
having, or not having, these things; but, as children 
playing with potsherds strive with one another about 
the game, but take no thought about the potsherds 
themselves, so this man “aleo has reckoned the 
material things of life as nothing, but is glad to 
play with them and handle them—what kind of 
tyrant, or guards, or swords in the hands of guards 
can any more inspire fear in the breast of such a man? 


361 


3 


"Ἰ 


ῳ» 


10 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


i 4 ᾽ a 4 , 
Εἶτα ὑπὸ μανίας μὲν δύναταί τις οὕτως 
- al Ν 
διατεθῆναι πρὸς ταῦτα καὶ ὑπὸ ἔθους οἱ Ταλιε- 
»“". Ἀ ἤ \ ? 
λαῖοι' ὑπὸ λόγου δὲ Kal ἀποδείξεως οὐδεὶς 
Ὧι » δ ¢ A 
δύναται μαθεῖν, ὅτε ὁ θεὸς πάντα πεποίηκεν τὰ 
» I \ f δ 
ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ καὶ αὐτὸν τὸν κόσμον ὅλον μὲν 
[οἱ Ἀ > “ 
ἀκώλυτον καὶ αὐτοτελῆ, τὰ ἐν μέρει δ᾽ αὐτοῦ 
‘ 7 of Ν \ > of , 
προς χρείαν τῶν ὅλων ; τῷ μὲν οὖν ἄλλα πάντα 
2 f ἴω ¢ a“ »"“.ὦ 
ἀπήλλακται τοῦ δύνασθαι παρακολουθεῖν τῇ 
“ ‘ Ἀ “~ δ 
διοικήσει αὐτοῦ; τὸ δὲ λογικὸν ξῷον ἀφορμὰς 
\ ‘ iy 
ἔχει πρὸς ἀναλογισμὸν τούτων ἁπάντων, ὅτι τε 
μέρος ἐστὶ καὶ ποῖόν τε μέρος καὶ ὅτι τὰ μέρη 
Lal δ t ἴω 
τοῖς ὅλοις εἴκειν ἔχει καλῶς. πρὸς τούτοις δὲ 
f n : 4 
φύσει γενναῖον καὶ μεγαλόψυχον καὶ ἐλεύθερον 
¢ ΘᾺ μὲ ἴω, , 
γενόμενον ὁρᾷ, διότι τῶν περὶ αὐτὸ τὰ μὲν ἀκώλυτα 
¥ a 3 >” b) \ ‘ \ 3.) ΜΝ ᾿ 
ἔχει καὶ ἐπ᾿ αὐτῷ, τὰ δὲ κωλυτὰ καὶ ἐπ᾽ ἄλλοις 
Ἀ Ν 
ἀκώλυτα μὲν τὰ προαιρετικά, κωλυτὰ δὲ τὰ 
, ‘ ” ᾿ 
ἀπροαίρετα. καὶ διὰ τοῦτο, ἐὰν μὲν ἐν τούτοις 
? ἈΝ ω 
μόνοις ἡγήσηται τὸ ἀγαθὸν τὸ αὑτοῦ καὶ συμ- 
f a ? fe YS Fh & ~ > f 
φέρον, τοῖς ἀκωλύτοις Kai ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτῷ, ἐλεύθερον 
᾿» vw ἮΝ 3 ms , 
ἔσται, εὑρουν, εὔδαιμον, ἀβλαβὲς, μεγαλόῴφρον, 
4 u a “ 
εὐσεβές, χάριν ἔχον ὑπὲρ πάντων τῷ θεῷ, 
al ξ΄ “ 4 
μηδαμοῦ μεμφόμενον μηδενὶ τῶν γενομένων, 
μηδενὶ ἐγκαλοῦν' ἂν δ᾽ ἐν τοῖς ἐκτὸς καὶ 
ἀπροαιρέτοις, ἀνάγκη κωλύεσθαι αὐτό, ἐμποδί- 
A , 
ζεσθαι, δουλεύειν τοῖς ἐκείνων ἔχουσιν ἐξουσίαν, 


i Schweighduser: μηδέν 8, 





armoire 


i Obviously referring to the Christians, as the Scholiast 
saw, Cf. also IL. 9, 19-21 and note, and Introd. Ὁ. xxvi ἢ. 


362 


BOOK IV. vu. 6-19 


Therefore, if madness can produce this attitude of 
mind toward the things which have just been 
mentioned, and also habit, as with the Galilaeans,} 
cannot reason and demonstration teach a man 
that God has made all things in the universe, 
and the whole universe itseli, to be free from 
hindrance, and to contain its end in itself, and the 
parts of it to serve the needs of the whole? Now 
all other animals have been excluded from the 
capacity to understand the governance of God, but 
the rational animal, man, possesses faculties that 
enable him to consider all these things, both that he 
is a part of them, and what kind of part of them he 
is, and that it is well for the parts to vield to the 
whole. And furthermore, being by nature noble, 
and high-minded, and free, the rational animal, man, 
sees that he has some of the things which are about 
him free from hindrance and under his control, but 
that others are subject to hindrance and under the 
control of others. Free from hindrance are those 
things which lie in the sphere of the moral purpose, 
and subject to hindrance are those which lie outside 
the sphere of the moral purpose. And so, if he 
regards his own good and advantage as residing in 
these things alone, in those, namely, , which are free 
from hindrance and under his control, he will be 
free, serene, happy, unharmed, high- minded, 
reverent, giving thanks for all things to God, under 
no circumstances finding fault with anything that 
has happened, nor blaming anything; if, however, he 
regards his good and advantage as residing in 
externals and ‘things outside the sphere of his moral 
purpose, he must needs be hindered and restrained, 
be aslave to those who have control over these things 


363 


1 


12 


..}8 


1: 


15 


16 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ἃ τεθαύμακεν καὶ φοβεῖται, ἀνάγκη δ᾽ ἀσεβὲς 


εἶναι ἅτε βλάπτεσθαι οἰόμενον ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ 
καὶ ἄνισον, ἀεὶ αὑτῷ τοῦ πλείονος περιποίη- 
τικόν, ἀνάγκη δὲ καὶ ταπεινὸν sivas καὶ 
μικροπρεπές. 

Ταῦτα τί κωλύει διαλαβόντα ζῆν κούφως καὶ 
εὐηνίως, πάντα τὰ συμβαίνειν δυνάμενα, πρῴως 
ἐκδεχόμενον, τὰ δ ἤδη συμβεβηκότα φέροντα ; 
“ θέλεις πενίαν ;᾽ ᾿ φέρε καὶ γνώσῃ, τί ἐστὶ πενία 
τυχοῦσα καλοῦ ὑποκριτοῦ, “ θέλεις ἀρχάς 3° 
φέρε. θέλεις ἀναρχίαν ; φέρε. ἀλλὰ πόνους 
θέλεις; 5 φέρε καὶ πόνους. “ἀλλ᾽ ἐξορισμόν ;" 
ὅπου ἂν ἀπέλθω, ἐκεῖ μοι καλῶς ἔσται" καὶ 
γὰρ ἐνθάδε οὐ διὰ τὸν τόπον ἣν μοι καλῶς, ἀλλὰ 
διὰ τὰ δόγματα, ἃ μέλλω μετ᾽ ἐμαυτοῦ ἀπο- 
φέρειν. οὐδὲ γὰρ δύναταί τὶς ἀφελέσθαι αὐτά, 
ἀλλὰ ταῦτα μόνα ἐμά ἐστε καὶ ἀναφαίρετα καὶ 
ἀρκεῖ μοι παρόντα, ὅπου ἂν ὦ καὶ ὅ τι ἂν ποιῶ. 
“ ἀλλ᾽ ἤδη καιρὸς ἀποθανεῖν.᾿" τί λέγεις ἀπο- 
θανεῖν ; μὴ τραγῴδει τὸ πρᾶγμα, ἀλλ᾽ εἰπὲ ὡς 
ἔχει «ἤδη καιρὸς τὴν ὕλην, ἐξ ὧν συνῆλθεν, εἰς 
ἐκεῖνα πάλιν ἀποκαταστῆναι." καὶ τί δεινόν; 
τί μέλλει ἀπόλλυσθαι τῶν ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ, τὸ 
γενέσθαι καινόν, ,παράλογον; τούτων ἕνεκα φο- 
βερός ἐστιν ὁ τύραννος; διὰ ταῦτα οἱ δορυφόροι 
μεγάλας δοκοῦσιν ἔχειν τὰς μαχαΐρας καὶ 


1 τά supplied by Sd. 
2 These last seven words (with the change of ἔχεις before 
ἀναρχίαν to ϑέλεις, by Schenkl) in the scholia a little below 
this point were seen by Lindsay to belong here. 





‘ See Encheiridion, 17, and frag. 11 for parallels, 


364 


BOOK IV. vu. 1ro-16 


which he has admired and fears; he must needs be 
irreverent, forasmuch as he thinks that God is 
injuring him, and be unfair, always trying to secure 
for himself more than his share, and must needs be 
of an abject and mean spirit. 

When a man has once grasped all this, what 
is there to prevent him from living with a Hght 
heart and an obedient disposition ; with a gentle 
spirit awaiting anything that may vet befull, and 
enduring that which has alre ady befallen? ‘ Would 
you have me bear poverty ἢ ” “Bring it on and you 
shall see what pov erty is when it finds a good actor 
to play the part.t Would you have me _ hold 
office?” Bring it on. * Would you have me suffer 
deprivation of “office >” Bring it on. “ Well, and 
would you have me ἊΨ troubles >” Bring them on 
too. “ Well, and exile?” Wherever I go it will be 
well with me, for here where I am it was well with 
me, not because of my location, but because of my 
judgements, and these I shall carry away with me; 
nor, indeed, can any man take these away from me, 
but they are the only things that are mine, and they 
cannot be taken away, and with the possession of 
them I am content, wherever I be and whatever I do. 
“But it is now time to die.” Why say “die”? 
Make no tragic parade of the matter, but speak of it 
as itis: “It is now time for the material of which 
you are constituted to be restored to those elements 
from which it came.’ And what is there terrible 
about that? What one of the things that make up 
the universe will be lost, what novel or unreason- 
able thing will have taken place? Is it for this 
that the tyrant inspires fear? Is it because of 
this that his guards seem to have long and sharp 


365 


17 


18 


19 


20 


21 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


, 
ὀξείας; ἄλλοις ταῦτα' ἐμοὶ δ᾽ ἔσκεπται περὶ 
4 3 3 3 \ 3 ‘a 2 3 f 
πάντων, εἰς ἐμὲ οὐδεὶς ἐξουσίαν ἔχει. ἠλευθέρω- 
μαι ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ, ἔγνωκα αὐτοῦ τὰς ἐντολάς, 
os 7 
οὐκέτε οὐδεὶς δουλαγωγῆσαί με δύναται, καρ- 
λ Bg i ὃ o ὃ \ tf ὃ ~ “ce 3 Ν 
πιστὴν ἔχω οἷον δεῖ, δικαστὰς οἵους δεῖ. “ οὐχὶ 
“a ? , , ; = 
τοῦ σώματός cov! κύριός εἶμι ; 1 τί οὖν πρὸς 
Ἵ fy κε ΝΣ ων δί . 75 7 > Ἀ 3 ᾿ς 
ἐμέ; “οὐχὶ τοῦ κτησιδίου ; τί οὖν πρὸς ἐμέ; 
«(-ὃ»Ξ-ἷῷςὩῺχδι “ a δὲ al. f 4 ? 
οὐχὶ φυγῆς ἢ δεσμῶν ; πάλιν τούτων “τἄντων 
καὶ τοῦ σωματίου ὅλου σοι αὐτοῦ ἐξίσταμαι, 
f A“ ἮΝ 
ὅταν θέλῃς. πείρασαί μοί σου τῆς ἀρχῆς 5 καὶ 
γνώσῃ, μέχρι τίνος αὐτὴν ἔχεις. 
Τίνα οὖν ἔτι φοβηθῆναι δύναμαι; τοὺς ἐπὶ 
τοῦ κοιτῶνος ; μὴ τί ποιήσωσιν; ἀποκλείσωσί 
bla tt f μ ἊΝ 3 
με; ἄν pe εὕρωσι θέλοντα εἰσελθεῖν, ἀπο- 
κλεισάτωσαν.---Τ οὖν ἔρχῃ ἐπὶ θύρας ;--“Οτι 
καθήκειν ἐμαυτῷ δοκῶ μενούσης τῆς παιδιᾶς 
συμπαίζειν.---[Τῶς οὖν οὐκ ἀποκλείῃ ;---Οτε ἂν 
μή τίς με δέχηται, οὐ θέλω εἰσελθεῖν, ἀλλ᾽ ἀεὶ 
μᾶλλον ἐκεῖνο θέλω τὸ γινόμενον. κρεῖττον γὰρ 
ἡγοῦμαι ὃ ὁ θεὸς θέλει ἢ ὃ ἐγώ. προσκείσομαι 
διάκονος καὶ ἀκόλουθος ἐκείνῳ, συνορμῶ, συνο- 
? g ¢ " θέ 5 Ν . % 
péyoual,” ἁπλῶς συνθέλω. ἀἁποκλείσμὸς ἐμοὶ 
> ; 3 ‘ i f \ , . ® 
ov γίνεται, ἀλλὰ τοῖς βιαξομένοις. διὰ τί οὖν 
? é μὴ Ld e # > Ν b \ 
οὐ Brafouat; οἶδα yap, ὅτι ἔσω ἀγαθὸν οὐδὲν 
διαδίδοται τοῖς εἰσελθοῦσιν. ἀλλ᾽ ὅταν ἀκούσω 


1 Schweighiuser (after Wolf): μου and εἶ 8, 

2s and Schenkl, who adds wolf: πειράσομαί cov τὴν 
ἀρχὴν 8. 

3 Wolf (after Schegk}: ὀρέγομαι 8. 
366 


BOOK IV. vn. 16~21 


swords? Let others see to that; I have considered 
all this, no one has authority over me. I have been 
set free by God, I know His commands, no one has 
power any longer to make a slave of me, I have the 
right kind of “emancipator, and the rig ght kind of 
judges. ‘Am I not master of your body ? "Very 
well, what is that tome? “Am [ not master of vour 
paltry property?” Very well, what is that to me? 
«Am 1 not master of exile or bonds?” Again I 
yield up to you all these things and my whole 
paltry body itself, whenever you will. Do make 
trial of your power, and you will find out how far it 
extends. 

Who is there, then, that I can any longer be afraid 
of? Shall I be afraid of the chamberlains? For 
tear they do what? Lock the door in my face? If 
they find me wanting to enter, let them lock the 
door in my face !_Why, then, do you go to the gate 
of the palace >—Because I think it fitting for me to 
join in the game while the game lasts.—How, 
then, is it that you are not locked out ? 1—Because, 
if anyone will not receive me, I do not care to go 
in, but always I wish rather the thing which takes 
place. For Ἴ regard God’s will as better than my 
will, I shall attach myself to Him as a servant and 
follower, my choice is one with His, my desire one 
with His, in a word, my will is one with His will. 
No door is locked in my face, but rather in the face 
of those who would force themselvesin. Why, then, 
do I not force myself in? Why, because I know that 
within nothing good is distributed among those who 
have entered. But when I hear someone called blessed, 


1 That is, it cannot properly be said of a man that he is 
‘locked out” if he does not ‘‘ wish” to enter. 
367 


τῷ 


Ww 


2 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


τινὰ μακαριζόμενον, ὅτε τιμᾶται ὑπὸ τοῦ Καί- 
gapus, λέγω “τί αὐτῷ συμβαίνει 7 μή τί οὖν 
καὶ δόγμα, οἷον δεῖ ἐπαρχίᾳ; "1 μή τι οὖν καὶ 
τὸ χρῆσθαι ἐπιτροπῇ; τί ἔτι διωθοῦμαι ; ἰσχα- 
δοκάρυά τις διαρριπτεῖ"" τὰ παιδία ἁρπάξει καὶ 
ἀλλήλοις διαμάχεται" οἵ ἄνδρες οὐχί, μικρὸν 
γὰρ αὐτὸ ἡγοῦνται. ἂν δ᾽ ὀστράκια διαρριπτῇ 
τις, οὐδὲ τὰ παιδία ἁρπάξει. ἐπαρχίαι διαδί- 
δονται: ὄψεται τὰ παιδία. ἀργύριον" ὄψεται 
τὰ παιδία. στρατηγία, ὑπατεία" διαρπ' αξέτω 
τὰ παιδία' ἐκκλειέσθω, τυπτέσθω, καταφιλείτω 
τὰς χεῖρας τοῦ διδόντος, τῶν aaa ἐμοὶ δ᾽ 
ἰσχαδοκάρυόν ἐστιν." τί οὖν, av? ἀπὸ “τύχης 
ῥιπτοῦντος αὐτοῦ ἔλθῃ εἰς τὸν κόλπου ἰσχάς; 
ἄρας κατέφαγον" μέχρι τοσούτου γὰρ ἔστι καὶ 
ἰσχάδα τιμῆσαι. ἵνα δὲ κύψω" καὶ ἄλλον 
ἀνατρέψω ἢ ἢ ὑπ᾽ ἄλλου ἀνα τραπῶ καὶ κολακεύσω 
τοὺς εἰσεέντας," οὐκ ; ἀξία οὔτ᾽ ἰσχὰς οὔτ᾽ ἄλλο τι 
τῶν οὐκ ἀγαθῶν, & με ἀναπεπείκασιν οἱ φιλό- 
σοφοι μὴ δοκεῖν ἀγαθὰ εἶναι. 

Δείκνυξ μοι τὰς μαχαίρας τῶν δορυφόρων. 

“ἰδοῦ, ἡλίκαι εἰσὶ καὶ πῶς ὀξεῖαι." τί οὖν 
ποιοῦσιν αἱ μεγάλαι αὗται μάχαιραι καὶ ὀξεῖαι; 
“ ἀποκτιννύουσιν. ᾿ πυρετὸς δὲ τί «τοιεῖ; “ἄλλο 
οὐδέν." κεραμὶς δὲ τί ποιεῖ; “ἄλλο οὐδέν." 


1 Schenk]: ἐπαρχίαν 8. The passage is extremely condensed 
if not actually lacunose. ‘This comparatively simple change 
enables one to secure the general sense required, whether 
or ποὺ it was originally expressed in this form. 

* Bentley and Schenkl*?: διαρρίπτῃ S. But cf. Trans. Amer. 
Phital. Assoc. 52 (1921) 51. 

3 ἂν added by Se. 4 κατάφαγε 8 and Schenkl, 

Wolf: κρύψω Κ, 

6 Elter: εἰσιόντας (“those who enter the palace”) 8. 


368 


BOOK IV. vir 21-26 


because he is being honoured by Caesar, I say, 
“What is his portion ? Does he, then, get also a 
judgement such as he ought to have for governing 
a province? Does he, then, get also the “ability to 
administer a procuratorship 3 > W hy should I any 
longer push my way in? Somebody is scattering 
dried figs and nuts; the children snatch them up 
and fight with one anuther, the men do not, for they 
eount this a small matter. But if somebody throws 
potsherds around, not even the children snatch them 
up. Governorships are being passed around. The 
children shall see! to that. Money. The children 
shall see to that. A practorship, a consulship. Let 
the children snatch them up; let the children 
have the door locked in their faces, take a beating, 
kiss the hands of the giver, and the hands of his slaves. 
As for me, it’s a mere scattering of dried figs and 
nuts.” But what, then, if, when the man is throwing 
them about, a dried fig chances to fall into my lap? 
I take it up and eat it. For I may properly value 
even a dried fig as much as that. But neither a 
dried fig, nor any other of the things not good, 
which the philosophers have persuaded me not to 
think good, is of sufficient value to warrant my 
grovelling and upsetting someone else, or being 
upset by ‘him, or fattering those who have flung the 
dried figs among us. 

Show me the swords of the guards. “See how 
large and how sharp they are!” What, then, do 
these large and sharp swords do? “They kill.” 
And what does fever do? “Nothing else.” And 
what does a tile do? “Nothing else.’” Do you 


1 See note on LY. 6, 23. 
369 


VOL, 1ἴ, ΒΒ 


BS 
- 


29 


30 


31 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


θέλεις οὗν πᾶντα ταῦτα θαυμάξω καὶ προσκυνῶ 
καὶ δοῦλος πάντων περιέρχωμαι; pen γένοιτο" 
ἀλλ᾽ ἅπαξ μαθών, ὅτι τὸ γενόμενον καὶ φθαρῆναι 
δεῖ, ἰ ἵνα ὁ κόσμος μὴ ἵστηται pnd ἐμποδίξηται, 
οὐκέτι διαφέρομαι. πότερον πυρετὸς αὐτὸ ποιή- 
σει ἢ κεραμὶς ἢ στρατιώτης, ἀλλ᾽ εἰ δεῖ συγ- 
κρῖναι, οἷδ᾽ ὅτι ἀπονώτερον αὐτὸ καὶ ταχύτερον; 
ὃ στρατεώτης ποιήσει. ὅταν οὖν μήτε φοβῶμαί 
τι ὧν διαθεῖναί με δύναται μήτ᾽ ἐπιθυμῶ τενὸς 
ὧν παρασχεῖν, τί ἔτι θαυμάξω αὐτόν, τί ἔτι 
τέθηπα 7 τί φοβοῦμαι τοὺς δορυφόρους ; τί 
χαίρω, ἄν μοι φιλανθρώπως λαλήσῃ καὶ ἀπο- 
δέξηταί με, καὶ ἄλλοις διηγοῦμαι, πῶς μοι 
ἐλάλησεν; “μὴ γὰρ Σωκράτης ἐστίν, μὴ γὰρ 
Διογένης, ἵν᾽ ὁ ἔπαινος αὐτοῦ ἀπό δειξις 7 περὶ 
ἐμοῦ; μὴ γὰρ TO ἦθος ἐξήλωκα. αὐτοῦ ; ἀλλὰ 
τὴν παι cay σῴξων ἔρχομαι πρὸς αὐτὸν καὶ 
ὑπηρετῶ, μέχρις ἂν ὅτου μηδὲν ἀβέλτερον κελεύῃ 
μηδ᾽ ἄρρυθμον. ἂν δέ μοι λέγῃ " ἄπελθε ἐπὶ 
Λέοντα τὸν "Σαλαμίνιον," λέγω αὐτῷ “ ξήτει 
ἄλλον" ἐγὼ γὰρ οὐκέτι παίξω." “ἄπαγςε αὐτόν." 
ἀκολουθῷ ἐν παιδιᾷ. “ἀλλ᾽ ἀφαιρεῖται σου ὃ 
τράχηλος." ἐκείνου δ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἀεὶ ἐπιμένει, ὑμῶν 
ὲ τῶν πειθομένων ; “ἀλλ᾽ ἄταφος ῥιφήσῃ." 

εἰ ἐγώ εἰμι ὁ νεκρός, ῥιφήσομαι" εἰ δ᾽ ἄλλος 


1s: ἐμαυτὸν 8. 





1 See note on IV. 1, 160. 

2 As was sometimes done as a last insult to the dead. 
Epictetus may also have had in mind the celebrated remark of 
Diogenes before his death, who, when his friends protested 
against his request that he be thrown out unburied (Diogenes 


37° 


BOOK IV. vi. 26-31 


want me, then, to respect and do cobeisance to all 
these things, and to go about as the slave of them 
all? Far from it! But if once I have learned that 
what is born must also perish, so that the world may 
not stand still, nor be hampered, it makes no differ- 
ence tome whether a fever shall bring that consumma- 
tion, or a tile, or a soldier; but, if I must make a 
comparison, I know that the soldier will bring it 
about with less trouble and more speed. Seeing, 
therefore, that I neither fear anything of all that the 
tyrant is able to do with me, nor greatly desire any- 
thing of all that he is able to provide, why do I any 
longer admire him, why any longer stand in awe of 
him? Why am I afraid of his guards? Why do I 
rejoice if he speaks kindly to me and welcomes me, 
and why do I tell others how he spoke to me? He 
is not Socrates, is he, or Diogenes, so that his praise 
should be a proof of what 1 am? I have not been 
ambitious to imitate his character, have I? Nay, 
but acting as one who keeps the game going, I come 
to him and serve him so long as he commands me 
to do nothing foolish or unseemly. If, however, he 
says, “Go and bring Leon of Salamis,’+ I reply, 
“Try to get someone else, for 1 am nat playing any 
longer.” “Take him off to prison,” says the tyrant 
about me. “ I follow, because that is part of the game.” 
“ But your head will be taken off.” And does the 
tyrant’s head always stay in its place, and the heads 
of you who obey him? “ But you will be thrown out 
unburied.”? If the corpse is I, then 1 shall be 
thrown out; but if I am something different from 


Laertius, 6, 79), ironically suggested that his staff be laid by 
his side to keep away the dogs and carrion birds. Cicero, 
Puse. Disp. 1, 104; Ps.-Diog. Hpist. 25. 


371 
ΒΒ) 


33 


92 


36 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


εἰμὶ τοῦ νεκροῦ, κομψότερον λέγε, ὡς ἔχει τὸ 

πρῶγμα, καὶ μὴ ἐκφόβει με. τοῖς παιδίοις ταῦτα 
koe epd ἐστι καὶ τοῖς ἀνοήτοις. εἰ δέ τις εἰς 
φιλοσύφου σχολὴν ἅπαξ εἰσελθὼν οὐκ οἶδεν, τί 
ἐστὶν αὐτός, ἀξιὸς ἐστι φοβεῖσθαι καὶ κολακεύειν 
οὕσπερ πρότερον} € ἐκολάκευεν' εἰ μήπω μεμάθηκεν, 
ὅτι οὐκ ἔστι σὰρξ οὐδ᾽ ὀστᾷ οὐδὲ νεῦρα, ἀλλὰ 
τὸ τούτοις χρώμενον, τὸ 3 καὶ διοικοῦν καὶ Tapa- 
κολουθοῦν ταῖς φαντασίαις. 

Nats ἀλλ᾽ οἱ λόγοι οὗτοι καταφρονητὰς 
ποιοῦσι τῶν νόμων. --κ αἱ ποῖοι μᾶλλον λόγοι 
πειθομένους παρέχουσι, τοῖς νόμοις τοὺς χρω- 
μένους ; νόμος δ᾽ οὐκ ἔστι τὰ ἐπὶ μωρῷ. καὶ 
ὅμως ὅρα, πῶς καὶ πρὸς τούτους ὡς δεῖ ἔχοντας 
παρασκευάξουσιν, οἵ γε διδάσκουσιν μηδενὸς 
ὠντιποιεῖσθαι πρὸς αὐτούς, ἐν οἷς ἂν ἡμᾶς 
νικῆσαι δύνωνται. περὶ τὸ σωμάτιον διδάσκου- 
σιν ἐξίστασθαι, περὶ τὴν κτῆσιν ἐξίστασθαι, 
περὶ τὰ τέκνα, γονεῖς, ἀδελφούς, 7 “πάντων παρα- 
χωρεῖν, πάντα ἀφιέναι: μόνα τὰ δόγματα, ὑπε- 
ξαιροῦνται, ἃ καὶ ὁ Ζεὺς ἐξαίρετα ἑκάστου 
εἶναι ἠθέλησεν. ποία ἐνθάδε παρανομία, ποία 
ἀβελτερία ; ; ὅπου κρείττων εἶ καὶ ἰσχυρότερος, 
ἐκεῖ σοι ἐξίσταμαι" ὅπου πάλιν ἐγὼ κρείττων, 
σὺ παραχώρει μοι. ἐμοὶ γὰρ μεμέληκεν, σοὶ δ᾽ 
οὔ, σοὶ μέλει, πῶς ἐν ὀρθοστρώτοις οἰκῆς, ἔτι 
πῶς παῖδές σοι καὶ πιλλᾶτοι διακονῶσιν, πῶς 


1 οὕσπερ Capps (Schweighiuser ofr), πρότερον Oldfather 
(in part after Page): ὃ ὄστερον (sic) S. Capps would prefer 
οὕσπερ νῦν κολακεύεις, 

* Schenkl: S uncertain. 

᾿ Schweighduser : δύνανται &. 

4 Schenk]: οἰχήσεται 8, 


372 


BOOK IV. vu. 31-37 


the corpse, speak with more discrimination, as the 
fact is, and do not try to terrify me. These things 
are terrifying to the children and the fools. But if 
aman who has once entered a philosopher's lecture 
does not know what he himself is, he deserves to be 
in a state of fear, and also to flatter those whom he 
used to flatter before;? if he has not yet learned 
that he is not flesh, nor bones, nor sinews, but that 
which employs these, that which both governs the 
impressions of the senses and understands them. 

Oh ves, but statements like these make men 
despise the laws.—Quite the contrary, what state- 
ments other than these make the men who follow 
them more ready to obeyethe laws? Law is not simply 
anything that is in the power of a fool. And yet 
see how these statements make us behave properly 
even toward these fools, because they teach us to 
claim against such persons nothing in which they 
can surpass us. They teach us to give way when it 
comes to our paltry body, to give way when it comes 
to our property, to our children, parents, brothers, to 
retire from everything, let everything go; they 
except only our judgements, and it was the will of 
Zeus also that these should be each man’s special 
possession. What do you mean by speaking of law- 
lessness and stupidity here? Where you are superior 
and stronger, there I give way to you; and again, 
where I am superior, you retire in favour of me. For 
I have made these matters my concern, and you 
have not. It is your concern how to live in marble 
halls? and further, how slaves and freedmen are to 

1 That is, before he began to attend lectures in philosophy. 
But the text is highly uncertain. ; 

2 Strictly speaking, walls covered with a veneer of varie- 


gated marble. 
373 


39 


40 


41 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


~ [αἱ “ ‘\ 
ἐσθῆτα περίβλεπτον φορῇς, πῶς κυνηγοὺς TON- 
4 δι , “ 
λοὺς ἔχῃς, πῶς κιθαρῳδούς, τραγῳδούς. μή τι 
“ f 
ἀντιποιοῦμαι; μή TL οὖν δογμάτων σοι μεμέ- 
ANKE; μή τι τοῦ λόγου τοῦ σεαυτοῦ; μή τι 
οἶδας, ἐκ τίνων μορίων συνέστηκεν, πῶς συνά- 
yerat, τίς ἡ διάρθρωσις αὐτοῦ, τίνας ἔχει 
δυνάμεις καὶ ποίας τινάς; τί οὖν ἀγανακτεῖς, 
> Ψ bi ¢ 7 4 ¢ 
εἰ ἄλλος ἐν τούτοις σου πλέον ἔχει ὁ μεμελε- 
τηκώς ;--ἰΑλλὰ ταῦτ᾽ ἐστὶ τὰ μέγιστα.---Καὶ 
τίς σε κωλύει περὶ ταῦτ᾽ ἀναστρέφεσθαι καὶ 
f b ν᾿ , Ν “ μ᾿ 
τούτων ἐπιμελεῖσθαι; τίς δὲ μείζονα ἔχει πα- 
ρασκευὴν βιβλίων, εὐσχολίας, τῶν φφελησόντων; 
μόνον ἀπόνευσόν ποτε ἐπὶ ταῦτα, ἀπόνειμον κἂν 
bd # fo “ ~ 
ὀλίγον χρόνον τῷ σαυτοῦ ἡγεμονικῷ" σκέψαι τί 
wor ἔχεις τοῦτο καὶ πόθεν ἐληλυθός, τὸ πᾶσιν 
ἴω w , 7 -Ὁ , " 
τοῖς ἄλλοις χρώμενον, πάντα τἄλλα δοκίμαξον, 
ἐκλεγόμενον, ἀπεκλεγόμενον. μέχρι δ᾽ ἂν οὗ 
περὶ τὰ ἐκτὸς ἀναστρέφῃ, ἐκεῖνα ἕξεις οἷα οὐδείς, 
ΓΝ + 
τοῦτο 6 οἷον αὐτὸ ἔχειν θέλεις, ῥυπαρὸν καὶ 
ἀτημέλητον. 


é ‘ 4 f $ ἃ ‘ ” ω 
ἡ΄. ρος τοὺς ταχέως ἐπὶ τὸ σχῆμα τῶν 
φιλοσόφων ἐπιπηδῶντας. 
Myéeror ἀπὸ τῶν κοινῶν τινὰ μήτ᾽ ἐπαι- 
, ? 
νέσητε μήτε ψέξητε μήτε τέχνην τινὰ ἢ ἀτεχ- 





+ Those who sang to their own accompaniment on the harp. 
2 See IV. 4, 44. 


374 


BOOK IY. vir. 37-vu. 1 


serve you, how you are to wear conspicuous clothing, 
how to have many hunting dogs, citharoedes,} and 
tragedians. I do not lay claim to any of these, do 
1? You, then, have never concerned yourself with 
judgements, have you? Or with vour own reason, 
have you? You do not know, do you, what are its 
constituent parts, how it is composed, what its 
arrangement is, what faculties it has, and what their 
nature is? Why, then, are you disturbed if someone 
else, the man, namely, who has concerned himself 
with these matters, has the advantage of you therein ? 
—-But these are the most important things that there 
are.—And who is there to prevent you from concern- 
ing yourself with these matters, and devoting vour 
attention to them? And who is better provided 
with books, leisure, and persons to help you? Only 
begin some time to turn your mind to these matters ; 
devote a little time, if no more, to your own govern- 
ing principle ; consider what this thing is which you 
possess, and where it has come from, the thing which 
utilizes everything else, submits everything else to 
the test, selects, and rejects. But so long as you 
concern yourself with externals, you will possess 
them in a way that no one else can match, but you 
will have this governing faculty in the state in which 
you want to have it, that is, dirty and neglected. 


any 


CHAPTER VIII 


To those who hastily assume the guise of the 
philosophers 


Never bestow either praise or blame upon a man 
for the things which may be either good or bad,? nor 


375 


Ga 


ot 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


νίαν mpoapaprupiaqte καὶ ἅμα μὲν προπετείας 
ἑαυτοὺς ἀπαλλάξετε, ἅμα δὲ κακοηθείας. " οὗτος 
ταχέως λούετ rau.” κακῶς οὖν ποιεῖ; οὐ πάντως. 
ἀλλὰ τί; ταχέως λούεται.---[Ἰάντα οὖν καλῶς 
γίνεται ἡ--Οὐδαμῶς: ἀλλὰ τὰ μὲν ἀπὸ δογμά- 
τῶν ὀρθῶν καλῶς, τὰ δ᾽ ἀπὸ μοχθηρῶν μοχ- 
ἠῴ σὺ δὲ μέχρις ἂν καταμάθῃς τὸ δόγμα, ap 
τὶς ποιεῖ ἕκαστα, μήτ᾽ ἐπαίνει τὸ ἔργον μήτε 
sree. δόγμα ὃ δ᾽ ἐκ τῶν ἐκτὸς οὐ ῥᾳδίως. κρίνεται. 
οὗτος τέκτων ἐστίν." διὰ τί; ᾿χρῆται σκε- 
πάρνῳ." τί οὖν τοῦτο; “οὗτος μουσικός" ἄδει 
γάρ." καὶ τί τοῦτο; “οὗτος φιλόσοφος." ᾿διὰ 
τί; “τρίβωνα γὰρ ἔχει καὶ κόμην. οἱ δ᾽ 
ἀγύρται τί ἔχουσιν; διὰ τοῦτο, ἂν ἀσχημο- 
νοῦντά τις ἴδῃ τινὰ αὐτῶν, εὐθὺς λέγει " ‘dav 
ὃ φιλόσοφος τί! ποιεῖ." ἔδει δ᾽ ἀφ᾽ ὧν ἠσχη- 
pover μᾶλλον λέγειν αὐτὸν μὴ εἷναι φιλόσοφον. 
εἰ μὲν γὰρ αὕτη ἐστὶν ἡ τοῦ φιλοσόφου πρό- 
Anis καὶ ἐπαγγελία, ἔχειν τρίβωνα καὶ κόμην, 
καλῶς ἂν ἔλεγον" εἰ δ᾽ ἐκείνη μᾶλλον, ἀναμάρ- 
TYTOV εἶναι, δεὰ τί οὐχὶ διὰ τὸ μὴ πληροῦν τὴν 
ἐπαγγελίαν ἀφαιροῦνται αὐτὸν τῆς προσηγορίας ; ; 
οὕτως yap καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν ἄχλων τεχνῶν. ὅταν 
ἴδῃ Tes κακῶς πελεκῶντα, οὐ λέγει “ τί ὄφελος 
τεκτονικῆς ; ; ἰδοὺ οἱ τέκτονες οἷα ποιοῦσι κακά, 
ἀλλὰ πᾶν τοὐναντίον λέγει “οὗτος οὐκ ἔστι 


1 +f added by Reiske. 





That is, no conclusion about right or wrong can be drawn 
from an action, in itself indifferent, the moral purpose of 
which one does not know. 


376 


BOOK IV, vin. 1-7 


credit him with either skill or want of skill; and by 
so doing you will escape from both rashness and 
malice. “This man is hasty about bathing.’’ Does 
he, therefore, do wrong? Not at all. But what 
is he doing? He is hasty about bathing.—Is all 
well, then'—That by no means follows;+ but 
only the act which proceeds from correct judge- 
ments is well done, and that which proceeds 
from bad judgements is badly done. Yet until you 
learn the judgement from which a man performs 
each separate act, neither praise his action nor blame 
it. But a judgement is not readily determined by 
externals, “This man is a carpenter.”” Why? 
“He uses an adze.” What, then, has that to do 
with the case? ‘*This man is a musician, for he 
sings.” And what has that to do with the case? 
‘This man is a philosopher.” Why? ‘ Because he 
wears a rough cloak and long hair.” And what do 
hedge-priests wear? That is why, when a man sees 
some one of them misbehaving, he immediately says, 
* See what the philosopher is doing.” But he ought 
rather to have said, judging from the misbehaviour, 
that the person in question was not a philosopher. 
For if the prime conception and profession of the 
philosopher is to wear a rough cloak and long hair, 
their statement would be correct; but if it is rather 
this, to be free from error, why do they not take 
away from him the designation of philosopher, 
because he does not fulfil the profession of one? For 
that is the way men do in the case of the other arts. 
When someone sees a fellow hewing clumsily with 
an axe, he does not say, ‘‘What’s the use of car- 
pentry? See the bad work the carpenters do!” but 
quite the contrary, he says, “This fellow is no 


377 


8 


9 


10 


I] 


12 


13 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


τέκτων, πελεκᾷ γὰρ κακῶς." ὁμοίως κἂν ἄδοντός 
τίνος ἀκούσῃ κακῶς, οὐ λέγει * ἰδοὺ πῶς 
ἀδουσιν οἱ μουσικοί, ᾿ ἀχλὰ μᾶλλον ore} “οὗτος 
οὐκ ἔστι μουσικός." ἐπὶ φιλοσοφίας δὲ μόνης 
τοῦτο πάσχουσιν" ὅταν τινὰ ἴδωσι παρὰ τὸ 
ἐπάγγελμα τὸ τοῦ φιλοσόφου ποιοῦντα, οὐχὶ 
τῆς προσηγορίας ἀφαιροῦντ αι αὐτόν, ἀλλὰ 
θέντες εἶναι φιλόσοφον, εἶτ᾽ am αὐτοῦ τοῦ 
γινομένου λαβόντες, ὅτε ἀσγημονεῖ, ἐπάγουσι 
μηδὲν ὄφελος εἶναι τοῦ φιλοσοφεῖν. 

Τί οὖν τὸ αἴτιον; ὅτι τὴν μὲν τοῦ τέκτονος 
πρόληψιν πρεσβεύομεν καὶ τὴν τοῦ μουσικοῦ 
καὶ ὡσαύτως τῶν ἄλλων τεχνιτῶν, τὴν τοῦ 
φιλοσόφου δ᾽ οὔ » ἀλλ᾽ ἅτε συγκεχυμένην καὶ 
ἀδιάρθρωτον a ἀπὸ τῶν ἐκτὸς μόνον κρίνομεν. καὶ 
ποία ἄλλη τέχνη ἀπὸ σχήματος ἀναλαμβάνεται 
καὶ κόμης, οὐχὶ δὲ καὶ θεωρήματα ἔχει καὶ ὕλην 
καὶ τέλος; τίς οὖν ὕλη τοῦ φιλοσόφου; μὴ 
τρίβων ; οὗ, ἀλλὰ ὁ λόγος. τί τέλος; μή τι 
φορεῖν τρίβωνα Σ οὔ, ἀλλὰ τὸ ὀρθὸν ἔχειν τὸν 
λόγον. ποῖα θεωρήματα : μή τε τὰ περὶ τοῦ 
πῶς πώγων μέγας γίνεται ἢ κόμη βαθεῖα; 
ἀλλὰ μᾶλλον ἃ Ζήνων λέγει, γνῶναι τὰ τοῦ 
λόγου στοιχεῖα, ποῖόν τὸ ἕκαστον αὐτῶν ἐστὶ 
καὶ πῶς ἁρμόττεται πρὸς ἄλληλα καὶ ὅσα 
τούτοις ἀκόλουθά ἐστιν. οὐ θέλεις οὖν ἰδεῖν 
πρῶτον, εἰ πληροῖ τὴν ἐπαγγελίαν ἀσχημονῶν, 


+ 8: οὗτος ὅτι S, 





1 The technical terminology of sy logistic reasoning is em- 
ployed. Men ‘‘ assume” or “lay down ” (θέντες) the general 
principle in the major premiss; ‘‘take” (λαβόντες) from 


378 


BOOK IV. vu. 7-13 


carpenter, for he hews clumsily with the axe.” And, 
similarly, if a man hears somebody singing badly, he 
does not say, “See how the musicians sing!” but 
rather, “ This fellow is no musician.” But it is only 
in the case of philosophy that men behave like this ; 
when they see somebody acting contrary to the pro- 
fession of the philosopher, they do not take away 
from him the designation of philosopher, but, assuming 
that he is a philosopher, and then taking! from what’ 
goes on that he is misbehaving, they conclude that 
there is no good in being a philosopher. 

What, then, is the reason for this? It is because 
we respect the prime conception of the carpenter, 
and the musician, and so also of all the other artisans 
and artists, while we do not respect that of the 
philosopher, but as if it were confused and inarticulate 
in our minds we judge of it only from externals. And 
what other art is there that is acquired by guise and 
hair-dress, and does not have also principles, and 
subject-matter, and end? What, then, is subject- 
matter for the philosopher? It is not a rough 
cloak, is it? No, but reason. What is end for the 
philosopher? It is not to wear a rough cloak, is it? 
No, but to keep his reason right. What is the 
nature of his principles? They do not have to do 
with the question how to grow a long beard, or a 
thick head of hair, do they? Nay, rather, as Zeno 
says, to understand the elements of reason, what the 
nature of each one is, and how they are fitted one 
to another, and all the consequences of these facts. 
Will you not, therefore, observe first of all whether 
the philosopher fulfils his profession by misbehaving, 


observation or experience a fact as a minor premiss ; and 
then ‘‘induce”’ or ‘‘ conclude” (érdyouc:). 


379 


id 


15 


16 


17 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


\ ef Ὁ 3 7 2 δὰ “ $ 
καὶ οὕτως τῷ ἐπιτηδεύματι ἐγκαλεῖν; νῦν δ᾽, 
αὐτὸς ὅταν σωφρονῇς, ἐξ ὧν ποιεῖν σοι δοκεῖ 
κακῶς, λέγεις “ὅρα τὸν φιλόσοφον (ὡς 1 πρέ- 

‘ fa) ἴω 
πόντος λέγειν τὸν τὰ τοιαῦτα 5 ποιοῦντα φιλιό- 
σοφονὴ καὶ πάλιν “τοῦτο φιλόσοφός ἐστιν; 3 
τεῦ ὟΣ δὲ ει ‘ , > > f vd 

opa ὃὲ “τὸν τέκτονα ov λέγεις, ὅταν μοι- 

εὐοντά τιν ὃς ἢ λιχνεύοντα ἴδ ὑδὲ 
χεύοντά Twa γνῷς ἢ λιχνεύοντα ἴδῃς, οὐ 
ac Ν , 0 ῳ > 4 ν᾿ ἃ ? 6 , 

ὅρα τὸν μουσικόν." οὕτως ἐπὶ ποσὸν ὦ αἰσθάνῃ 

s > ΦᾺ 4 , ” f > 
καὶ αὐτὸς τῆς ἐπαγγέλιας τοῦ hirocodou, ἀπο- 
λισθάνεις δὲ καὶ συγχέη ὑπὸ ἀμελετησίας. 

᾿Αλλὰ καὶ αὐτοὶ οἱ καλούμενοι φιλόσοφοι ἀπὸ 
τῶν κοινῶν τὸ πρᾶγμα μετίασιν: εὐθὺς ἀνα- 

, 

λαβόντες τρίβωνα καὶ πώγωνα καθέντες φασὶν 
“ ὀγὼ φιλόσοφός εἰμι." οὐδεὶς δ᾽ ἐρεῖ “ἐγὼ 
μουσικὸς εἰμι," ἂν πλῆκτρον καὶ κιθάραν ayo- 
ράσῃ, οὐδ᾽ “ἐγὼ χαλκεύς εἰμι," ἂν πιλίον καὶ 
fa * ? 3 e f Ἁ \ 
περίζωμα περιθῆται, GNX ἁρμόξεται μὲν TO 
σχῆμα πρὸς τὴν τέχνην, ἀπὸ τῆς τέχνης δὲ τὸ 
ὄνομα, οὐκ ἀπὸ τοῦ σχήματος ἀναλαμβάνουσιν. 
διὰ τοῦτο καλῶς Ἐῤφράτης ἔλεγεν ὅτι “ ἐπὶ 
πολὺ ἐπειρώμην λανθάνειν φιλοσοφῶν καὶ ἦν 

33 f ke ἴω 3 f ‘al Ἁ \ 
μοι, φησίν, “ τοῦτο ὠφέλιμον. πρῶτον μὲν yap 

Μ' οἰ a 3 7 ir 3 A ‘ ‘ 
ἤδειν, ὅσα καλῶς ἐποίουν, ὅτι οὐ διὰ τοὺς θεατὰς 
ha ¥ 3 4 3 3 f oF 3 ~ 
ἐποίουν, ἀλλὰ δ ἐμαυτόν' ἤσθιον ἐμαυτῷ 

" ᾿ ‘4 = X , Ἀ 
καλῶς, Κατεσταλμένον εἶχον τὸ βλέμμα, τὸν 

i οὗ after ὡς deleted by Sd. 


* τοιαῦτα added by Schenkl (after Wolf). 
3 Elter’s punctuation. 


380 


BOOK IV. vit. 13-17 


and then, if that be the case, blame his way of acting? 

But asit is, when you yourself are behaving decently, 
you say, on the basis of the evil that he seems to you 
to be doing, “Look at the philosopher,’ just as 
though it were proper to call a man who acts like 
that a philosopher; and again, “Is that what a 
philosopher is?” But you do not say, “ Look at 
the carpenter,’ when you know that a man is an 
adulterer, or see a man eating greedily, nor do you 
say, under similar circumstances, “Look at the 
musician.” Thus to a certain degree you too realize 
what the philosopher’s profession is, but you back- 
slide and get confused through carelessness. 

But even those who are styled philosophers pursue 
their calling with means which are sometimes good and 
sometimes bad. For example, when they have taken 
a rough cloak and let their beards grow, they say, 
“Tama philosopher.” But nobody will say, “I am 
a musician,” if he buys a plectrum and a cithara ; 
nor, “1 am a smith,” if he puts on a felt cap and an 
apron; but the guise is fitted to the art, and they 
get their name from the art, but not from the guise. 
That is why Euphrates! was right when he used to 
say: “For a long time I tried not to let people 
know that 1 was a philosopher, and this,” he says, 
“was useful to me. For, in the first place, I knew 
that whatever I did well, I did so, not on account of 
the spectators, but on my own account ; it was for my 
own sake that I ate well, and kept my countenance 


ἦ See on III. 15, 8, and compare for the uncertainty in 
men’s minds how to classify Euphrates, Apollonius of Tyana, 
fipistles, 1. 





+ Upton: πόσον S. 


19 


20 


23 


24 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


περίπατον' πάντα ἐμαυτῷ Kat θεῷ. εἶτα ὥσπερ 
μόνος ἠγωνιξόμην, οὕτως μόνος καὶ ἐκινδύνευον" 
οὐδὲν ἐμοὶ δράσαντι τὸ αἰσχρὸν ἢ ἀπρεπὲς τὸ 
τῆς φιλοσοφίας ἐκινδυνεύετο, οὐδ᾽ ἔβλαπτον 
τοὺς πολλοὺς ὡς φιλόσοφος ἁμαρτάνων. διὰ τοῦτο 
οἱ μὴ εἰδότες μου τὴν ἐπιβολὴν ἐθαύμαζον, πῶς 
πᾶσι φιλοσόφοις χρώμενος καὶ συξζῶν αὐτὸς 
οὐκ ἐφιλοσόφουν. καὶ τί κακόν, ἐν οἷς ἐποίουν 
ἐπιγιγνώσκεσθαι τὸν φιλόσοφον, ἐν δὲ τοῖς 
συμβόλοις μή; ἢ 

Βλέπε, πῶς ἐσθίω, πῶς πίνω, πῶς καθεύδω, πῶς 
ἀνέχομαι, πῶς ἀπέχομαι, πῶς συνεργῶ, πῶς ὁρέ- 
ξει χρῶμαι, πῶς ἐκκλίσει, πῶς τηρῶ τὰς σχέσεις 
τὰς φυσικὰς ἢ ἐπιθέτους ἀσυγχύτως καὶ ἀπαρα- 
ποδίστως" ἐκεῖθέν με κρῖνε, εἰ δύνασαι" εἰ δ᾽ 
οὕτως κωφὸς εἶ καὶ τυφλός, ἵνα μηδὲ τὸν 
“Ἥφαιστον ὑπολαμβάνῃς καλὸν χαλκέα, ἂν μὴ 
τὸ πιλίον ἴδῃς περὶ τὴν κεφαλὴν περικείμενον, 
τί κακὸν ὑφ᾽ οὕτως ἠλιθίου κριτοῦ ἀγνοεῖσθαι; 

Οὕτως ἐλάνθανε" παρὰ τοῖς πλείστοις Σω- 
κράτης καὶ ἤρχοντο πρὸς αὐτὸν ἀξιοῦντες φιίλο- 
σόφοις συσταθῆναι. μή τι οὖν ἠγανάκτει ὡς 
ἡμεῖς καὶ ἔλεγεν, “ἐγὼ δέ σοι οὐ φαίνομαι 
φιλόσοφος; ἀλλ᾽ ἀπῆγεν καὶ συνίστα ἑνὶ 
ἀρκούμενος τῷ εἶναι φιλόσοφος, χαίρων δὲ καὶ 
ὅτι μὴ δοκῶν οὐκ ἐδάκνετο' ἐμέμνητο γὰρ τοῦ 
ἰδίου ἔργου. τί ἔργον καλοῦ καὶ ἀγαθοῦ; μα- 


1 τῆς supplied by Reiske. 
2 δὲ ἴῃ margin: ἐλάνθα S. 





1 See note on IIT. 23, 21. 


BOOK IV. vit 17-24 


and gait composed ; it was all for myself and for God. 
And, secondly, as the contest was mine alone, so 
also 1 alone ran the risks; in no respect through 
me, if I did what was disgraceful or unseemly, 
did the cause of philosophy come into danger, nor 
did I do harm to the multitude by going wrong 
as a philosopher. For that reason those who were 
ignorant of my purpose wondered how it was that, 
although I was familiar with all the philosophers and 
lived with them, I was myself not acting in the réle 
of a philosopher. And what harm was there in 
having the philosopher that I was, recognized by 
what I did, rather than by the outward signs?” 

See how I eat, how drink, how sleep, how endure, 
how retrain, how help, how employ desire and how 
aversion, how I observe my relationships, whether 
they be natural or acquired, without confusion and 
without hindrance ; judge me on the basis of all this, 
if you know how. But if you are so deaf and blind 
as not to regard even Hephaestus as a good smith 
unless you see the felt cap resting on his head, what 
harm can come from passing unrecognized by a judge 
so foolish ? 

In this way the great majority of men failed to 
recognize Socrates, and so they used to come to him 
and ask to be introduced to philosophers!1 Was 
he, then, irritated as we are, and would he say, 
*“ And don’t f look like a philosopher to you?” 
No, but he used to take them and introduce them, 
and was satisfied with one thing, that is, bemg a 
philosopher, and glad that he was not annoyed at 
not being taken for one; for he habitually bore in 
mind his own proper function. What is the function 
of a good and excellent man? To have many 


333 


Saal 


25 


ee] 
bees | 


23 


29 


30 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


θητὰς πολλοὺς ἔχειν; οὐδαμῶς. ὄψονται οἱ 
περὶ τοῦτο ἐσπουδακότες. ἀλλὰ θεωρήματα 
δύσκολα ἀκριβοῦν ; ὄψονται καὶ περὶ τούτων 
ἄλλοι. ποῦ οὖν αὐτὸς καὶ ἣν τις καὶ εἶναι 
ae ὅπου βλάβη Kat ὠφέλεια. “εἴ μέ 
᾿ φησίν, “βλάψαι δύναται, ἐγὼ οὐδὲν ποιῶ' 
εἰ ων περιμένω, ἵνα με ὠφελήσῃ, ἐγὼ οὐδέν 
εἰμι. θέλω τι καὶ οὐ γίνεται' ἐγὼ ἀτυχής εἰμι." 
εἰς τοσοῦτο σκάμμα προεκαλεῖτο πάντα ὁντι- 
ναοῦν καὶ οὐκ ἄν pot δοκεῖ ἐκστῆναι οὐδενί---- 
τί δοκεῖτε; καταγγέλλων καὶ λέγων “ ἐγὼ τοιοῦ- 
TOS εἰμι; μὴ σγένυιτο, ἀλλὰ ὧν τοιοῦτος. 
πάλιν γὰρ τοῦτο μωροῦ καὶ ἀλαζόνος “ἐγὼ 
ἀπαθής εἰμι καὶ ἀτάραχος" μὴ ἀγνοεῖτε, ὧ 
ἄνθρωποι, ὅτι, ὑμῶν κυκωμένων 1 καὶ θορυβου- 
μένων περὶ τὰ μηδενὸς ἄξια μόνος, ἐγὼ ἀπήλ- 
λαγμαι πάσης ταραχῆς. οὕτως οὐκ ἀρκεῖ σοι 
τὸ μηδὲν ἀλγεῖν, ἂν μὴ κηρύσσῃς " συνέλθετε 
πάντες οἵ ποδαγρῶντες, οἱ κεφαλαλγοῦντες, οἱ 
πυρέσσοντες, οἱ χωλοί, οἱ τυφλοί, καὶ ἴδετέ με 
ἀπὸ παντὸς πάθους ὑγιᾶ "3 τοῦτο κενὸν καὶ 
φορτικόν, εἰ μή τι ὡς ὁ ᾿Ασκληπιὸς εὐθὺς ὑπο- 
δεῖξαι δύνασαι, πῶς θεραπεύοντες αὖθις 3 ἔσονται 
ἄνοσοι κἀκεῖνοι, καὶ εἰς τοῦτο φέρεις παρά- 
Serypa τὴν ὑγίειαν τὴν σεαυτοῦ. 
Τοιοῦτος γάρ τίς ἐστιν ὃ Κυνικὸς τοῦ σκήπτρου 
καὶ διαδήματος ἠξιωμένος παρὰ τοῦ Διὸς καὶ 


: Reiske: κοιμωμένων 8. 2 Reiske: εὐθύς 5. 
r 





1 See note on IV. 6, 23. 
* Strictly speaking, the loosened and smoothed earth on 


384 


BOOK IV. vi. 24-30 


pupils? Not at all. Those who have set their 
hearts on it shall see to that. Well, is it to set 
forth difficult principles with great precision? Other 
men shall see to these things also. In what field 
was he, then, somebody, and wished so to be? In 
the field where there was hurt and help. * If,” 
says he, “a man can hurt me, what I am engaged 
in amounts to nothing ; if I wait for somebody else 
to help me, I am myself nothing. If I want some- 
thing and it does not happen, it follows that 1 am 
miserable.” This was the mighty ring? to which 
he challenged every man whomsoever, and therein 
he would not, I believe, have given way before any- 
one in—what do you suppose ?—in proclaiming and 
asserting “Iam such and sucha man’? Far from 
it! but in beimg such and such aman. For, again, 
it is the part of a fool and blowhard to say, “I am 
tranquil and serene; be not ignorant, O men, that 
while you are tossed about and are in turmoil over 
worthless things, I alone am free from every per- 
turbation.” So is it not enough for you yourself to 
feel no pain without proclaiming, ‘‘ Come together, 
all you who are suffering from gout, headaches, and 
fever, the halt, and the blind, and see how sound 
I am, and free from every disorder’’? That is a 
vain and vulgar thing to say, unless, like Asclepius, 
you are able at once to show by what treatment 
those others will also become well again, and for this 
end are producing your own good health as an 
example. 

Such is the way of the Cynie who is deemed 
worthy of the sceptre and diadem of Zeus, and 
which wrestling matches were held, the ancient equivalent 


of our ring. 
aQe 


9} 


32 


33 


34 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


λέγων “ty ἴδητε, ὦ ἄνθρωποι, ὅτε τὴν εὐδαι- 
μονίαν καὶ ἀταραξίαν οὐχ ὅπου ἐστὶ ζητεῖτε, 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅπου μή ἐστιν, ἰδοὺ ἐγὼ ὑμῖν παράδειγμα 
ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ ἀπέσταλμαι μήτε κτῆσιν» ἔχων 
μήτε οἶκον μήτε γυναῖκα μήτε τέκνα; ἀλλὰ μηδ᾽ 
ὑπόστρωμα μηδὲ χιτῶνα μηδὲ σκεῦος" καὶ ἴδετε, 
πῶς ὑγιαίνω" πειράθ ητέ μου κἂν ἰδητε a ἀτάραχον, 
ἀκούσατε τὰ φάρμακα καὶ ὑφ᾽ ὧν ἐθεραπεύθην." 
τοῦτο γὰρ ἤδη καὶ φιλάνθρωπον καὶ γενναῖον. 
ἀλλ᾽ ὁρᾶτε, τίνος ἔργον ἐστίν' τοῦ Διὸς ἢ ὃν 
ἂν ἐκεῖνος ἄξιον κρίνῃ ταύτης τῆς ὑπηρεσίας, 
iva. μηδαμοῦ μηδὲν παρωγυμνώσῃ πρὸς τοὺς 
πολλούς, δι οὗ τὴν μαρτυρίαν τὴν αὑτοῦ, ἣν 
τῇ ἀρετῇ μαρτυρεῖ καὶ τῶν ἐκτὸς καταμαρτυρεῖ, 
αὐτὸς ἄκυρον ποιήσῃ" 


οὔτ᾽ Ὁ χρ, σάν χρόα κάλλιμον οὔτε παρειῶν 
δάκρυ᾽ ὀμορξάμενον. 


καὶ οὐ μόνον ταῦτα, ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ ποθοῦντά τί ἢ 
ἐπιξητοῦντα, ἄνθρωπον ἢ τόπον ἢ διαγωγήν, ὡς 
τὰ παιδία τὸν τρυγητὸν ἢ τὰς ἀργίας, αἰδοῖ 
πανταχοῦ κεκοσμημένον, ὡς οἱ ἄλλοι τοίχοις 
καὶ θύραις. καὶ θυρωροῖς. 

Név δ᾽ αὐτὸ μόνον κενηθέντες πρὸς φιλοσοφίαν, 
ὡς οἱ κακοστόμαχοι, πρός τι βρωμάτιον, ὃ μετὰ 
μικρὸν σικχαίνειν μέλλουσιν, εὐθὺς ἐπὶ τὸ σκῆπ- 
Tpov, ἐπὶ τὴν βασιλείαν. καθεῖκε τὴν κόμην, 
ἀνείληφε τρίβωνα, γυμνὸν δεικνύει τὸν ὦμον, 
μάχεται τοῖς ἀπαντῶσιν κἂν ἐν φαινόλῃ τινὰ 


1 Bentley: χωρήσαντα 8. 





1 Homer, Odyssey, XI. 5690 8, 
286 


BOOK IV. vit. 30-34 


says, “That you may see yourselves, O men, to 
be looking for happiness and serenity, not where 
it is, but where it is not, behold, God has sent me 
to you as an example; I have neither property, nor 
house, nor wife, nor children, no, not even so much 
as a bed, or a shirt, or a piece ot furniture, and yet 
you see how healthy 1 am. Make trial of me, and if 
you see that 1 am free from turmoil, hear my remedies 
and the treatment which cured me.” For this, at 
length, is an attitude both humane and noble. But 
see whose work it is; the work of Zeus, or of him 
whom Zeus deems worthy of this service, to the 
end that he shall never lay bare to the multitudes 
anything whereby he shall himself invalidate the 
testimony which it is his to give in behalf of virtue, 
and against externals. 


“Never there fell o’er his beauteous features a 
pallor, nor ever 
Wiped he the tears from his cheeks.” 1 


And not merely that, but he must neither yearn 
for anything, nor seek after it—be it human being, 
or place, or manner of life—like children seeking 
after the season of vintage, or holidays; he must be 
adorned on every side with self-respect, as all other 
men are with walls, and doors, and keepers of doors. 

But, as it is, being merely moved towards 
philosophy, like dyspeptics who are moved to some 
paltry foods, which they are bound in a short 
while to loathe, immediately these men are off to the 
sceptre, to the kingdom. One of them lets his hair 
grow long, he takes up a rough cloak, he shows his 
bare shoulder, he quarrels with the people he meets, 
and if he sees somebody in an overcoat he quarrels 


387 


36 


39 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ἴδῃ, μάχεται αὐτῷ. ,. ἄνθρωπε, χειμάσκησον 
πρῶτον" ἰδοῦ σου τὴν ὁρμήν, μὴ κακοστομάχου 
ἢ κισσώσης γυναικός ἐστιν. ἀγνοεῖσθαι μελέτη- 
σον πρῶτον, τίς εἶ' σαυτῷ φιλοσόφησον ὀλίγον 
χρόνον. οὕτως καρπὸς γίνεται; κατορυγῆναι δεῖ 
eis} χρόνον τὸ σπέρμα, κρυφθῆναι, κατὰ μικρὸν 
αὐξηθῆναι, ἵνα τελεσφορήσῃ. ἂν δὲ πρὸ τοῦ 
γόνυ φῦσαι τὸν στάχυν ἐξενέγκῃ, ἀτελές ἐστιν, 
ἐκ κήπου ᾿Αδωνιακοῦ. τοιοῦτον εἶ καὶ σὺ ᾿φυτά- 
ριον" θᾶττον τοῦ δέοντος ἤνθηκας, ἀποκαύσει σε 
0 χειμών. ἰδοῦ, τί λέγουσιν οἱ γεωργοὶ περὶ τών 
σπερμάτων, ὅταν πρὸ ὥρας θερμασίαι γένωνται ; ; 
ἀγωνιῶσιν, μὴ ἐξυβρίσῃ τὰ σπέρματα, εἶτα αὐτὰ 
πάγος εἷς Ka Bwv ἐξελέγξῃ. ἣν καὶ σύ, ἄνθρωπε' 
ἐξύβρικας, ᾿ἐπιπεπήδηκας δοξαρίῳ πρὸ ὥρας. 
δοκεῖς τις εἶναι, μωρὸς παρὰ μωροῖς' ἀποπαγήσῃ, 
μᾶλλον δ᾽ ἀποπέπηγας ἤδη ἐν τῇ ῥίξῃ κάτω, τὰ 
δ᾽ ἄνω σου μικρὸν ἔτι ἀνθεῖ καὶ διὰ τοῦτο δοκεῖς 
ἔτι ζῆν καὶ θάλλειν. ἄφες ἡμᾶς γε κατὰ φύσιν 
πεπανθῆναι. τί ἡμᾶς ἀποδύεις, τί βιάξῃ; οὔπω 
δυνάμεθα ἐνεγκεῖν τὸν ἀέρα. ἔασον τὴν ῥίζαν 


1 εἰς added by Schenkl. 





. * Sugg resting a very serious effort. See note on I. 2, 82, 

* Early spring house-gardens in honour of Adonis, where 
seeds were thickly planted in porous earthenware, sponges, 
and the like, sprouting luxuriantly, and of course quickly 
fading (ef. the reference to them in Isaiah, 1. 29: ‘‘ Ye shall 
be contended for the gardens that ye have chosen.” The 
ae osm became proverbial for incompleteness and early 

ading. 
8 This metaphor is so preposterous, for it is always the 
extremities of plants which are the first to be frostbitten, and 
not the protected roots, that one is inclined to ask if the text 


388 


BOOK IV. vin. 34-40 


with him. Man, take a winter’s training first ;+ look 
at your own choice, for fear it is like that of a 
dyspeptic, or a woman with the strange cravings of 
pregnancy. Practise first not to let men know who 
you are; keep your philosophy to yourself a little 
while. That isthe way fruit is produced : the seed has 
to be buried and hidden for a season, and be grown 
by slow degrees, in order that it may come to per- 
fection. But if it heads out before it produces the 
jointed stock, it never matures, it is from a garden 
of Adonis.2 That is the kind of plant you are too; 
you have blossomed prematurely, and the winter 
will blight you utterly. See what the farmers say 
about their seeds, when the hot weather comes 
before its proper time. They are in utmost anxiety 
lest the seeds should grow insolently lush, and then 
but a single frost should lay hold of them and 
expose their weakness. Man, do you also beware; 
you have grown insolently lush, you have leaped 
forward to occupy some petty reputation before its 
due time; you think yourself somebody, foo! that 
you are among fools; you will be bitten by the 
frost, or rather, you have already been bitten by 
the frost, down at the root, while your upper part 
still blooms a little, and for that reason you seem 
to be still alive and flourishing.? Allow us at least 
to ripen as nature wishes. Why do you expose 
us to the elements, why force us? We are not yet 
able to stand the open air. Let the root grow, next 
be sound. Clearly it is, since a whole series of corrections 
would have to be made in order to avoid the difficulty. 
Epictetus, a city dweller, probably knew little directly about 
the effects of frost on garden plants. The words ‘‘ flower,” 


“tree,” and ‘‘herb’”’ do not occur in his conversations at all, 
and even ‘‘plant” but rarely.—See note on IV. 11, 1. 
389 


41 


42 


43 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


na / a 
αὐξηθῆναι, εἶτα γόνυ λαβεῖν τὸ πρῶτον, εἶτα τὸ 
δεύτερον, εἶτα τὸ τρίτον" εἶθ᾽ οὕτως ὁ καρπὸς 
ἐκβιάσεται τὴν φύσιν, κἂν ἐγὼ μὴ θέλω. 

Τίς γὰρ ἐγκύμων γενόμενος καὶ πλήρης τηλι- 
κούτων δογμάτων οὐχὶ αἰσθάνεταί τε τῆς αὑτοῦ 
παρασκευῆς καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ κατάλληλα ἔργα ὁρμᾷ ; 
$ " ἴω \ > 3 a A ¢ a / \ 
ἀλλὰ ταῦρος μὲν οὐκ ἀγνοεῖ THY αὑτοῦ φύσιν Kal 
παρασκευήν, ὅτων ἐπιφανῇ τι θηρίον, οὐδ᾽ ava- 

᾿ \ ? > \ 7 e of 
μένει τὸν προτρεψόμενον, οὐδὲ κύων, ὅταν ἴδῃ 

a) b f f 2. ON 7 ON Ay ‘ 3 \ 
TL τῶν ἀγρίων ζῴων" ἐγὼ δ᾽ ἂν ἴσχω THY ἀνδρὸς 
ἴω 7 
ἀγαθοῦ παρασκευήν, ἐκδέξομαι, ἵνα με ov παρα- 
σκευάσῃς ἐπὶ τὰ οἰκεῖα ἔργα ; νῦν δ᾽ οὔπω ἔχω, 
ἜΤΕΙ Ν 
πίστευσόν μοι. τί οὖν με πρὸ ὥρας ἀποξηρᾶναι 

7 ¢ 9. Χ 3 7 

θέλεις, ὡς αὐτὸς ἐξηράνθης ; 


θ΄. ἸΤρὸς τὸν εἰς ἀναισχυντίαν μεταβληθέντα. 


“Ὅταν ἄλλον tons ἄρχοντα, ἀντίθες, ὅτι σὺ 
ἔχεις τὸ μὴ δεῖσθαι ἀρχῆς" ὅταν ἄλλον πλου- 
τοῦντα, ἰδοῦ τί ἀντὶ τούτου ἔχεις. εἰ μὲν γὰρ 

x 37 3 ? ; [οἱ 7 Φ > + oY 
μηδὲν ἔχεις ἀντ᾽ αὐτοῦ, ἄθλιος εἶ εἰ δ᾽ ἔχεις 
τὸ μὴ χρείαν ἔχειν πλούτου, γίγνωσκε, ὅτε πλεῖον 
ἔχεις καὶ πολλῷ πλείονος ἄξιον. ἄλλος γυναῖκα 
εὔμορφον, σὺ τὸ μὴ ἐπιθυμεῖν εὐμόρφου γυναικός. 
μικρά σοι δοκεῖ ταῦτα; καὶ πόσου ἂν τιμή- 
σαιντὸ οὗτοι αὐτοὶ οἱ πλουτοῦντες καὶ“ἄρχοντες 

\ > 3 4 f 7 ΄ 
καὶ μετ᾽ εὐμόρφων διαιτώμενοι δύνασθαι πλούτου 
καταφρονεῖν καὶ ἀρχῶν καὶ αὐτῶν τούτων τῶν 


399 


BOOK IV. vu. 40-1x. 3 


let it acquire the first joint, and then the second, and 
then the third; and so finally the fruit will forcibly 
put forth its true nature, even against my will. 

For who that has conceived and is big with such 
great judgements is not aware of his own equip- 
ment, and does not hasten to act in accordance with 
them? Why, a bullis not ignorant of his own 
nature and equipment, when some wild beast 
appears, nor does he hang back for someone to 
encourage him; neither does a dog, when he sees 
some wild animal; and shall I, if I have the equip- 
ment of a good man, hang back, so that you may 
encourage me to do what is my own proper work? 
But as yet I do not have the equipment, believe me. 
Why, then, do you wish to have me wither away 
before my time, as you yourself have withered? 


CHAPTER IX 


To the man who had become shameless 


WHENEVER you see another person holding office, 
set over against this the fact that you possess the 
ability to get along without office; whenever you 
see another person wealthy, see what you have 
instead. For if you have nothing instead, you are 
wretched; but if you are capable of feeling no need 
of wealth, know that you are better off, and have some- 
thing worth far more than wealth. Another has a 
comely wife, you the ability not to yearn for a comely 
wife. Is all this small in your eyes? Yet how much 
would these men give, who are rich and hold office, and 
live with beautiful women, to be able to despise wealth 
and offices, and these very same women whom they 


3g 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


4 γυναικῶν, ὧν ἐρῶσιν καὶ ὧν τυγχάνουσιν ; ἀγνοεῖς 
οἷόν τί ἐστι δίψος πυρέσσοντος ; οὐδὲν ὅμοιον 
ἔχει τῷ τοῦ ὑγιαίνοντος. ἐκεῖνος πιὼν ἀποπέ- 
παυται" ὁ δὲ πρὸς ὀλίγον ἡσθεὶς  ναυτιᾷ, χολὴν 
αὐτὸ ποιεῖ ἀντὶ ὕδατος, ἐμεῖ, στροφοῦται, διψῇ 

5 σφοδρότερον. τοιοῦτόν ἐστι μετ᾽ ἐπιθυμίας πλου- 
τεῖν, μετ᾽ ἐπιθυμίας ἄρχειν, μετ᾽ ἐπιθυμίας καλῇ 
συγκαθεύδειν' ξηλοτυπία πρόσεστιν, φόβος τοῦ 
στερηθῆναι, αἰσχροὶ Χόγοι, αἰσ γρὼ ἐνθυμήματα, 
ἔργα ἀσχήμονα. 

8 Καὶ τί, φησίν, ἀπολλύω ; ----Ανθρωπε, ὑπῆρχες 
αἰδήμων καὶ νῦν οὐκέτι εἶ: οὐδὲν ἀπολώλεκας ; 
ἀντὶ Χρυσίππου καὶ Ζήνωνος ᾿Αριστείδην ἀνα- 
γιγνώσκεις καὶ Evnvov? οὐδὲν ἀπολώλεκας ; 
ἀντὶ Σωκράτους καὶ Διογένους τεθαύμακας τὸν 
πλείστας διαφθεῖραι καὶ ἀναπεῖσαι δυνάμενον. 

καλὸς εἶναι θέλεις καὶ πλάσσεις σεαυτὸν μὴ ὧν 
καὶ ἐσθῆτα ἐπιδεικνύειν θέλεις στελπνήν, ἵνα τὰς 
γυναῖκας ἐπιστρέφῃς, κἄν που μυραφίου ἐπι- 

8 τύχης, μακάριος εἶναι δοκεῖς. πρότερον δ᾽ οὐδὲ ϑ 
ἐνεθυμοῦ τι τούτων, ἀλλὰ ποῦ εὐσχήμων λόγος, 
ἀνὴρ ἀξιόλογος, ἐνθύμημα γενναῖον. τουγαροῦν 
ἐκάθευδες ὡς ἀνήρ, mponets ὡς ἀνήρ, ἐσθῆτα 
ἐφόρεις ἀνδρικήν, λόγους ἐλάλεις πρέποντας ἀνδρὶ 


1 Reiske: ἤσθετο 5. 2 See explanatory note. 
3 Wendland (and perhaps S originally): οὐδέν Se. 





1 Typical erotic writers, the former the author of the 
celebrated Milesian Tales, the latter of an erotic work 
admired by Menander. Yet compare, on the Evenus of this 
passage, von Wilamowitz, Hermes, 11 (1876), 300, who con- 
jectures Eubius (Εὔβιον), whom Ovid, Tristia, 2. 416, calls 


392 


BOOK IV. 1x. 3-8 


passionately love and win? Do you not know what 
kind of thing the thirst of a man in fever is? It 
is quite unlike that of a man in health, The latter 
drinks and his thirst is gone, but the other gets a 
momentary satisfaction, and then becomes nauseated, 
turns the water into bile, throws up, has a pain in 
his bowels, and suffers more violent thirst than 
before. A similar thing it is to be rich and have 
strong desire, to hold office and have strong desire, 
to sleep by the side of a beautiful woman and have 
strong desire; jealousy is added to one’s lot, fear 
of loss, disgraceful words, disgraceful thoughts, 
unseemly deeds. 

And what do I lose? says somebody.— Man, 
you used to be modest, and are no longer so; 
have you lost nothing? Instead of Chrysippus and 
Zeno you now read Aristeides and Evenus;} have 
you lost nothing? Instead of Socrates and Diogenes 
you have come to admire the man who is able to 
corrupt and seduce the largest number of women. 
You wish to be handsome and make yourself up, 
though you arg not handsome, and you wish to 
make a show of gay attire, so as to attract the 
women, and you think yourself blessed if perchance 
you light upon some trivial perfume. But formerly 
you used never even to think of any of these 
things, but only where you might find decent 
speech, a worthy man, a noble thought. Therefore 
᾿ you used to sleep as a man, to go forth as a man, to 
wear the clothes of a man, to utter the discourse that 
was suitable for a good man; and after all that do 


impurae conditur historiae, and mentions together with 


Aristeides, as here. On the question see Crusius, Zeal- 
Encyelopddie®, 6, 850-51. 


393 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


" , Ἁ f 
ἄγαθῷ' εἶτά μοι λέγεις “‘ovdey ἀπώλεσα" ; 
PF 
9 οὕτως οὐδὲν ἄλλο ἢ κέρμα ἀπολλύουσιν ἄν- 
θρωποι; αἰδὼς οὐκ ἀπόλλυται, εὐσχημοσύνη 
οὐκ ἀπόλλυται; 7) οὐκ ἔστι ζημιωθῆναι ταῦτα 
10 ἀπολέσαντα; σοὶ μὲν οὖν δοκεῖ τάχα τούτων 
OA > " μὴ f ἥδ “ t [τὸ 
οὐδὲν οὐκέτι εἶναι ξημία' ἣν δέ ποτε χρόνος, ὅτε 
/ 39 Ἀ ct , \ f \ , 
μόνην αὐτὴν ὑπελογίζου καὶ ζημίαν καὶ βλάβην, 
7 “ ᾿ 
ὅτε ἠγωνίας, μή τις ἐκσείσῃ σε τούτων τῶν λόγων 
καὶ ἔργων. 
11. ἨἸδού, ἐκσέσεισαι ὑπ᾽ ἄλλου μὲν οὐδενός, ὑπὸ 
n~ a ἴον \ 
σαυτοῦ δέ. μαχέσθητι σαυτῷ, ἀφεέλοῦ σαυτὸν 
3 3 4 7 IQR 3 " ’ Ε 
12 εἰς εὐσχημοσύνην, εἰς αἰδῶ, εἰς ἐλευθερίαν. εἰ 
ool τίς που ἔλεγεν περὶ ἐμοῦ ταῦτα, ὅτι μέ τις 
᾿ δὰ a 
μοιχεύειν ἀναγκάζει, ὅτι ἐσθῆτα φορεῖν τοιαύτην, 
er / 3 A 3 \ > "ἢ 3. 4 
ὅτι μυρίξεσθαι, οὐκ ἂν ἀπελθὼν αὐτόχειρ ἐγένου 
τούτου τοῦ ἀνθρώπου τοῦ οὕτως mot παραχρω- 
‘ f " > > / “ “ \ 
13 μένου; viv οὖν ov θέλεις σαυτῷ βοηθῆσαι; καὶ 
td ἴω ¢ 
πόσῳ pawy αὕτη ἡ βοήθεια; οὐκ ἀποκτεῖναί 
~ 7 fal > δ \ 
τινα δεῖ, ov δῆσαι, οὐχ ὑβρίσαι, ave εἰς ἀγορὰν 
προελθεῖν, ἀλλ᾽ αὐτὸν αὑτῷ λαλῆσαι, τῷ μάλιστα 
f 
πεισθησομένῳ, πρὸς ὃν οὐδείς ἐστί σου πιθανώ- 
14 τερος. καὶ πρῶτον μὲν κατάγνωθιε τῶν γιγνο-. 
nm fal 
μένων, εἴτα καταγνοὺς μὴ ἀπογνῷς σεαυτοῦ μηδὲ 
πάθῃς τὸ τῶν ἀγεννῶν ἀνθρώπων, οἱ ἅπαξ ἐν- 
δόντες εἰσάπαν ἐπέδωκαν ἑαυτοὺς καὶ ὡς ὑπὸ 
16 ῥεύματος παρεσύρησαν, ἀλλὰ μάθε τὸ τῶν πταιδο- 
a 7 
τριβῶν. πέπτωκε τὸ παιδίον" ““ἀναστᾶς,᾽" φησίν, 
ἐς ἤ a / x > ΤᾺ 33 ~ 
16 “πάλιν πάλαιε, μέχρις ἂν ἰσχυροποιηθῇς. τοιοῦ- 
7 \ \ , af / A Os 5 
τὸν τι καὶ σὺ πάθε: ἴσθε γάρ, ὅτι οὐδέν ἐστιν 
394 


BOOK IV. rx. 8-16 


you still say, “I have lost nothing”? And is it 
nothing but small change that men lose in this way ? 
Is not self-respect lost, is not decency Jost? Or is it 
impossible that the loss of these things counts for 
anything? To you, indeed, the loss of none of these 
things, perhaps, seems any longer serious; but 
there once was a time when you thought it the 
only serious loss and harm, when you were in great 
anxiety legt anyone should dislodge you from these 
good words and deeds. 

Behold, you have been dislodged, though by no one 
else but yourself. Fight against yourself, vindicate 
yourself for decency, for respect, for freedom. If 
anyone ever told you about me that someone was 
forcing me to commit adultery, to wear clothes like 
yours, or to perfume myself, would you not have 
gone and murdered the man who was so maltreating 
me? And now, therefore, are you not willing to 
come to your own rescue? Yet how much easier 
is the work of rescue in the latter case! It is not 
necessary to kill somebody, put him in bonds, or 
assault him; you do not have to come out into the 
market-place, but only to talk to yourself, the man 
most likely to be persuaded, to whom no one is 
more persuasive than yourself. And first of all 
condemn what you are doing; then, when you have 
passed your condemnation, do not despair of your- 
self, nor act like the spiritless people who, when 
once they have given in, surrender themselves 
completely, and are swept off by the current, as it 
were, but learn how the gymnastic trainer of boys 
acts. The boy he is training is thrown; “ get up,’ 
he says, “and wrestle again, till you get strong.” 
React in some such way yourself, for 1 would have 


395 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


εὐωαγωγότερον ἀνθρωπίνης ψυχῆς. θελῆσαι δεῖ 

καὶ γέγονεν, διώρθωται'" ὡς πάλιν ἀπονυστάσαι 
\ 3 / "ἢ / 2 \ Ὗ ? 

καὶ ἀπόλωλεν. ἔσωθεν yap ἐστι Kal ἀπωλεια 

t / 

xal! βοήθεια. --- Kita τί μοι ἀγαθὸν ; — Kai τί 
a tay 4 " / 

ζητεῖς τούτου μεῖζον ; ἐξ ἀναισχύντου αἰδήμων 
/ 

ἔσῃ, ἐξ ἀκόσμου κόσμιος, ἐξ ἀπίστου πιστός, ἐξ 
3 7 , 7 3 7 / 

ἀκολάστου σώφρων. εἴ τινα ἄλλα τούτων μείζονα 

ζητεῖς, ποίει ἃ ποιεῖς" οὐδὲ θεῶν σέ τις "ἔτι σῶσαι 

δύναται. 


ὡ “ Cad 
i. Τίνων δεῖ καταφρονεῖν καὶ πρὸς τίνα 


διαφέρεσθαι ; 


᾿Απορία πᾶσα év® τοῖς ἀνθρώποις περὶ τὰ 
ἐκτὸς γίνεται, ἀμηχανία περὶ τὰ ἐκτός. “τί 
ποιήσω; πῶς γένηται; πῶς ἀποβῇ; μὴ τόδε 
ἀπαντήσῃ, μὴ τόδε. πᾶσαι αὗται αἱ φωναὶ 
περὶ τὰ ἀπροαίρετα στρεφομένων εἰσίν" τίς yap 
"λέγει " “πῶς μὴ συγκατατιθῶμαι τῷ ψεύδει ; ; 
8 πῶς μὴ ἀπονεύσω ἀπὸ τοῦ ἀληθοῦς ;" ; ἐὰν οὕτως 
ἦ εὐφυής, ὥστε περὶ τούτων ἀγωνιᾶν, ὑπομνήσω 
αὐτὸν ὅτι “τί ἀγωνιᾷς ; ἐπὶ σοί ἐστιν ἀσφαλὴς 
ἰσθι' μὴ πρὸ τοῦ ἐπάγειν τὸν φυσικὸν κανόνα 
προπήδα ἐν τῷ συγκατατίθεσθαι." 


1 Schegk, and Upton’s ‘‘codex”: ἤ 8. 
5 Schenkl: πᾶσαν (apparently) 8S. 


396 


BOOK IV. ix. 16—x. 3 


you know that there is nothing more easily pre- 
vailed upon than a human soul. You have but to 
will a thing and it has happened, the reform has 
been made; as, on the other hand, you have but to 
drop into a doze and all is lost. For it is within 
you that both destruction and deliverance lie.—But 
what good do I get after all that?—And what 
greater good than this are you looking for? Instead 
of shameless, you will be self-respecting ; instead of 
faithless, faithful; instead of dissolute, self-con- 
trolled. If you are looking for anything else greater 
than these things, go ahead and do what you are 
doing; not even a god can any longer save you. 


CHAPTER X 


What ought we to despise and on what place a high 
value ? 


Men find all their difficulties in externals, their 
perplexities in externals. “What shall I do? 
How is it to take place? How is it to turn 
out? I am afraid that this will befall me, or 
that.” All these are the expressions of men who 
concern themselves with the things that lie outside 
the sphere of the moral purpose. For who says, 
‘“ How am I to avoid giving assent to the false? 
How am I to refuse to swerve aside from the 
true?” ? Ifa man is so gifted by nature as to be 
in great anxiety about these things, I shall remind 
him, “ Why are you in great anxiety? It is under 
your own control; rest secure. Do not be in a 
hurry to give your assent before applying the rule of 
nature.” 

397 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


4 Πάλιν ἂν περὶ ὀρέξεως ἀγωνιᾷ, μὴ ἀτελὴς 
ὅ γένηται καὶ ἀποτευκτική, περὶ ἐκκλίσεως, μὴ 
περιπτωτική, πρῶτον μὲν αὐτὸν καταφιλήσω, 
ὅτι ἀφεὶς περὶ ἃ οἱ ἄλλοι ἐπτόηνται καὶ τοὺς 
ἐκείνων φόβους περὶ τῶν ἰδίων ἔργων πεφρόν- 


ΤᾺ 


ef >? 3 μὴ > ΡΝ 3 $e 2 Ἁ 
6 τικεν, ὅπου αὐτός ἐστιν' εἶτα ἐρῶ αὐτῷ “εἰ μὴ 
θέλῃς ὀρέγεσθαι ἀποτευκτικῶς μηδ᾽ ἐκκλίνειν 
περιπτωτικῶς, μηδενὸς ὀρέγου τῶν ἀλλοτρίων, 
δὲ bd [οὶ \ > \ f 3 δὲ 7 \ 
μηδὲν EXKALVE TOV μὴ ἐπὶ σοί. εἰ OF μὴ, καὶ 
5» " \ » 2 a 39 ) > 2." 
7 ἀποτυχεῖν καὶ περιπεσεῖν ἀνάγκη. ποία ἐνθάδ 
ta! “ \ 
aropia; ποῦ τόπον ἔχει “mas yévntar;” καὶ 
a BY 
“πῶς ἀποβῇ ;" καὶ “μὴ ἀπαντήσῃ τόδε ἢ 
τόδε; 
ῬᾺ ’ὔ 
8 Νῦν οὐχὶ τὸ ἐκβησόμενον ἀπροαίρετον ;—Nat. 
Qe δ᾽ 3 , n 5 “ \ [ἴω 3 \ ? 
—H δ᾽ οὐσία τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ καὶ κακοῦ ἐστὶν ἐν 
τοῖς προαιρετικοῖς ;---Ν αἱ.-- ξεστιν οὖν σοι 
παντὶ τῷ ἀποβάντι χρῆσθαι κατὰ φύσιν ; μή τις 
9 σε κωλῦσαι δύναται ;---Οὐδείς.----.Μηκέτι οὖν μοι 
Ud “ ; ᾿ 
λέγε “πῶς γένηται ; ἡ ὅπως γὰρ ἂν γένηται, σὺ 
5, ων 6} fo \ ΨῃΨ ‘ 3 \ 
αὐτὸ θήσεις καλῶς καὶ ἔσται cor τὸ ἀποβὰν 
10 εὐτύχημα. ἢ τίς ἂν ἣν ὁ Ἡρακλῆς λέγων “πῶς 
\ ἢ rd 
μοι μὴ μέγας λέων ἐπιφανῇ μηδὲ μέγας σῦς μηδὲ 
f af 
θηριώδεις AvOpwmo;”; καὶ τί σοι μέλει; ἂν 
a a) ΖΗ “ 
μέγας σῦς ἐπιφανῇ, μεῖζον ἄθλον ἀθλήσεις" ἂν 
Ν «ἢ θ nm 3 f 4 Ἵ 
κακοὶ ἄνθρωποι, κακῶν ἀπαλλάξεις πὴν οἰκου- 


* μή before this word was deleted by Meibom. 
398 


BOOK IV. x. 4-10 


Again, if a man is in great anxiety about desire, for 
fear lest it become incomplete and miss its mark, or 
about aversion, for fear lest it fall into what it would 
avoid, I shall first give him a kiss of congratulation, 
because he has got rid of what the rest of mankind 
are excited about, and their fears, and has turned 
his serious thought to his own true business in the 
realm where he himself is. And after that I shall 
say to him,“If you do not wish to desire without 
failing to get, or to avoid without falling into the 
object of your aversion, desire none of those things 
which are not your own, and avoid none of those 
things which are not under your control. If not, 
you are of necessity bound to fail in achieving your 
desires, and to fall into what you would avoid.” 
Where is there any difficulty in that case? What 
room is there to ask, “ How is it to take place?”’ 
and “ How is it to turn out?’ and to say, “I am 
afraid that this will befall me, or that’’? 

Is not the future outside the sphere of the 
moral purpose now?—Yes.—And is not the true 
nature of the good and evil inside the sphere of the 
moral purpose ?>-—Yes.—Are you permitted, then, to 
make a natural use of every outcome? No one can 
prevent you, can he?—No one.—Therefore, say no 
longer to me, “ How is it to take place?” Because, 
whatever takes place, you will turn it to good purpose, 
and the outcome will be a blessing for you. Or 
what would Heracles have been had he said “ How 
am 1 to prevent a great lion from appearing, or a 
great boar, or savage men?” ? And what do you 
eare for that? If a great boar appears, the struggle 
in which you are to engage will be greater; if evil 
men appear, you will clear the world of evil men.— 


399 


11 


13 


14 


1d 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


pévny.— Av οὖν οὕτως ἀποθάνω s—Ayaées ὧν 
ἀποθανῇ, γενναίαν πρᾶξιν ἐπιτελῶν. ἐπεὶ γὰρ 
δεῖ πάντως ἀποθανεῖν, ὦ ἀνάγκη τί TOTE ποιοῦντα 
εὑρεθῆναι, ἢ γεωργοῦντα ἢ σκάπτοντα ἢ ἐμπο- 
ρευόμενον ἢ ὑπατεύοντα ἢ ἀπεπτοῦντα ἢ διαρ- 
ροιζόμενον. τί οὖν θέλεις ποιῶν εὑρεθῆναι ὑπὸ 
τοῦ θανάτου ; ἐγὼ μὲν τὸ ἐμὸν μέρος ἔργον Tb 
TOTE ἀνθρωπικόν, εὐεργετικόν, κοινωφελές, γεν- 
ναῖον. εἰ δὲ μὴ δύναμαι τὰ τηλικαῦτα ποιῶν 
εὑρεθῆναι, ἐκεῖνό γε τὸ ἀκώλυτον, τὸ διδόμενον, 
ἐμαυτὸν ἐπανορθῶν, ἐξεργαζόμενος τὴν δύναμιν 
τὴν χρηστικὴν τῶν φαντασιῶν, ἀπάθειαν ἐκπο- 
νῶν, ταῖς σχέσεσι τὰ οἰκεῖα ἀποδιδούς" εἰ οὕτως 
εὐτυχής εἶμι, καὶ τοῦ τρίτου τόπου παραπτόμενος, 
τοῦ περὶ τὴν τῶν κριμάτων ἀσφάλειαν. 

“Ay μετὰ τούτων με 0 θάνατος καταλάβῃ, 
ἀρκεῖ μοι ἂν δύνωμαι πρὸς τὸν θεὸν ἀνατεῖναι 
τὰς χεῖρας, εἰπεῖν ὅτι “ ἃς ἔλαβον ἀφορμὰς παρὰ 
σοῦ πρὸς τὸ αἰσθέσθαι σου τῆς διοικήσεως καὶ 
ἀκολουθῆσαι αὐτῇ, τούτων οὐκ ἠμέλησα: οὐ 
κατήσχυνά σε τὸ ἐμὸν μέρος. ἰδοῦ, πῶς κέχρη- 
μαι ταῖς αἰσθήσεσιν, ἰδοῦ, “πῶς ταῖς προλήψεσιν. 
μῇ ποτέ σε ἐμεμψάμην, μή τι τῶν γινομένων τινὶ 
δυσηρέστησα ἢ ἄλλως γενέσθαι ἠθέλησα, μή τι 


1 Reiske: ἀποδιδοῦν S, 





1 See IIT. 2, 1, and note. 

2 These imaginary last words of Epictetus have given much 
offence to Elizabeth Carter (author of the most famous 
of the English translations), and no doubt others, who find 
them ostentatious and lacking in humility. They represent, 
however, an ideal and not an actual condition, and as such are 
entirely innocent. Epictetus, who was in fact the most humble 


400 


BOOK IV. x. 10-15 


But if I die in so doing ?—You will die as a good 
man, bringing to fulfilment a noble action. Why, 
since you have to die in any event, you must be 
found doing something or other—farming, or dig- 
ging, or engaged in commerce, or holding a consul- 
ship, or suffering with dyspepsia or dysentery. What 
is it, then, you wish to be doing when death finds 
you? I for my part should wish it to be some work 
that befits a man, something beneficent, that pro- 
motes the common welfare, or is noble. But if I 
cannot be found doing such great things as these, I 
should like at least to be engaged upon that which 
is free from hindrance, that which is given me to 
to do, and that is, correcting myself, as I strive to 
perfect the faculty which deals with the external 
impressions, labouring to achieve calm, while yet 
giving to each of my human relationships its due; 
and, if I am so fortunate, striving to attain to the 
third field of study,) that which has to do with 
security in the formation of judgements. 

If death finds me occupied with these matters, 
it is enough for me if I can lift up my hands unto 
God, and say,? “ The faculties which I received from 
Thee to enable me to understand Thy governance 
and to follow it, these I have not neglected; I have 
not dishonoured Thee as far as in me lay. Behold 
how I have dealt with my senses, behold how I 
have dealt with my preconceptions. Have I ever 
blamed Thee? Have I been discontented with 
any of these things which happen, or wished it to 
have been otherwise? Have I at all violated my 


of men (see Vol. I. pp. xviii-xx), does not say, “It is enough 
for me because I can lift up nvy hands unto God, and say,” but, 
“fT oan,” which is a very different matter. 

401 


vou, OU, 


18 


19 


20 


22 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


\ } , 1 , of So Ψ \ 
ras σχέσεις παρέβην ; 1 χάριν ἔχω," ὃ pe σὺ 
ἐγέννησας, χάριν ἔχω, ὧν ἔδωκας" ἐφ᾽ ὅσον éxpn- 
σάμην τοῖς σοῖς, ἀρκεῖ μοι. πάλιν αὐτὰ ἀπόλαβε 
καὶ κατάταξον εἰς ἣν θέλεις χώραν’ σὰ γὰρ ἣν 
πάντα, σύ μοι αὐτὰ δέδωκας." οὐκ ἀρκεῖ οὕτως 
ἔχοντα ἐξελθεῖν ; καὶ τίς βίων. κρείττων ἢ εὐσχὴη- 
μονέστερος τοῦ οὕτως ἔχοντος, ποία δὲ κατα- 
στροφὴ εὐδαιμονεστέρα ; 

“Iva δὲ ταῦτα γένηται, οὐ μικρὰ δέξασθαι 
οὐδὲ μικρῶν ἀποτυχεῖν. οὐ δύνασαι καὶ ὑπα- 
τεῦσαι θέλειν καὶ ταῦτα καὶ ἀγροὺς ἔχειν ἐσπου- 
δακέναι καὶ ταῦτα καὶ τῶν δουλαρίων φροντίξειν 
καὶ σεαυτοῦ. ἀλλ᾽ ἄν τε τῶν ἀλλοτρίων θέλῃς, 
τὰ σὰ ἀπώλετο. αὕτη τοῦ πράγματος ἡ φύσις" 
προῖκα οὐδὲν γίνεται. καὶ τί θαυμαστόν ; ἂν 
ὑπατεῦσαι θέλῃς, ἀγρυπνῆσαί σε δεῖ, περιδραμεῖν, 
τὰς χεῖρας καταφιλῆσαι, πρὸς ταῖς ἀλλοτρίαις 

ύραις κατασαπῆναι, πολλὰ μὲν εἰπεῖν, WONKA δὲ 
πρᾶξαι ἀνελεύθερα, δῶρα πέμψαι πολλοῖς, ξένια 
καθ᾽ ἡμέραν ἐνίοις" καὶ τί τὸ γινόμενόν ἐστιν ; 
δώδεκα δεσμὰ ῥάβδων καὶ τρὶς ἢ τετράκις ἐπὶ 
βῆμα καθίσαι καὶ κιρκήσια δοῦναι καὶ σπυρίσιν 
δειπνίσαι3 ἢ δειξάτω. μοί τις, τί ἐστὶ παρὰ 
ταῦτα. ὑπὲρ ἀπαθείας οὖν, ὑπὲρ ἀταραξίας, 
ὑπὲρ τοῦ καθεύδοντα καθεύδειν, ἐγρηγορότα 
ἐγρηγορέναι, μὴ φοβεῖσθαι μηδέν, μὴ ἀγωνιᾶν 

1 Schweighitiuser : παρεβῆναι 8, 


* xdow ἔχω here added by Reiske. 
ὃ Reiske : δειπνῇσαι Κ΄. 
1 The consular fasces. 
* The sporteiae which were distributed at Rome by a 
patron among his clients, 


402 





BOOK IV. x. 15-22 


relationships with others? For that Thou didst beget 
me I am grateful; for what Thou hast given I am 
grateful also. The Jength of time for which I have 
had the use of Thy gifts is enough for me. Take 
them back again and assign them to what place 
Thou wilt, for they were all Thine, and Thou 
gavest them me.” Is it not enough for a man to 
take his departure from the world in this state of 
mind? And what among all the kinds of life is 
superior to this, or more seemly than his who is 
so minded, and what kind of end is more for- 
tunate ἢ 
But that this may take place a man must accept no 
small troubles, and must miss no small things. You 
cannot wish for a consulship and at the same time 
wish for this; you cannot have set your heart upon 
having lands and this too; you cannot at the same 
time be solicitous for your paltry slaves and yourself 
too, But if you wish for any one of the things 
that are not your own, what is your own is lost. 
This is the nature of the matter: Nothing is done 
except for a price. And why be surprised? If you 
wish to be consul you must keep vigils, run around, 
kiss men’s hands, rot away at other men’s doors, say 
and do many slavish things, send presents to many 
persons, and guest-gifts to some people every day. 
And whatis the outcome of it all? Twelve bundles 
of rods, and the privilege of sitting three or four 
times on the tribune, and giving games in the Circus, 
and lunches in little baskets? Or else let someone 
show me what there is in it beyond this. For 
calm, then, for peace of mind, for sleeping when 
you are asleep, and being awake when you are 
awake, for fearing nothing, for being in great 
493 
pp 2 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


an / ‘ 
ὑπὲρ μηδενὸς οὐδὲν ἀναλῶσαι θέλεις, οὐδὲν 
a a a 
23 πονῆσαι; ἀλλ᾽ ἄν τι ἀπόληταί σου περὶ ταῦτα 
δ ΜᾺ ‘al EN 
γινομένου ἢ ἀναλωθῇ κακῶς ἢ ἄλλος τύχῃ ὧν 
an \ wn f 
ἔδει σε τυχεῖν, εὐθὺς  δηχθήσῃ ἐπὶ τῷ γενομένῳ ; 
3 3 “ f 3 \ / / a 
24 οὐκ ἀντιθήσεις, TL ἀντὶ τίνος λαμβάνεις, πόσον 
[ \ / 3 \ ~ θέ 4 a 
ἀντὶ πόσου; ὡλλὰ προῖκα θέλεις τὰ τηλικαῦτα 
λ β na, \ a δ ΟΝ 4 ὼ 
αβεῖν ; καὶ πῶς δύνασαι; ἔργον ἔργῳ. 
- 3 δύ \ Ν > Ν ” 3 7 
25 Οὐ δύνασαι καὶ τὰ ἐκτὸς ἔχειν ἐπιμελείας 
τετυχηκότα καὶ τὸ σαυτοῦ ἡγεμονικόν. εἰ δ᾽ 
y »ν / [οὶ 2 3 \ 7 of a) 
ἐκεῖνα θέλεις, τοῦτο ἄφες" εἰ δὲ μή, οὔτε τοῦτο 
ἕξεις οὔτ᾽ ἐκεῖνα, περισπτώμενος ἐπ᾿ ἀμφότερα. 
2 “ , 3 “ ΄ 3 “ ~ 3 
26 εἰ τοῦτο θέλεις, ἐκεῖνά σε ἀφεῖναι δεῖ. ἐκχε- 
θήσεται τὸ ἔλαιον, ἀπολεῖται τὰ σκευάρια, ἀλλ᾽ 
ἐγὼ ἀπαθὴς ἔσομαι. ἐμπρησμὸς ἔσται ἐμοῦ μὴ 
/ a“ \ 
παρόντος καὶ ἀπολεῖται τὰ βιβλία, ἀλλ᾽ ἐγὼ 
a ,ὔ 
χρήσομαι ταῖς φαντασίαις κατὰ φύσιν. ἀλλ᾽ 
3 v4 a 3 Ὁ , > - \ Ν 
27 οὐχ ἔξω φαγεῖν. εἰ οὕτως τάλας εἰμί, λιμὴν τὸ 
ἀποθανεῖν. οὗτος δ᾽ ἐστὶν ὁ λιμὴν πάντων, ὃ 
\ nm ΜᾺ 
θώνατος, αὕτη ἡ καταφυγή. διὼ τοῦτο οὐδὲν τῶν 
a / f 
ἐν τῷ Bim χαλεπὸν ἐστιν. ὅταν θέλῃς, ἐξῆλθες 
\ 3 7 ͵ δ 3 [9] ᾽ 3 a“ 
28 καὶ ov καπνίζῃ. τί οὖν ἀγωνιᾷς, TL ἀγρυπνεῖς ; 
3 \ δὲ Wer) 3 , » \ 3 Ao 
οὐχὺ ὃὲ εὐθυς ἀναλογισάμενος, TOV σου TO ἀγαθὸν 
᾿ ees, la , ὩἦὯὍΦὋΦὋ τ. 5.5. 4 2 , 
ἐστι καὶ τὸ κακὸν, λέγεις OTL “ ἐπ᾽ ἐμοὶ ἀμφότερα' 
3} ’ 3 f @ δύ v3 3 f 
οὔτε τούτου τις ἀφελέσθαι με δύναται οὔτ᾽ ἐκείνῳ 
29 ἄκοντα περιβαλεῖν. τί οὖν οὐ ῥέγχω βαλών ; 


1 μή after εὐθύς is deleted in S. 





1 Supply: ‘‘has no partnership.” See IV. 6, 30, where 
the proverb is given in full. 
2 The reference is to suicide. Cf, I. 25, 18 and 20. 


404 


BOOK IV. x. 22-29 


anxiety about nothing, are you unwilling to spend 
anything, to make any exertion? But if’ something 
that belongs to you be lost while you are engaged 
in these affairs, or be spent to no purpose, or 
someone else get what you ought to have got, are 
you going to be vexed immediately at what has 
happened ? Will you not balance off what you are 
getting in return for what, how much in return for 
how much? Nay, do you ‘wish to get such valuable 
things for nothing? And how can you? “One 
serious business with another.’’} 

You cannot be continually giving attention to both 
externals and your own governing principle. But 
if you want the former, let the latter go; otherwise 
you will have neither the latter nor the former, being 
drawn in both directions. If you want the latter, 
you must let the former gv. The oil will be 
spilled, my paltry furniture will perish, but I shall 
be calm. There will be a fire when I am not 
at home, and my books will perish, yet I shall 
deal with my external impressions according to 
nature. But I shall have nothing to eat. If I am 
so badly off as all that, death is my harbour. And 
this is the harbour of all men, even death, and this 
their refuge. That is why no one of the things that 
befall us in our life is difficult. Whenever you 
wish, you walk out of the house, and are no longer 
bothered by the smoke.2 Why, then, are you con- 
sumed with anxiety? Why do you keep vigils? 
And why do you not forthwith reckon up where 
your good and your evil lie, and say, “ They are 
both under my control; no man can either rob me 
of the one, or plunge me in the other against my 
will? Why, then, do I not throw myself down and 


405 


30 


31 


33 


34 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


τὰ ἐμὰ ἀσφαλῶς ἔχει" τὰ ἀλλότρια ὄψεται αὐτὰ 
ὃς ἂν φέρῃ, ὡς ἂν διδῶται παρὰ τοῦ ἔχοντος 
ἐξουσίαν. τίς εἰμὶ ὁ θέλων αὐτὰ οὕτως ἔχειν ἢ 
οὕτως ; μὴ γάρ μοι δέδοται ἐκλογὴ αὐτῶν; μὴ 
γὰρ ἐμέ τις αὐτῶν διοικητὴν πεποίηκεν ; ἀρκεῖ 
pot ὧν ἔχω ἐξουσίαν. ταῦτά με δεῖ κάλλιστα 
παρασκευάσαι, τὰ δ᾽ ἄλλα ὡς ἂν θέλῃ ὁ ἐκείνων 
κύριος." 

Ταῦτά τις ἔχων πρὸ ὀφθαλμῶν ἀγρυπνεῖ, καὶ 
στρέφεται ἔνθα καὶ ἔνθα ; τί θέλων ἢ τί ποθῶν; 
Πάτροκλον ἢ ᾿Αντίλοχον ἢ Πρωτεσίλαον ;+ πότε 
γὰρ ἡγήσατο ἀθάνατόν τινα τῶν φίλων πότε 
γὰρ οὐκ εἶχεν πρὸ ὀφθαλμῶν, ὅτε αὔριον ἢ εἰς 
τρίτην δεῖ ἢ αὐτὸν ἀποθανεῖν ἢ ἐκεῖνον ; “ vai,” 
φησίν, “ἀλλ᾽ ᾧμην, ὅτι ἐκεῖνος ἐπιβιώσεταί μοι 
καὶ αὐξήσει μου τὸν υἱόν." μωρὸς γὰρ ἧς καὶ τὰ 
ἄδηλα ᾧου. τί οὖν οὐκ ἐγκαλεῖς σεαυτῷ, ἀλλὰ 
κλαίων κάθησαι ὡς τὰ κοράσια ; “ ἀλλ᾽ ἐκεῖνός 
μοι φαγεῖν παρετίθει. ἔξη γάρ, μωρέ: νῦν δ᾽ οὐ 
δύναται. ἀλλ᾽ Αὐτομέδων σοι παραθήσει" ἂν δὲ 
καὶ Αὐτομέδων ἀποθάνῃ, ἄλλον εὑρήσεις. ἂν δ᾽ 


1 Qldfather: Μενέλαον 5, See explanatory note. 





1 Homer, Ziad, XXIV. 5, referring to Achilles on his bed 
when mourning for Patroclus. 

2 Patroclus and Antilochus were well-known friends of 
Achilles, but ‘‘ Menelaus” (the reading of 8) must be wrong, 
partly because he was not in any way a special friend, and 
particularly because he was not killed, as the context re- 
quires. Some other friend of the hero, who was Irilled, must 
be supplied, and that can hardly be anyone but Protesilaus, 
wlio, was one of his playmates under the tutelage of Cheiron. 
Phildstratus, Her. 176 K. Achilles leaped on shore im- 


406 


BOOK IV. x. 20--24 


snore? What is mine is safe. What is not mine 
shall be the concern of whoever gets it, according 
to the terms upon which it may be given by Him 
who has authority over it. Who am I to wish that 
what is not mine should be either thus or so? For 
it has not been given me to make a choice among 
these things, has it? For no one has made me an 
administrator of them, has he? I am satisfied with 
the things over which 1 have authority. These I 
ought to treat so that they may become as beautiful 
as possible, but everything else as their master may 
desire.” 

Does any man who has all this before his eyes 
keep vigils, and does he “toss hither and thither’’?+ 
What does he wish, or what does he yearn for? 
For Patroclus, or Antilochus, or Protesilaus?? Why, 
when did he regard any of his friends as immortal? 
Yes, and when did he not have before his eyes the 
fact that on the morrow or the day after either 
he or his friend must die?® “Yes,” he says, “but 
I had thought he was going to survive me, and 
bring up my son.” No doubt, but then you were 
a fool, and were thinking of things that were un- 
certainties. Why, then, do you not blame your- 
self, instead of sitting and crying like little girls? 
“Nay, but he used to set my food before me.” 
Yes, fool, for then he was alive ; and now he cannot. 
But Automedon * will set your food before you, and 
if Automedon too die, you will find somebody else. 


mediately after Protesilans and avenged his death. See 
Escher in the Real-Eneyclopidie?, I. 229, 9 ff. 

2 A kind of proverbial expression. Conipare Marcus 
Aurelius, 4 47. 

4 Comrade and charioteer of both Patroclus and Achilles. 


407 


35 


36 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF-EPICTETUS 


ἡ χύτρα, ἐν ἡ ἥψετό σοι τὸ κρέας, καταγῇ, λιμῷ 
σε δεῖ ἀποθανεῖν, ὅτε μὴ ἔχεις τὴν συνήθη 
χύτραν; οὐ πέμπεις καὶ ἄλλην καινὴν ayo- 
ράξεις ; 

οὐ μὲν γάρ τι; 


φησίν, 
ὔ ἢ “ 
κακώτερον ἄλλο πάθοιμι. 


τοῦτο γάρ σοι κακόν ἐστιν; εἶτ᾽ ἀφεὶς τοῦτο 
ἐξελεῖν αἰτιᾷ τὴν μητέρα, ὅτι σοι οὐ προεῖπεν, ἵν᾽ 
ὀδυνώμενος ἐξ ἐκείνου διατελῇς ; 

Τί δοκεῖτε ; μὴ ἐπίτηδες ταῦτα συνθεῖναι “Ομη- 
ρον, ἵν᾽ ἴδωμεν, ὅτι οἱ εὐγενέστατοι, οἱ 1 ἰσχυρότα- 
Tot, οἱ πλουσιώτατοι, ot εὐμορφότατοι, ὅταν 
οἷα δεῖ δόγματα μὴ ἔχωσιν, οὐδὲν κωλύονται 
ἀθλιώτατοι εἶναι καὶ δυστυχέστατοι ; 


ια΄. Περὶ καθαριότητος. 


᾿Αμφισβητοῦσί τινες, εἰ ἐν τῇ φύσει τοῦ 
ἀνθρώπου περιέχεται τὸ κοινωνικόν' ὅμως δ᾽ 
αὐτοὶ οὗτοι οὐκ ἄν μοι δοκοῦσιν ἀμφισβητῆσαι, 
ὅτι τό ye” καθάριον πάντως περιέχεται καὶ εἴ 
τινι ἄλλῳ καὶ τούτῳ τῶν ζῴων χωρίζεται. ὅταν 
οὖν ἄλλο τι ξἕῷον ἴδωμεν ἀποκαθαῖρον ἑαυτό, 
ἐπιλέγειν εἰώθαμεν θαυμάξοντες ὅτι “ as ἄνθρω- 


1 of added by 5. 3 τόγε Wolf: ποτέ 5. 





1 Homer, Iliad, XIX. 391, : 

2 The generalization is somewhat hasty. Many animals, 
like cats (and the felidae in general), moles, most birds, 
snakes, etc., are distinctly more cleanly than any but the 


408 


BOOK IV. x. 34-x1. 2 


If the pot in which your meat used to be boiled gets 
broken, do you have to die of hunger because you 
do not have your accustomed pot? Won't you 
send out and buy a new one to take its place? He 
Says, 


ΠῚ no greater than this could befall me.} 


Why, is this what you call an ill? And then, for- 
bearing to get rid of it, do you blame your mother, 
because she did not foretell it to you, so that you 
might continue to lament from that time forth? 

What do you men think? Did not Homer com- 
pose this in order for us to see that there is nothing 
to prevent the persons of highest birth, of greatest 
strength, of most handsome appearance, from being 
most miserable and wretched, when they do not hold 
the right kind of judgements ? 


CHAPTER XI 
Of cleanliness 


Some people raise the question whether the social 
instinct is a necessary element in the nature of man ; 
nevertheless, even these people, as it seems to me, 
would not question that the instinct of cleanliness 
is most assuredly a necessary element, and that man 
is distinguished from the animals by this quality 
if by anything.2 When, therefore, we see some 
other animal cleaning itself, we are in the habit 
of saying in surprise that it is acting “like a human 


most civilized men. Epictetus was clearly not strong in 
natural history. Cf. notes on II. 24, 16; IV. 8, 39; IV. 11, 
32, and νοῦ, 33, 16. 


409 


ARRIANS DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


“τος. καὶ πάλιν ἄν τις ἐγκαλῇ τινὶ ξῴῳ, εὐθὺς 
εἰώθαμεν ὥσπερ ἀπολογούμενοι λέγειν ὅτι “ οὐ 
8 δήπου ἄνθρωπός ἐστιν. οὕτως ἐξαίρετόν τί 
περὶ τὸν ἄνθρωπον εἶναι οἰόμεθα ἀπὸ τῶν θεῶν 
αὐτὸ “πρῶτον λαμβάνοντες. ἐπεὶ γὰρ ἐκεῖνοι 
φύσει καθαροὶ καὶ ἀκήρατοι, ἐφ᾽ ὅσον ἠγγίκασιν 
αὐτοῖς οἱ ἄνθρωποι κατὰ τὸν λόγον, ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον 
καὶ τοῦ καθαροῦ καὶ τοῦ καθαρίου εἰσὶν ἀνθεκτι- 
4 κοί. ἐπεὶ δ᾽ ἀμήχανον τὴν οὐσίαν αὐτῶν παν- 
τάπασιν εἶναι καθαρὰν ἐκ τοιαύτης ὕλης κεκρα- 
μένην, ὁ λόγος παραληφθεὶς εἰς τὸ ἐνδεχόμενον 
ταύτην καθάριον ἀποτελεῖν πειρᾶται. 
ὅ ‘Hla πρώτη οὖν καὶ ἀνωτάτω καθαρότης ἡ ἐν 
ψυχῇ γενομένη καὶ ὁμοίως ἀκαθαρσία. ψυχῆς 
ὡς σώματος μὲν ἀκαθαρσίαν οὐκ ἂν εὕροις," ὡς 
ψυχῆς δὲ τί ἂν ἄλλο εὕροις ἢ τὸ παρέχον αὐτὴν 
6 ῥυπαρὰν πρὸς τὰ ἔργα τὰ αὑτῆς ; ἔργα δὲ ψυχῆς 
ὁρμᾶν, ἀφορμᾶν, ὀρέγεσθαι, ἐκκλίνειν, παρα- 
σκευάξεσθαι, ἐπιβάλλεσθαι, συγκατατίθεσθαι. 
7 τί ποτ᾽ οὖν ἐστὶ τὸ ἐν τούτοις τοῖς ἔργοις ῥυπαρὰν 
παρέχον αὐτὴν καὶ ἀκάθαρτον ; οὐδὲν ἄλλο ἢ ἢ τὰ 
8 μοχθηρὰ κρίματα αὐτῆς. ὥστε ψυχῆς μὲν ἀκα- 
apota δόγματα “πονηρά, κάθαρσις δ᾽ ἐμποίησις 
οἵων δεῖ δογμάτων. καθαρὰ δ᾽ ἡ ἔχουσα οἷα δεῖ 
δόγματα" ,μόνη γὰρ αὕτη ἐν τοῖς ἔργοις τοῖς 
αὑτῆς ἀσύγχυτος Kat ἀμόλυντος. 
9 Δεῖ δέ ἦι ἐοικὸς τούτῳ καὶ ἐπὶ σώματος φιλο- 


1 ἢ added by Upton. 2 Upton’s ‘ codex ”: εὕρηις S. 





* Our idiom requires us to use both ‘‘clean ” and ‘‘ pure,” 
and their derivatives, for what in the Greek is expressed 
by a single word. 


410 


BOOK IV. x1 2-9 


being.” And again, if one finds fault with some 
beast, we are in the habit of saying immediately, 
as though in apology, “Well, of course it isn’t a 
human being.” So true it is that we consider clean- 
liness to be a special characteristic of man, deriving 
it in the first instance from the gods, For since 
they are by nature pure? and undefiled, in so far 
as men have approached them by virtue of reason, 
just so far are they attached to purity and cleanli- 
ness. But since it is impossible for the nature of 
men to be altogether pure, seeing that it is com- 
posed of such material as it is, the reason which 
they have received from the gods endeavours to 
render this material clean as far as is possible. 

Therefore, the prime and highest purity is that 
which appears in the soul, and the same is true of 
impurity. But you would not find the same im- 
purity in a soul as you would in a body, and as 
being soul, what else would you find impure about 
it than that which makes it dirty for the per- 
formance of its own functions? And the functions 
of a soul are the exercise of choice, of refusal, of 
desire, of aversion, of preparation, of purpose, and 
of assent. What, then, can that be which makes 
the soul dirty and unclean in these functions? 
Nothing but its erroneous decisions. It follows, 
therefore, that impurity of a soul consists of bad 
judgements, and purification consists in creating 
within it the proper kind of judgements; and a 
pure soul is the one which has the proper kind of 
judgements, for this is the only soul which is 
secure against confusion and pollution in its own 
functions. 

Now one ought to be eager to achieve, as far 


ALL 


10 


11 


13 


14 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


τεχνεῖν κατὰ τὸ ἐνδεχόμενον. ἀμήχανον ἣν 
μύξας μὴ ῥεῖν τοῦ ἀνθρώπου τοιοῦτον ἔχοντος τὸ 
σύγκραμα' διὰ τοῦτο χεῖρας ἐποίησεν ἡ φύσις 
καὶ αὐτὰς τὰς ῥῖνας. ὡς σωλῆνας πρὸς τὸ ἐκδι- 
δόναι, τὰ ὑγρά. ἂν οὖν avappoph τις αὐτάς, λέγω 
ὅτι οὐ ποιεῖ ἔργον ἀνθρωπικόν. ἀμήχανον ἣν μὴ 
πηλοῦσθαι τοὺς πόδας μηδὲ ὅλως μολύνεσθαι διὰ 
τοιούτων τινῶν πορευομένους" διὰ τοῦτο ὕδωρ 
παρεσκεύασεν, διὰ τοῦτο χεῖρας. ἀμήχανον ἣν 
ἀπὸ τοῦ τρώγειν μὴ ῥυπαρόν τί προσμένειν τοῖς 
ὀδοῦσι" διὰ τοῦτο ἐς γγλῦνον," φησίν, Tous 
ὀδόντας. διὰ τί; ἵν ᾿ ἄνθρωπος ἡ ἧς καὶ μὴ θηρίον 
μηδὲ συίδιον. ἀμήχανον μὴ ἀπὸ τοῦ ἱδρῶτος καὶ 
τῆς κατὰ τὴν ἐσθῆτα συνοχῆς ὑπολείπεσθαί τι 
περὶ τὸ σῶμα ῥυπαρὸν καὶ δεόμενον ἀποκαθάρ- 
σεως" διὰ τοῦτο ὕδωρ, ἔλαιον, χεῖρες, ὀθόνιον, 
ξύστρα, νίτρον, ἔσθ' ὅθ᾽ ἡ ἄλλη πᾶσα παρασκευὴ 
πρὸς τὸ καθῆραι αὐτό. οὔ" ἀλλ' ὁ μὲν χαλκεὺς * 
ἐξιώσει τὸ σιδήριον, καὶ ὄργανα πρὸς τοῦτο ἕξει 
κατεσκευασμένα, καὶ τὸ πινάκιον αὐτὸς σὺ πλυ- 
νεῖς, ὅταν μέχλῃς ἐσθίειν, ἐὰν μὴ ἧς παντελῶς 
ἀκάθαρτος καὶ ῥυπαρός" τὸ σωμάτιον δ᾽ οὐ 
πλυνεῖς 5 οὐδὲ καθαρὸν ποιήσεις "τ Διὰ τί; ᾿ 
φησίν.--- Πάλιν PO | σοι" πρῶτον μὲν ἵνα τῶ 
ἀνθρώπου ποιῇς, εἶτα ἵνα μὴ ἀνιᾷς τοὺς ἐν- 

1 The words ὡς χαλκεύς following this word in 8 have 


been deleted in the MS. 
2 ©. Schenkl: πλύνεις 8. 





1 A sort of scraper, generally of metal, much used by 
athletes. 

* The excesses, probably Oriental in origin, to which 
Christian ascetism soon went in regard to despising clean- 


412 


BOOK IV. x1. 9-14 


as mays be, something similar to this in the case of 
the body also. It was impossible that there should 
be no discharge of mucus from the nose, since man’s 
body has been composed as it is; for that reason 
nature made hands, and the nostrils like tubes to 
discharge the humours. If, therefore,a man snuffs 
back these discharges of mucus, I say that he 
is not acting as a human being should. It was 
impossible that the feet should not get muddy, nor 
dirty at all, when they pass through certain such sub- 
stances; for that reason nature has provided water, 
for that hands. It was impossible that some impurity 
from eating should not remain on the teeth; for 
that reason nature says, “ Wash your teeth.’ Why? 
In order that you may be a human being, and 
not a beast or a pig. It was impossible that some- 
thing dirty and needing to be cleaned off should 
not be left on the person from our sweat and the 
pressure of our clothes; for that reason we have 
water, oil, hands, a towel, a strigil,} nitre, and, on 
occasion, every other kind of equipment to cleanse 
the body. Not so you.? But the smith will remove 
the rust from his iron tool, and will have implements 
made for this purpose, and you yourself will wash 
your plate when you are going to eat, unless you are 
utterly unclean and dirty; but will you not wash 
nor make clean your poor body ?—Why? says some- 
one.-—Again F will tell you: First, so as to do what 
befits a man; and second, so as not to offend those 


liness, seem to have begun to manifest themselves already 
in the early second century among enthusiastic young 
Stoies and tvould-be Cynies. It is interesting to sce how 
Epictetus, simple and austere as he was, vigorously main- 
tained the validity of older Greek and Roman feeling in 
this regard. 

413 


15 


16 


17 


18 


19 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


, a f \ 3 , “ \ 
τυγχάνοντας. τοιοῦτόν TL καὶ ἐνθάδε ποιεῖς Kat 
’ 3 Ζ Ν Ed € a “a oy 
οὐκ αἰσθάνῃ. σαυτὸν ἄξιον ἡγῇ τοῦ blew: ἔστω, 
fa 
ἴσθι ἄξιος. μὴ τι καὶ τοὺς παρακαθίζοντας, μή 
\ 
τι καὶ τοὺς συγκατακλινομένους, μή TL καὶ TOUS 
καταφιλοῦντας; ἔα ἄπελθ᾽ εἰς ἐρημίαν πού 
a / “ 
ποτε, ἧς ἄξιος εἶ, καὶ μόνος δίαγε κατόζων σεαυτοῦ. 
’ n fal / 
δίκαιον yap ἐστι τῆς σῆς ἀκαθαρσίας σὲ μόνον 
3 , > t 2 th > f 
ἀπολαύειν. ἐν πόλει δ᾽ ὄντα οὕτως ἀπερισκέπτως 
, 2 f ? , t , ᾿ 
καὶ ἀγνωμόνως ἀναστρέφεσθαι τίνος σοι φαίνεται ; 
εἰ δ᾽ ἵππον σοι πεπιστεύκει ἡ φύσις, περιεώρας 
(a) ‘ 
αὐτὸν καὶ ἀτημέλητον ; καὶ viv οἴου cov τὸ 
fas ς f 3 , ω $ 7 
σῶμα ὡς ἵππον ἐγκεχειρίσθαι πλῦνον avTO, 
κα ,» 
ἀπόσμηξον, ποίησον, ἵνα σε μηδεὶς ἀποστρέφηται, 
μηδεὶς ἐκτρέπηται. τίς δ᾽ οὐκ ἐκτρέπεται ῥυπα- 
‘ 2 7 / a A \ 
pov ἄνθρωπον, ὄξοντα, κακόχρουν μᾶλλον ἢ τὸν 
, . Χ,,,} et 4 f ἢ 
KexoTTpamevov; éxeivn ἡ ὁσμὴ ἔξωθέν ἐστιν 
ἐπίθετος, ἡ δ᾽ ἐξ ἀθεραπενσίας ἔσωθεν καὶ οἷονεὶ 
διασεσηπότος. 
᾿Αλλὰ Σωκράτης ὀλιγάκις ἐλούετο.---Αλλὰ 
yf fas \ a 
ἔστιλβεν αὐτοῦ τὸ σῶμα, GAN ἦν οὕτως 
» ἢ Ἀ δύ [4 393. Γ > [οὶ Ἂς ¢ f 
ἐπίχαρι καὶ ἡδύ, WOT ἤρων αὐτοῦ οἱ ὡραιότατοι 
καὶ εὐγενέστατοι καὶ ἐπεθύμουν ἐκείνῳ παρα- 
κατακλίνεσθαι μᾶχλον ἢ τοῖς εὐμορφοτάτοις. 
Φ 
ἐξὴν ἐκείνῳ μήτε λούεσθαι μήτε πλύνεσθαι, εἰ 


1 Schenkl: ἢ &. 
414 


BOOK IV. xi. 14-19 


whom you meet. You are doing something of the 
sort even here, and do not realize it. You think 
that you are worthy of the smell.t Very well, be 
worthy of it. Do you think, though, that those who 
sit by your side, those who recline beside you, those 
who kiss you, are worthy of it too?? Bah, go away 
into a wilderness somewhere or other, a place worthy 
of you, and live alone, smelling yourself! For it is 
only right that you should enjoy your uncleanliness 
all by yourself. But since you are living in a city, 
what kind of character do you fancy you are exhibit- 
ing, to behave so thoughtlessly and inconsiderately ? 
If nature had committed to your care a horse, would 
you have utterly neglected it? And now I would 
have you think that your body has been entrusted 
to you like a horse; wash it, rub it down, make it 
so that nobody will turn his back on you or move 
aside. But who does not avoid a dirty fellow that 
smells and has an unsightly skin, even more than a 
man bespattered with dung? In this latter case 
the smell is external and acquired, in the other it 
comes from slovenliness that is internal, and is 
characteristic of one who has grown rotten through 
and through. 

But Socrates bathed infrequently,’ says someone,— 
Why, his body was radiant; why,it was so attractive 
and sweet that the handsomest and most high-born 
were in love with him, and yearned to sit by his 
side rather than beside those who had the prettiest 

1 That is, so good that his smell makes no real difference. 

2 That is, bad enough to deserve such treatment (ἄξιος 


meaning both ‘‘ good enough” and ‘‘bad enough ”’). 
3 Plato, Symposium, 174A. 





2 Sb in margin: ἔστι μέν ὅ. 


415 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ἤθελεν: καίτοι καὶ TO ὀλιγάκις ἰσχὺν εἶχεν.1--- 
᾿Αλλὰ λέγει ᾿Αριστοφάνης 


τοὺς ὠχριῶντας, τοὺς ἀνυποδήτους λέγω.---- 


Λέγει γὰρ καὶ ἀεροβατεῖν αὐτὸν καὶ ἐκ τῆς 
παλαίστρας κλέπτειν τὰ ἱμάτια. ἐπεί ToL πάντες 
οἱ γεγραφότες περὶ Σωκράτους πάντα τἀναντία 
αὐτῷ προσμαρτυροῦσιν, ὅτι nous οὐ μόνον ἀκοῦσαι, 
ἀλλὰ καὶ ἰδεῖν F ἦν. πάλιν περὶ Διογένους ταὐτὰ 
γράφουσι. δεῖ γὰρ μηδὲ κατὰ τὴν ἀπὸ τοῦ 
σώματος ἔμφασιν ἀπὸ φιλοσοφίας ἀποσοβεῖν 
τοὺς πολλούς, GAN ὥσπερ, τὰ ἄλλα εὔθυμον καὶ 
ἀτάραχον ἐπιδεικνύειν αὑτὸν οὕτως καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ 
σώματος. εἴδετε, ὦ ἄνθρωποι, ὅτι οὐδὲν ἔχω, 
οὐδενὸς δέομαι: ἴδετε πῶς ἄοικος ὧν καὶ ἄπολις 
καὶ φυγάς, ἂν οὕτως τύχῃ, καὶ ἀνέστιος πάντων 
τῶν εὐπατριδῶν καὶ πλουσίων ,ἀταραχώτερον 
διάγω καὶ εὐρούστερον. ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸ σωμάτιον 3 
ὁρᾶτε ὅτε οὐ κακοῦται ὑπὸ τῆς αὐστηρᾶς διαίτης." 

ἂν δέ μοι ταῦτα λέγῃ τίς ἀνθρώπου σχῆμα 
καταδίκου ἔχων καὶ πρόσωπον, τίς με πείσει θεῶν 
προσελθεῖν φιλοσοφίᾳ, εἴ γε" τοιούτους ποιεῖ; 
μὴ γένοιτο" οὐδ᾽, εἰ σοφὸς ἔμελλον εἶναι, ἤθελον. 


1 The words κἂν θερμῷ μὴ θέλῃς, ψυχρῷ, here, I have trans- 
ferred to § 32, where, as Schweighiuser saw, they clearly 
belong. 

* Wolf: ἱμάτιον 8. 

3. ef ye Reiske, after Schegk: ὥστε 8. 





+ Ibid., 217-18. 

2 χούεσθαι is properly of ‘‘bathing,” as inthe public 
baths, especially, in this passage, the warm baths of Roman 
times, which are clearly in mind; πλύνεσθαι is properly of 
cleaning clothes, as in a laundry, which was generally done 


416 


BOOK IV. xt 19-24 


forms and features.1 He might have neither bathed 
nor washed,?had he sodesired; yet even his infrequent 
bathings were effective-—But Aristuphanes says, 


The pallid men I mean, who shoeless go.3—~ 


Oh, yes, but then he says also that Socrates “ trod the 
air,’ and stole people’s clothes from the wrestling 
school. And yet all who have written about Socrates 
unite in bearing testimony to the precise opposite 
of this; that he was not merely pleasant to hear, but 
also to see. Again, men write the same thing about 
Diogenes. For a man ought not to drive away the 
multitude from philosophy, even by the appearance 
of his body, but as in everything else, so also on the 
side of the body, he ought to show himself cheerful 
and free from perturbation. “See, O men, that I 
have nothing, and need nothing. See how, although 
I am without a house, and without a city, and an 
exile, if it so chance, and without a hearth, I still 
live a life more tranquil and serene than that of all 
the noble and the rich. Yes, and you see that even 
my paltry body is not disfigured by my hard way of 
living.” But 161 am told this by a person who has 
the bearing and face of a condemned man, what one 
of all the gods shall persuade me to approach 
philosophy, if she makes people like that? Far be 
it from me! I shouldn’t be willing to do so, not 
even if it would make me a wise man. 
in ancient Greece, as in modern, and in the Orient, with cold 
water. All that is meant, as far as Socrates is concerned, 
is that he generally washed at home in cold water, and very 
seldom used public baths or hot baths. 

8 Clouds, 108, slightly modified. 

4 Zbid., 179 and 225. The argument is that the evidence 


of Aristophanes is worthless anyway, because he also made 
these two preposterously false statements about Socrates. 


417 
VOL. ΤΙ. 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


25 ᾿Εγὼ μὲν νὴ τοὺς θεοὺς τὸν νέον τὸν πρώτως 
κινούμενον θέλω μᾶλλον ἐλθεῖν πρός με πεπλασ- 
μένον τὴν κόμην ἢ + κατεφθινηκότα καὶ ῥυπαρόν. 
βλέπεται yap τις ἐν ἐκείνῳ τοῦ καλοῦ φαντασία, 
ἔφεσις δὲ τοῦ εὐσχήμονος. ὅπον δ᾽ αὐτὸ εἶναι 

26 φαντάζεται, ἐκεῖ καὶ φιλοτεχνεῖ. λοιπὸν ὑπο- 
δεῖξαι μόνον αὐτῷ δεῖ καὶ εἰπεῖν “νεανίσκε, τὸ 
καλὸν ξητεῖς καὶ εὖ ποιεῖς. ioe οὖν, ὅτι ἐκεῖ 
φύεται, ὅπου τὸν λόγον ἔχεις" ἐκεῖ. αὐτὸ ζήτει, 
ὅπου τὰς ὁρμὰς καὶ τὰς ἀφορμάς, ὅπου τὰς 

OT ὀρέξεις, τὰς ἐκκλίσεις. τοῦτο γὰρ ἔχεις ἐν 
σεαυτῷ ἐξαίρετον, τὸ σωμάτιον δὲ φύσει πηλός 
ἐστιν. τί πονεῖς εἰκῆ περὶ αὐτό; εἰ μηδὲν 

28. ἕτερον, τῷ χρόνῳ γνώσῃ, ὅτι οὐδέν ἐστιν." ἂν δέ 
μοι ἔλθῃ κεκοπρωμένος, ῥυπαρός, μύστακα ἔχων 
μέχρι τῶν γονάτων, τί αὐτῷ εἰπεῖν ἔχω, ἀπὸ 
ποίας αὐτὸν ὁμοιότητος ἐπαγαγεῖν ; περὶ τί γὰρ 

29 ἐσπούδακεν. ὅμοιον τῷ καλῷ, ἵν᾿ αὐτὸν μεταθῷ 
καὶ εἴπω “οὐκ ἔστιν ἐνθάδε τὸ καλόν, ἀλλ᾽ 
ἐνθάδε" ; ΤῊ: αὐτῷ λέγω “οὐκ ἔστιν ἐν τῷ 


»»" 


κεκοπρῶσθαι τὸ καλόν, GAN ἐν τῷ λόγῳ ; 
ἐφίεται γὰρ τοῦ καλοῦ; ἔμφασιν γὰρ τινα αὐτοῦ 
ἔχει ; ; ἄπελθε καὶ χοίρῳ διαλέγου, ἵἷ iv’ ἐν βορβόρῳ 

30 μὴ κυλίηται. διὰ τοῦτο καὶ ἸΙολέμωνος ἥψαντο 
οἱ λόγοι οἱ Ἐενοκράτους ἃ ὡς φιλοκάλου νεανίσκου" 
εἰσῆλθεν γὰρ ἔχων ἐναύσματα τῆς περὶ τὸ καλὸν 
σπουδῆς, ἀλλαχοῦ δ᾽ αὐτὸ ζητῶν. 


1 ἢ added by Schenkl. 





1 See IIL. 1, 14, and note. 
2 Much as Suetonius so admirably says of Nero (c. 55): 
Erat ili aelernitatis perpetuaeque Jamae cupido, sed inconsulta. 


418 


BOOK IV. x1. 25-30 


As for me, by the gods, I should rather have the 
young man who was experiencing the first stirrings 
towards philosophy come to me with his hair care- 
fully dressed, than with it in a state of desperate 
neglect and dirty. For the first case shows that 
there exists in the young man a sort of imaging 
of beauty, and an aiming at comeliness, and where 
he fancies it to be, there also he devotes his efforts. 
With that as a starting-point, all that it is necessary 
to do is to show him the way, and say, “ Young man, 
you are seeking the beautiful, and you do well. 
Know, then, that it arises in that part of you where 
you have your reason; seek it there where you have 
your choices and your refusals, where you have your 
desires and your aversions. For this part is some- 
thing of a special kind which you have within you, but 
your paltry body is by nature only clay. Why do you 
toil for it to no purpose? If you learn nothing else, 
time at least will teach you that it is nothing.” But 
if he comes to me bespattered with dung, dirty, his 
moustache reaching down to his knees, what have I 
to say to him, from what point of resemblance can I 
start so as to prevail upon him? For what is there 
to which he is devoted, that bears any resemblance to 
the beautiful, so that I may turn him about and say, 
“‘ Beauty is not there, but here”? Do you want me 
to say to him, “ Beauty does not consist in being 
bespattered with dung, but in reason”? For is he 
aiming at beauty? Has he any manifestation of it? 
Go and talk to a pig, that he may wallow no more in 
mud! That is why the words of Xenocrates laid 
hold even οἵα Polemo,! because he was a young man 
who loved beauty. For he came to Xenocrates with 
glimmerings of a zeal for the beautiful, but was 
looking for it in the wrong place. 


419 


31 


32 


33 


34 


35 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


'Επεί τοι οὐδὲ τὰ ξῷα τὰ ἀνθρώποις σύντροφα 
ῥυπαρὰ ἐποίησεν ἡ φύσις. μή τι ἵππος κυλίεται 
ἐν βορβόρῳ, μή τι κύων γενναῖος ; ἀλλ᾽ ὁ US καὶ 
τὰ σαπρὰ χηνίδια καὶ σκώληκες καὶ ἀράχναι, 
τὰ μακροτάτω τῆς ἀνθρωπίνης συναναστροφῆς 
ἀπεληλασμένα. σὺ οὖν ἄνθρωπος ὧν οὐδὲ ξῷον 
εἶναι θέλεις τῶν ἀνθρώποις συντρόφων, ἀλλὰ 
σκώληξ μᾶλλον ἢ ἀράχνιον ; οὐ λούσῃ πού ποτε 
ὡς θέλεις, οὐκ ἀποπλυνεῖς σεαυτόν, κἂν θερμῷ 
μὴ θέλῃς, ψυχρῷ" οὐχ ἥξεις καθαρός, ἵνα σοι 
χαίρωσιν ob συνόντες ; ἀλλὰ καὶ εἰς TA ἱερὰ 
ἡμῖν συνέρχῃ τοιοῦτος, ὅπου πτῦσαι οὐ νενὸ- 
μισται οὐδ᾽ ἀπομύξασθαι, ὅλος ὧν πτύσμα καὶ 
μύξα; 

Τί οὖν ; καλλωπίξζεσθαί τις ἀξιοῖ ; μὴ γένοιτο, 
εἰ μὴ ἐκεῖνο ὃ πεφύκαμεν, τὸν λόγον, τὰ δόγματα, 
τὰς ἐνεργείας, τὸ δὲ σῶμα μέχρι τοῦ καθαρίου, 
μέχρι τοῦ μὴ προσκόπτειν. ἀλλ᾽ ἂν ἀκούσῃς, 
ὅτε οὐ δεῖ φορεῖν κόκκινα, ἀπελθὼν κόπρωσόν 
σον τὸν τρίβωνα ἢ κατάρρηξον.---Αλλὰ πόθεν 
ἔχω καλὸν τρίβωνα ;--- ἄνθρωπε, ὕδωρ ἔχεις, 
πλῦνον αὐτόν. ἰδοὺ νέος ἀξιέραστος, ἰδοὺ πρεσ- 
βύτης ἄξιος τοῦ ἐρᾶν καὶ ἀντερᾶσθαι, ᾧ τις vidv 
αὑτοῦ παραδώσει παιδευθησόμενον,3 ᾧ θυγατέρες, 

1 83: ἡνίδια 8. 


* These last five words, which appear in § 19, actually 
belong here, as Schweighauser saw. 


5 παραδώσει Kronenberg ; παιδευθησόμενον Schenkl: παρα- 
δοθησόμενον S. 





Land 


* OF course a spider is not ordinarily a dirty animal in its 
personal habits; the most that can be said is that it is 
ie aes found in quiet and hence dusty spots. Of. note 
on § 1, 


420 


BOOK IV. x1. 31-35 


Why, look you, nature has not made dirty even 
the animals which associate with man. A horse 
doesn’t roll around in the mud, does he? or a highly 
bred dog? No, but the hog, and the miserable rotten 
geese, and worms, and spiders, the creatures farthest 
removed from association with human beings. Do 
you, then, who are a human being, wish to be not 
even an animal of the kind that associates with men, 
but rather a worm, or a spider?! Will you not take 
a bath somewhere, some time, in any form you 
please ? Will you not wash yourself? If you 
don’t care to bathe in hot water, then use cold. 
Will you not come to us clean, that your companions 
may be glad? What, and do you in such a state go 
with us even into the temples, where it is forbidden 
by custom to spit or blow the nose, yourself being 
nothing but a mass of spit and drivel ? 

Well, what then? Is anyone demanding that you 
beautify yourself? Heaven forbid! except you 
beautify that which is our true nature *—the reason, 
its judgements, its activities; but your body only so 
far as to Beep it cleanly, only so far as to avoid giving 
offence. But if you hear that one ought not to wear 
scarlet, go bespatter your rough cloak with dung—or 
tear it to pieces!? Yet where am I to get a rough 
cloak that looks well ?—Man, you have water, wash it ! 
See, here is a lovable young man, here an elderly 
man worthy to love and to be loved in return, to 
whom a person will entrust the education of his son, 
to whom daughters and young men will come, if it 

2 4,¢. aman really zs not body, which he has in common 
with other*animals, but mind, reason, or moral purpose. 
Cf. such passages as I. 1, 23; IIT. 1, 25-6; 18, 17; IV. 5, 12 
and 23; 7, 81f.; and § 27 above. 

3 That is, the young man carries the precept to extremes, 
the command, being ironical. 

421 


36 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ᾧ νέοι προσελεύσονται, ἂν οὕτως τύχῃ, ἵνα ἐν 
κοπρῶνι λέγῃ τὰς σχολάς. μὴ γένοιτο. πᾶσα 
ἐκτροπὴ ἀπό τινος ἀνθρωπικοῦ γίνεται, αὕτη 
ἐγγύς ἐστι τῷ μὴ ἀνθρωπικὴ εἶναι. 


ιβ΄. Περὶ προσοχῆς, 
A 4 ‘ 
Ὅταν ἀφῇς πρὸς ὀλίγον τὴν προσοχήν, μὴ 
τοῦτο φαντάξου, ὅτι, ὁπόταν θέλῃς, ἀναλήψῃ 
ral 4 t 4 
αὐτήν, ἀλλ᾽ ἐκεῖνο πρόχειρον ἔστω σοι, ὅτι παρὰ 
τὸ σήμερον ἁμαρτηθὲν εἰς τἄλλα χεῖρον ἀνάγκη 
σοι τὰ πράγματα ἔχειν. πρῶτον μὲν γὰρ τὸ πάν- 
3 ἴω ᾽ 
τῶν χαλεπώτατον ἔθος τοῦ μὴ προσέχειν ἐγγίνε- 
ied ¥ a 7 7} \ / 
ται, εἶτα ἔθος τοῦ ἀναβάλλεσθαι THY προσοχῆήν' 
ἀεὶ δ᾽ εἰς ἄλλον καὶ ἄλλον χρόνον εἴωθας ὑπερτί- 
θεσθαι 3 τὸ εὐροεῖν, τὸ εὐσχημονεῖν, τὸ κατὰ 
} " ᾿ ὔ ῃ 4 > 4 
φύσιν ἔχειν καὶ διεξάγειν. εἰ μὲν οὖν λυσιτελὴς 
ἡ ὑπέρθεσίς ἐστιν, ἡ παντελὴς ἀπόστασις αὐτῆς 
ἐστὶ λυσιτελεστέρα' εἰ δ᾽ οὐ λυσιτελεῖ, τί οὐχὶ 
διηνεκῆ τὴν προσοχὴν φυλάσσεις ; “ σήμερον 


) 
παῖξαι θέλω." τί οὖν κωλύει3 προσέχοντα; 


se 5 ” / ay x ΄ f : \ \ 
goat. τί οὖν κωλύει προσέχοντα ; μὴ γὰρ 
“ τ» ~ 4 ἃ ld 
ἐξαιρεῖται TL μέρος τοῦ βίου, ἐφ᾽ ὃ ov διατείνει 
τὸ προσέχειν ; χεῖρον γὰρ αὐτὸ προσέχων ποιή- 
aN δὲ \ 7 \ , of ~ 
σεῖς, βέλτιον δὲ μὴ προσέχων ; Kal ti ἄλλο τῶν 
᾿" f » cal 
ἐν τῷ βίῳ κρεῖσσον ὑπὸ τῶν μὴ προσεχόντων 
΄ ¢ f ‘\ 
yiveTat; ὃ τέκτων μὴ προσέχων τεκταίνει 
1 Kronenberg (after Sd and s): φησί 8. 
* Schenkl: tw (or T*wéas) ὑπερτιθέμενος δ'. 


ὃ κωλύει added by C. Schenkl. 
422 


BOOK IV. x1. 35—xu. 5 


so chance—all for the purpose of having him deliver 
his lectures sitting on a dunghill? Good Lord, no! 
Every eccentricity arises from some human trait, but 
this trait comes close to being non-human. 


CHAPTER XII 
Of attention 


Wuen you relax your attention for a little while, 
do not imagine that whenever you choose you will 
recover it, but bear this in mind, that because of 
the mistake which you have made to-day, your 
condition must necessarily be worse as regards every- 
thing else. For, to begin with—and this is the 
worst of all—a habit of not paying attention is 
developed; and after that a habit of deferring 
attention; and always you grow accustomed to 
putting off from one time to another tranquil and 
appropriate living, the life in accordance with nature, 
and persistence in that life. Now if the postpone- 
ment of such matters is profitable, it is still more 
profitable to abandon them altogether; but if it is 
not profitable, why do you not maintain your atten- 
tion continuously? “To-day I want to play.” What 
is to prevent your playing, then,—but with attention ? 
“1 want to sing.” What is to prevent your singing, 
then,—but with attention? There is no part of the 
activities of your life excepted, to which attention does 
not extend, is there? What, will you do it worse by 
attention, and better by inattention? And yet what 
other thing, of all that go to make up our life, is 
done better by those who are inattentive? Does 
the inattentive carpenter do his work more accur- 


423 


6 


7 


8 


9 


10 


1} 


12 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ἀκριβέστερον ; ὁ κυβερνήτης μὴ προσέχων * 
κυβερνῷ ἀσφαλέστερον ; ἄλλο δέ τι τῶν μικρο- 
τέρων ἔργων ὑπὸ ἀπροσεξίας ἐπιτελεῖται κρεῖσ- 
σον; οὐκ αἰσθάνῃ, ὅτι, ἐπειδὰν ἀφῇς τὴν γνώμην, 
οὐκ ἔτι ἐπὶ σοί ἐστιν ἀνακαλέσασθαι αὐτήν, οὐκ 
ἐπὶ τὸ εὔσχημον, οὐκ ἐπὶ τὸ αἰδῆμον, οὐκ ἐπὶ τὸ 
κατεσταλμένον ; ἀλλὰ πᾶν τὸ ἐπελθὸν ποιεῖς, 
ταῖς προθυμίαις ἐπακολουθεῖς. 

Τίσιν οὖν δεῖ με προσέχειν 3 pdrov μὲν 
ἐκείνοις τοῖς καθολικοῖς καὶ ἐκεῖνα πρόχειρα 
ἔχειν καὶ χωρὶς ἐκείνων μὴ καθεύδειν, μὴ avic- 
τασθαι, μὴ πίνειν, μὴ ἐσθίειν, μὴ συμβάλλειν 
ἀνθρώποις" ὅτι προαιρέσεως ἀλλοτρίας κύριος 
οὐδείς, ἐν ταύτῃ δὲ μόνῃ τἀγαθὸν καὶ κακόν. 
οὐδεὶς οὖν κύριος οὔτ᾽ ἀγαθόν μοι περιποιῆσαι 
οὔτε κακῷ με περιβαλεῖν, ἀλλ᾽ ἐγὼ αὐτὸς ἐμαυτοῦ 
κατὰ ταῦτα ἐξουσίαν ἔχω μόνος. ὅταν οὖν 
ταῦτα ἀσφαλῆ μοι ἢ: τί ἔχω περὶ τὰ ἐκτὸς 
ταράσσεσθαι ; ποῖος τύραννος φοβερός, ποία 
νόσος, ποία πενία, ποῖον πρόσκρουσμα π᾿ Αλλ' 
οὐκ ἤρεσα τῷ δεῖνι.---Μὴ οὖν ἐκεῖνος ἐμόν ἐστιν 
ἔργον, fu μή Te ἐμὸν κρίμα "-τΟὔ.---Ἴἶ οὖν ἔτι μοι 
μέλει ; s— Αλλὰ δοκεῖ τις εἶναι.--- Ὄψεται αὐτὸς 
καὶ οἷς δοκεῖ, ἐγὼ δ᾽ ἔχω, τίνι με δεῖ ἀρέσκειν, 
τίνι ὑποτετάχθαι, τίνι πείθεσθαι: τῷ θεῷ καὶ 
μετ᾽ ἐκεῖνον ἐμοί.3 ἐμὲ ἐκεῖνος συνέστησεν ἐμαυτῷ 
καὶ τὴν ἐμὴν προαίρεσιν ὑπέταξεν ἐ ἐμοὶ μόνῳ δοὺς 
κανόνας εἰς χρῆσιν αὐτῆς τὴν ὀρθήν, οἷς ὅταν 


1 These last six words are added, to fill an obvjous lacuna, 


in Upton’s “codex.” Something like them is certainly 
needed. 


* éuol supplied by Diels, 
424 


BOOK IV, xu. 5-12 


ately? The inattentive helmsman steer more safely ? 
And is there any other of the lesser functions of life 
which is done better by inattention? Do you not 
realize that when once you let your mind go 
wandering, it is no longer within your power to 
recall it, to bring it to bear upon either seemliness, 
or self-respect, or moderation? But you do any- 
thing that comes into your head, you follow your 
inclinations. 

What are the things, then, to which I ought to 
pay attention ?-First, these general principles, and 
you ought to have them at your command, and 
without them neither go to sleep, nor rise up, nor 
drink, nor eat, nor mingle with men; I mean the 
following: No man is master of another’s moral 
purpose; and: In its sphere alone are to be found 
one’s good and evil. It follows, therefore, that no 
one has power either to procure me good, or to 
involve me in evil, but I myself alone have authority 
over myself in these matters. Accordingly, when 
these things are secure for me, what excuse have 1 
for being disturbed about things external? What 
kind of tyrant inspires fear, what kind of disease, or 
poverty, or obstacle?—-But I have not pleased So- 
and-so.— He is not my function, is he? He is not 
my judgement, is he ?>—No.—Why, then, do I care 
any longer?—But he has the reputation of being 
somebody.—He and those who think so highly of 
him will have to see to that, but I have one whom 
{I must please, to whom I must submit, whom I 
must obey, that is, God, and after Him, myself. 
God has «commended me to myself, and He has 
subjected to me alone my moral purpose, giving me 
standards for the correct use of it; and when I follow 


425 


13 


14 


1ὅ 


16 


17 


18 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


κατακολουθήσω, ἐν συλλογισμοῖς οὐκ ἐπιστρε- 
φομαι οὐδενὸς τῶν ἄλλο τι λεγόντων, ἐν μεταπίπ- 
τουσιν οὐ “φροντίξω οὐδενός. διὰ τί οὖν ἐν τοῖς 
μείξοσιν ἀνιῶσί με οἱ ψέγοντες ; τί τὸ αἴτιον 
ταύτης τῆς ταραχῆς ; οὐδὲν ἄλλο ἢ ὅτι ἐν τού- 
τῳ τῷ τόπῳ ἀγύμναστὸς εἰμι. ἐπεί TOL πᾶσα 
ἐπιστήμη καταφρονητική ἐστε τῆς ἀγνοίας καὶ 
τῶν ἀγνοούντων καὶ οὐ μόνον" αἱ ἐπιστῆμαι, ἀλλὰ 
καὶ αἱ τέχναι. φέρε ὃν θέλεις σκυτέα καὶ τῶν 
πολλῶν καταγελᾷ περὶ τὸ αὑτοῦ ἔργον" φέρε ὃν 
θέλεις τέκτονα. 

“ Τ]ρῶτον μὲν οὖν ταῦτα ἔχειν πρόχειρα καὶ 
μηδὲν δίχα τούτων ποιεῖν, ἀλλὰ τετάσθαι τὴν 
ψυχὴν ἐπὶ τοῦτον τὸν σκοπόν, μηδὲν τῶν ἔξω 
διώκειν, μηδὲν τῶν ἀλλοτρίων, ἀλλ᾽ ὡς διέταξεν 
6 δυνάμενος, τὰ προαιρετικὰ ἐξ ἅπαντος, τὰ δ᾽ 
ἄλλα ὡς ἂν διδῶται. ἐπὶ τούτοις δὲ μεμνῆσθαι, 
τίνες ἐσμὲν καὶ τί ἡμῖν ὄνομα, καὶ πρὸς τὰς 
δυνάμεις τῶν σχέσεων πειρᾶσθαι τὰ καθήκοντα 
ἀπευθύνειν: τίς καιρὸς ᾳδῆς, τίς καιρὸς παιδιᾶς," 

τίνων παρόντων" τί ἔσται ἀπὸ τοῦ πράγματος" 
μή τὶ καταφρονήσωσιν ἡμῶν οἱ fe συνόντες, μή τι 
ἡμεῖς αὐτῶν' πότε σκῶψαι καὶ τίνας ποτὲ Kara 
γελάσαι καὶ ἐπὶ tive ποτὲ συμπεριενεχθῆναι, καὶ 
τίνι, καὶ λοιπὸν ἐ ἐν τῇ συμπεριφορᾷ πῶς τηρῆσαι 
τὸ αὑτοῦ. ὅπου δ᾽ ἂν ἀπονεύσῃς ἀπὸ τινος τού- 
TOV, εὐθὺς ξημία, οὐκ ἔξωθέν ποθεν, ἀλλ᾽ ἐξ 
αὐτῆς τῆς ἐνεργείας. 


1 Upton’s ‘‘codex” and Wolf: παιδείᾶς 5. 
® of supplied by 82. 





1 See note on 1, 7, 1. 
426 


BOOK IV. xu. 12-18 


these standards, I pay heed to none of those who say 
anything else, I give not a thought to anyone in argu- 
ments with equivocal premisses.! Why, then, in the 
more important matters am I annoyed by those who 
censure me? What is the reason for this perturba-. 
tion of spirit? Nothing but the fact that in this 
field I lack training. For, look you, every science 
is entitled to despise ignorance and ignorant people, 
and not merely the sciences, but also the arts. Take 
any cobbler you please, and he laughs the multitude 
to scorn when it comes to his own work; take any 
carpenter you please. 

First, therefore, we ought to have these principles 
at command, and to do nothing apart from them, 
but keep the soul intent upon this mark; we must 
pursue none of the things external, none of the 
things which are not our own, but as He that is 
mighty has ordained; pursuing without any hesita- 
tion the things that lie within the sphere of the 
moral purpose, and all other things as they have 
been given us. And next we must remember who 
we are, and what is our designation, and must en- 
deavour to direct our actions, in the performance of 
our duties, to meet the possibilities of our social 
relations. We must remember what is the proper 
time for song, the proper time for play, and in 
whose presence; also what will be out of place; 
Jest our companions despise us, and we despise our~ 
selves; when to jest, and whom to laugh at, and to 
what end to engage in social intercourse, and with 
whom; and, finally, how to maintain one’s proper 
character ‘in such social intercourse. But whenever 
you deviate from any one of these principles, imme- 
diately you suffer loss, and that not from anywhere 
outside, but from the very nature of the activity. 


427 


19 


21 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


f > 
Ti οὖν ; δυνατὸν ἀναμάρτητον ἤδη εἶναι; 
3 f > > 3 Ἂ ὃ \ \ ἈΝ \ Ὁ 
ἅμήχανον, ANA ἐκεῖνο δυνατὸν πρὸς TO μὴ ἅμαρ- 
“A 3 \ / 9 
τάνειν τετάσθαι διηνεκῶς. ἀγαπητὸν yap, εἰ 
\ \ 3 ὔ 
μηδέποτ᾽ ἀνιέντες ταύτην τὴν προσοχὴν ὀλίγων 
a » 4 
ye ἁμαρτημάτων ἐκτὸς ἐσόμεθα. viv δ᾽ ὅταν 
" (} , 7 ΚΝ θ ῳ A aie 
εἴπῃς “ ἀπαύριον προσέξω," ἴσθι ὅτι τοῦτο λέγεις 
la 
“ σήμερον ἔσομαι ἀναίσχυντος, ἄκαιρος, ταπεινός" 
a / 
ἐπ᾿ ἄλλοις ἔσται TO λυπεῖν με' ὀργισθήσομαι 
, 2) / cf \ “ 
σήμερον, φθονήσω." βλέπε ὅσα κακὰ σεαυτῷ 
3 7 3 3 ¥ 1 bad Oy ie 4 
ἐπιτρέπεις. ἀλλ εἰ σοι αὔριον καλῶς ἔχει, 
“ i 
πόσῳ κρεῖττον σήμερον ; εἰ αὔριον συμφέρει, 
\ n / ir \ ἐγ ὃ θῇ 
πολὺ μᾶλλον σήμερον, ἵνα καὶ αὔριον δυνηθῇς 
καὶ μὴ πάλιν ἀναβάλῃ εἰς τρίτην. 


f Ἀ 4 3 7 3 { XN e ω 
iy. Ilpos τοὺς εὐκόλως ἐκφέροντας τὰ αὑτῶν. 


Ὅταν τις ἡμῖν ἁπλῶς δόξῃ διειλέχθαι περὶ τῶν 
ἑαυτοῦ πραγμάτων, πώς ποτε ἐξαγόμεθα καὶ 
αὐτοὶ πρὸς τὸ ἐκφέρειν πρὸς αὐτὸν τὰ ἑαυτῶν 
ἀπόρρητα καὶ τοῦτο ἁπλοῦν οἰόμεθα εἶναι" 
πρῶτον μὲν ὅτι ἄνισον εἶναι δοκεῖ αὐτὸν μὲν 
ἀκηκοέναι τὰ τοῦ πλησίον, μὴ μέντοι μεταδιδόναι 
κἀκείνῳ ἐν τῷ μέρει τῶν ἡμετέρων. εἶθ᾽ ὅτι 
οἰόμεθα ody ἁπλῶν ἀνθρώπων παρέξειν αὐτοῖς 
φαντασίαν σιωπῶντες τὰ ἴδια. ἀμέλει πολλάκις 
εἰώθασιν λέγειν “ ἐγώ σοι πάντα τἀμαυτοῦ εἴρηκα, 


1 Schenkl: εἰσ J. 2 Trincavelli: ras & 


428 


BOOK IV. xu. 19~xurr. 3 


What then? Is it possible to be free from fault 
altogether? No, that cannot be achieved, but it 
is possible ever to be intent upon avoiding faults, 
For we must be satisfied, if we succeed in escaping at 
least a few faults by never relaxing our attention. 
But now, when you say, “To-morrow I will pay 
attention,” I would have you know that this is what 
you are ‘saying : “To-day I will be shameless, tact- 
less, abject; it will be in the power of other men to 
grieve me; I will get angry to-day, I will give way 
toenvy.” Just see all the evils that you are allow- 
ing yourself! But if it is good for you to pay 
attention to-morrow, how much better is it to-day ! 
If it is to your interest to-morrow, it is much more 
so to-day, that you may be able to do the same 
to-morrow also, and not put it off again, this time to 
the day after to-morrow. 


CHAPTER XIII 
To those who lightly talk about their own affairs 


WHEN someone gives us the impression of having 
talked to us frankly about his personal affairs, some- 
how or other we are likewise led to tell him our 
own secrets, and to think that is frankness! The 
first reason for this is because it seems unfair for a 
man to have heard his neighbour's affairs, and yet 
not to let him too have, in his turn, a share in 
ours. Another reason, after that, is because we 
feel that we shall not give the impression to these 
men of being frank, if we keep our own private 
affairs concealed. Indeed, men are frequently in 
the habit of saying, “1 have told you everything 


429 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


/ “ὌΝ can a 3 a“ θέλ . “ ? 
σύ μοι οὐδὲν τῶν σῶν εἰπεῖν θέλεις ; ποῦ γίνεται 
“~ }Σ ἤ 1 be δ \ 7 θ 9 λῷ 
4 τοῦτο ;" πρόσεστιϊ δὲ καὶ τὸ οἴεσθαι ἀσφαλῶς 
“ / δ f 
πιστεύειν τῷ ἤδη TA αὑτοῦ πεπιστευκότι" ὑπέρχε- 
a ‘A μ᾿ 
ται γὰρ ἡμᾶς, ὅτι οὐκ ἄν ποτε οὗτος ἐξεῖποι τὰ 
¢ f 3 ΄ / , ¢ nm " , 
ἡμέτερα εὐλαβούμενος, μήποτε καὶ ἡμεῖς ἐξεύπω- 
5 μεν τὰ ἐκείνου. οὕτως καὶ ὑπὸ τῶν στρατιωτῶν 
ἐν Ῥώμῃ οἱ προπετεῖς λαμβάνονται. παρακεκά- 
θικέ σοι στρατιώτης ἐν σχήματι ἰδιωτικῷ καὶ 
ἀρξάμενος κακῶς λέγει τὸν Καίσαρα, εἶτα σὺ 
ὥσπερ ἐνέχυρον παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ λαβὼν τῆς πίστεως 
τὸ αὐτὸν τῆς λοιδορίας κατῆρχθαι λέγεις καὶ αὐτὸς 
6 ὅσα φρονεῖς, εἶτα δεθεὶς ἀπάγῃ. τοιοῦτόν τι καὶ ἐν 
τῷ καθόλου πάσχομεν. οὐ yap” ὡς ἐμοὶ ἐκεῖνος 
“ , Ν ¢ mn ’ 
ἀσφαλῶς πεπίστευκεν τὰ ἑαυτοῦ, οὕτως κἀγὼ 
7 τῷ ἐπιτυχόντι' ἀλλ᾽ ἐγὼ μὲν ἀκούσας σιωπῶ, ἂν 
> Δ δ > 3 \ ? / \ / 
γε ὦ τοιοῦτος, ὁ δ᾽ ἐξελθὼν ἐκφέρει πρὸς πάντας. 
3 y ~ 
eit ἂν γνῶ τὸ γενόμενον, ἂν μὲν ὦ καὶ αὐτὸς 
3 “ [τ > 4 f 3 / ‘ 
ἐκείνῳ ὅμοιος, ἀμύνασθαε θέλων ἐκφέρω τὰ 
3 f Ν , Ν , ΕΝ \ ? 
8 ἐκείνου καὶ φύρω καὶ φύρομαι. ἂν δὲ μνημονεύω, 
ἢ ᾿ n 
ὅτε ἄλλος ἄλλον ov βλάπτει, ἀλλὰ τὰ αὑτοῦ 
¥ ef \ ‘a Ν 3 “ , 
ἔργα ἕκαστον καὶ βλάπτει καὶ ὠφελεῖ, τούτου 
κ a’ fa) n 
μὲν κρατῶ τοῦ μὴ ὅμοιόν τε ποιῆσαι ἐκείνῳ, 
Φ 3 δ Ν a “ 
ὅμως O ὑπὸ φλυαρίας τῆς ἐμαυτοῦ πέπονθα 
& πέπονθα. 
3 
9 Ναί: ἀλλ’ ἄνισόν ἐστιν ἀκούσαντα τὰ τοῦ 


1 Wolf: προσέτι S, * od γάρ Schenkl: αὐτάρ δ. 





1 It may possibly be, as Upton suggests, that this abuse 
led John the Baptist to warn soldiers specifically, ‘‘ Neither 
accuse any falsely’ (Luke iii, 14), 


4.29 


BOOK IV. xm. 3-9 


about myself, aren’t you willing to tell me anything 
about yourself? Where do people act like that?”’ 
Furthermore, there is also the thought that we can 
safely trust the man who has already entrusted 
knowledge of his own affairs; for the idea occurs to 
us that this man would never spread abroad know- 
ledge of our affairs, because he would be careful to 
guard against our too spreading abroad knowledge 
of his affairs. In this fashion the rash are ensnared 
by the soldiers in Rome. A soldier, dressed like a 
civilian, sits down by your side, and begins to speak 
ill of Caesar, and then you too, just as though you 
had received from him some guarantee of good faith 
in the fact that he began the abuse, tell likewise 
everything you think, and the next thing is—you are 
led off to prison in chains.1 We experience something 
of the same sort also in the general course of our 
life. For even though this particular man has safely 
entrusted knowledge of his own affairs to me, I do 
not myself in like manner tell my affairs to any 
chance comer; no, I listen and keep still, if, to be 
sure, I happen to be that kind of a person, but he 
goes out and tells everybody. And then, when I 
find out what has happened, if I myself resemble the 
other person, because I want to get even with him I 
tell about his affairs, and confound him and am 
myself confounded. If, however, I remember that 
one person does not harm another, but that it is a 
man’s own actions which both harm and help him, 
this much I achieve, namely, that I do not act like 
the other person, but despite that I get into the 
state in .which I am because of my own foolish 
talking. 

Yes, but it isn’t fair to hear your neighbour's 


431 


10 


11 


13 


14 


15 


16 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


“πλησίον ἀπόρρητα. αὐτὸν ἐν τῷ μέρει μηδενὸς 
μεταδιδόναι αὐτῷ.---Μὴ γάρ σε παρεκάλουν, 
ἄνθρωπε ; μὴ γὰρ ἐπὶ συνθήκαις τισὶν ἐξήνεγκας 
τὰ σαυτοῦ, iy ἀκούσῃς ἐν τῷ μέρει καὶ τὰ ἐμά; 
εἰ σὺ φλύαρος εἰ καὶ πάντας τοὺς ἀπαντήσαντας 
φίλους εἶναι δοκεῖς, θέλεις καὶ ἐμὲ ὅμοιόν σοι 
γενέσθαε ; τί δ᾽, εἰ σὺ καλῶς μοι πεπίστευκας τὰ 
σαυτοῦ, σοὶ δ᾽ οὐκ ἔστι καλῶς πιστεῦσαι, θέλεις 
με προπεσεῖν ; οἷον εἰ πίθον εἶχον ἐγὼ μὲν 
στεγνόν, σὺ δὲ τετρυπημένον καὶ ἐλθὼν παρα- 
κατέθου μοι τὸν σαυτοῦ οἶνον, ἵνα βάλω εἰς τὸν 
ἐμὸν πίθον, εἶτ᾽ ἠγανάκτεις ὅτι μὴ κἀγὼ σοὶ 
πιστεύω τὸν ἐμαυτοῦ οἶνον" σὺ γὰρ ,Τετρυπη- 
μένον ἔχεις τὸν πίθον. πῶς οὖν ἔτι ἴσον γίνε- 
ται; σὺ πιστῷ παρακατέθου, σὺ αἰδήμονι, τὰς 
ἑαυτοῦ ἐνεργείας μόνας βλαβερὰς ἡγουμένῳ καὶ 
ὠφελίμους, τῶν δ᾽ ἐκτὸς οὐδέν' ἐγὼ σοὶ θέλεις 
παρακαταθῶμαι, ἀνθρώπῳ τὴν ἑαυτοῦ προαί- 
peow ἠτιμακότι, θέλοντι δὲ κερματίου τυχεῖν ἢ 
ἀρχῆς τινὸς ἢ προαγωγῆς ἐν τῇ αὐλῇ, κἂν μέλλῃς 
τὰ τέκνα σου ᾿κατασφάξειν, ὡς ἡ Μήδεια; ποῦ 
τοῦτο ἰσον ἐστίν; ἀλλὰ δεῖξόν μοι σαυτὸν 
πιστόν, αἰδήμονα, βέβαιον, δεῖξον, ὅτι δόγματα 
ἔχεις φιλικά, δεῖξόν σου τὸ ἀγγεῖον ὅτι οὐ τέτρη- 
ται καὶ ὄψει, πῶς οὐκ ἀναμενῶ * ἵνα μοι ov 
πιστεύσῃς τὰ σαυτοῦ, ἀλλ᾽ αὐτὸς ἐλθὼν σὲ 
παρακαλῶ ἀκοῦσαι τῶν ἐμῶν. τίς γὰρ οὐ θέλει 
χρήσασθαι a ἀγγείῳ καλῷ, τίς ἀτιμάζξει σύμβουλον 
εὔνουν καὶ πιστόν, τίς οὐκ ἄσμενος δέξηται τὸν 
ὥσπερ φορτίου μεταληψόμενον τῶν αὐτοῦ περι- 


1 Elter, after Wolf: ἀναμένω S. 
432 


BOOK IV. xin. 9-16 


secrets and then give him no share of your own in 
return.—Man, I did not invite your confidences, did 
I? You did not tell about your affairs on certain 
conditions, that you were to hear about mine in 
return, did you? If you are a babbler, and think 
that every person you meet is a friend, do you also 
want me to be like yourself? And why, if you did 
well to entrust your affairs to me, but it is impossible 
for me to do well in trusting you, do you wish me to 
be rash? It is just as though I had a jar that was 
sound, and you one with a hole in it, and you came 
to me and deposited your wine with me, for me to 
store it in my jar; and then youcomplained because 
I do not entrust to you my wine also; why, your jar 
has a hole init! How, then, is equality any longer 
to be found? You made your deposit with a faithful 
man, with a respectful man, with a man who 
regards only his own activities as either harmful or 
helpful, and nothing that is external, Do you wish 
me to make a deposit with you—a man who has 
dishonoured his own moral purpose, and wants to 
get paltry cash, or some office, or advancement at 
court, even if you are going to cut the throats of 
your children, as Medea did? Where is there 
equality in that? Nay, show yourself to me as a 
faithful, respectful, dependable man; show that 
your judgements are those of a friend, show that 
your vessel has no hole in it, and you shall see how 
I will not wait for you to entrust the knowledge of 
your affairs to me, but I will go of myself and ask you 
to hear about mine. For who does not wish to use a 
good vessel, who despises a friendly and faithful 
counsellor, who would not gladly accept the man 
who is ready to share his difficulties, as he would 


433 
VOL, 11, ΒΕ 


17 


18 


19 


20 


21 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


“ Ἀ 3 nm f “ ? Ν ἴω 
στάσεων καὶ αὐτῷ τούτῳ κουφιοῦντα αὑτὸν τῷ 
μεταλαβεῖν ; 

3 
Nat: ἀλλ: ἐγὼ σοὶ πιστεύω, σὺ ἐμοὶ οὐ 
\ ? 
πιστεύεις.---Πρῶτον μὲν οὐδὲ σὺ ἐμοὶ πιστεύεις, 
3 \ f > \ ὃ \ “ ἡδὲ δύ 
ἀλλὰ φλύαρος εἰ καὶ OLA τοῦτο οὐδὲν OUVATAL 
“ ΜᾺ ‘ 
κατασχεῖν. ἐπεί τοι εἰ τοῦτό ἐστιν, ἐμοὶ μόνῳ 
αὐτὰ πίστευσον" νῦν δ᾽ ὃν ἂν εὐσχολοῦντα ἴδῃς, 
θί 2. δὶ ΄ «ce a x , NOG 
παρακαθισας αὑτῷ λέγεις “ἀδελφέ, οὐδένα σὸν 
ἔχω εὐνούστερον οὐδὲ φίλτερον, παρακαλῶ σε 
ἀκοῦσαι τὰ ἐμά" καὶ τοῦτο πρὸς τοὺς οὐδέ τι 
ὀλέώγον ἐγνωσμένους ποιεῖς. εἰ δὲ καὶ πιστεύεις 
Δ [οἱ ce 
ἐμοί, δῆλον ὅτι ὡς πιστῷ καὶ αἰδήμονι, οὐχ ὅτι 
σοὶ τὰ ἐμαυτοῦ ἐξεῖπον. ἄφες οὖν, ἵνα κἀγὼ 
ταὐτὰ ὑπολάβω. δεῖξόν μοι, ὅτι, ἄν τις τινὶ τὰ 
αὑτοῦ Ὁ ἐξείπῃ, ἐκεῖνος πιστός ἐστι καὶ αἰδήμων. 
ἴω cy la) / 
εἰ yap τοῦτο Hy, ἐγὼ περιερχόμενος πᾶσιν ἀνθρώ- 
mows τὰ ἐμαυτοῦ ἂν ἔλεγον, εἰ τούτου ἕνεκα 
μὴ \ \ 3 f μὴ \ 3 
ἔμελλον πιστὸς καὶ αἰδήμων ἔσεσθαι. τὸ ὃ 
a ‘ 3 “Ὁ 2 ‘ / ἴα. 3 Ἂ 
ἐστὶν οὐ τοιοῦτον, ἀλλὰ δογμάτων δεῖ οὐχ ὧν 
ἔτυχεν. ἂν γοῦν τινὰ ἴδῃς περὶ τὰ ἀπροαίρετα 
ἐσπουδακότα καὶ τούτοις ὑπτοτεταχότα τὴν αὑτοῦ 
“ 
προαίρεσιν, ἔσθιε ὅτι ὁ ἄνθρωπος οὗτος μυρίους 
¥ \ 3 
ἔχει τοὺς ἀναγκάξοντας, τοὺς κωλύοντας. οὐκ 


22 ἔστιν αὐτῷ χρεία πίσσης ἢ τροχοῦ πρὸς τὸ ἐξει- 
7 / 


- a > 
πεῖν ἃ οἶδεν, ἀλλὰ παιδισκαρίου νευμάτιον, ἂν 
εὖ f / i; A 
οὕτως τύχῃ; ἐκσείσει αὐτὸν, Katcaptavod φιλο- 
- a 
φροσύνη, ἀρχῆς ἐπιθυμία, κληρονομίας, ἄλλα 


ls: αὐτῶι ΑΗ, 


“" 





; ee of torture among the ancients. See also IT. 


434 


BOOK IV. xu. 16-22 


share a burden with him, and to make them light 
for him by the very fact of his sharing in them? 
Yes, but I trust you, while you do not trust me.— 
First, you do not trust me, either, but you are a babbler, 
and that is the reason why you cannot keep anything 
back. Why, look you, if that statement of yours is 
true, entrust these matters to me alone; but the 
fact is that whenever you see anybody at leisure 
you sit down beside him and say, “ Brother, I have 
no one more kindly disposed or dearer to me than 
you, I ask you to listen to my affairs’”’; and you act 
this way to people whom you have not known for 
even a short time. And even if you do trust me, 
it is clear you trust me as a faithful and respectful 
person, not because ἔ have already told you 
about my affairs. Allow me also, then, to have the 
same thought about you. Show me that, if a man 
unbosoms himself to somebody about his own 
affairs, he is faithful and respectful, For if that 
were so, I should have gone about and told my 
own affairs to all men, that is, if that was going to 
make me faithful and respectful. But that is not 
the case; to be faithful and respectful a man needs 
judgements of no casual sort. If, therefore, you see 
someone very much in earnest about the things that 
lie outside the province of his moral purpose, and 
subordinating his own moral purpose to them, rest 
assured that this man has tens of thousands of persons 
who subject him to compulsion and hinder him. He 
has no need of pitch or the wheel? to get him to 
speak out what he knows, but a little nod from 
a wench, if it so happen, will upset him, a kindness 
from one of those who frequent Caesar’s court, desire 
for office, or an inheritance, and thirty thousand 


435 
¥ FY 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


28 τούτοις ὅμοια τρισμύρια. μεμνῆσθαι οὗν ἐν τοῖς 
καθόλου, ὅ ὅτι οἱ ἀπόρρητοι λόγοι πίστεως χρείαν 

34 ἔχουσι καὶ δογμάτων τοιούτων: ταῦτα δὲ ποῦ 
viv εὑρεῖν ῥᾳδίως ; ἢ δειξάτω μοί τις τὸν οὕτως 
ἔχοντα, ὥστε λέγειν “ ἐμοὶ μόνων μέλει τῶν ἐμῶν, 
τῶν ἀκωλύτων, τῶν φύσει ἐλευθέρων. ταύτην 
οὐσίαν ἔχω τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ, τὰ δὲ ἄλλα γινέσθω ὡς 
ἂν διδῶται" οὐ διαφέρομαι." 


436 


BOOK IV. xu. 22-24 


other things of the sort. Remember, therefore, in 
general, that confidences require faithfulness and 
faithful judgements; and where can one readily 
find these things nowadays?! Or, let someone 
show me the man who is so minded that he can say, 
“1 care only for what is my own, what is not subject 
to hindrance, what is by nature free. This, which is 
the true nature of the good, I have; but let every- 
thing else be as God has granted, it makes no 
difference to me.” 


1 Of. ‘* When the Son of man cometh, shall he find faith on 
the earth ?” (Luke xviii. 8). 


437 


FRAGMENTS 


Introductory Note 


Tue genuine fragments of Epictetus are not very 
numerous, and since several of them are of unusual 
interest, it has seemed best to add them at this 
point. One fragment, No. 28 b, I have added to 
those listed by Schenkl, since its discovery was 
subsequent to his latest edition. 

Earlier editions have included a large number of 
aphorisms gathered from Stobaeus, and from a 
gnomology purporting to contain excerpts from 
Democritus, Isocrates, and Epictetus. The researches 
of a group of scholars, principally H. Schenkl,? R. 
Asmus,? and A. Elter,? have thrown such doubt 
upon the authenticity of these aphorisms that it 
would scarcely serve any useful purpose to reproduce 
them in the present work. 


1 Die epiktetischen Fragmente, Sttzungsberichte der philos.- 
hast. Classe der K. Akad. der Wiss., Wien, 115 (1888), 448 - 
546. Also ed. maior 1916, Chapter III, pp. xlviii-lii. 

2 Quaestiones Hpicteteae, Freiburg i. B., 1888, - 

3 Hyicteti et Moschionis Sententiae, Bonn, 1892. 


439 


FRAGMENTA 


1 (1751). Stobaeus, Eclogae, 11. 1, 31 


tot 7 
᾿Αρριανοῦ ᾿Εἰπικτητείου πρὸς τὸν περὶ οὐσίας 
πολυπραγμονοῦντα * 


Τί μοι μέλει, φησί, πότερον ἐξ ἀτόμων ἢ ἐξ 
ἀμερῶν ἢ ἐκ πυρὸς καὶ γῆς συνέστηκε τὰ ὄντα; 
οὐ γὰρ ἀρκεῖ μαθεῖν τὴν οὐσίαν τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ καὶ 
κακοῦ καὶ τὰ μέτρα τῶν ὀρέξεων καὶ ἐκκλίσεων 
καὶ ἔτι ὁρμῶν καὶ ἀφορμῶν καὶ τούτοις ὥσπερ 
κανόσι χρώμενον διοικεῖν τὰ τοῦ βίου, τὰ δ᾽ ὑπὲρ 
ἡμᾶς ταῦτα χαίρειν ἐᾶν, ἃ τυχὸν μὲν ἀκατά- 
ληπτά ἐστι τῇ ἀνθρωπίνῃ γνώμῃ, εἰ δὲ καὶ τὰ 
μάλιστα θείη 3 τις εἶναι καταληπτά, ἀλλ᾽ οὖν τί 
ὄφελος καταληφθέντων ; οὐχὶ δὲ διακενῆς πράγ- 
para ἔχειν φατέον τοὺς ταῦτα ὡς ἀναγκαῖα τῷ 
τοῦ φιλοσόφου λόγῳ προσνέμοντας ; Μή τι οὖν 
καὶ τὸ ἐν Δελφοῖς παράγγελμα παρέλκον ἐστί, 
τὸ Τνῶθι σαυτόν ;---Γοῦτο δὲ μὲν οὔ, φησί.--- 
Τίς οὖν ἡ δύναμις αὐτοῦ; εἰ χορευτῇ τίς παρήγ- 
γέλλε τὸ γνῶναι ἑαυτόν, οὔκουν ἂν τῇ προσ- 
τάξει προσεῖχε τῷ ἐπιστραφῆναι καὶ τῶν συγ- 
χορευτῶν καὶ τῆς πρὸς αὐτοὺς συμφωνίας ;— 
Φησίν.---Εἰἰ δὲ ναύτῃ ; ὃ εἰ δὲ στρατιώτῃ; πό- 

1 Numbers in parenthesis refer to Schweighauser’s edition, 
which was followed by Long in his translation. 


* The final word of the title added by Wachsmuth. 
5 Schweighauser: 67 MSS. 


440 


FRAGMENTS 


] 


From Arrian the pupil of Epictetus. To the man 
who was bothering himself about the problem of 
being 


What do I care, says Epictetus, whether all exist- 
ing things are composed of atoms, or of indivisibles, or 
of fire and earth? Is it not enough to learn the true 
nature of the good and the evil, and the limits of the 
desires and aversions, and also of the choices and 
refusals, and, by employing these as rules, to order 
the affairs of our life, and dismiss the things that are 
beyond us? It may very well be that these latter 
are not to be comprehended by the human mind, and 
even if one assume that they are perfectly compre- 
hensible, well, what profit comes from comprehend- 
ing them? And ought we not to say that those 
men trouble themselves in vain who assign all this as 
necessary to the philosopher’s system of thought? 
Is, therefore, also the precept at Delphi superfluous, 
“Know thyself’ ?—That, indeed, no, the man 
answers.—What, then, does it mean? If one badea 
singer in a chorus to “ know himself,’ would he not 
heed the order by paying attention both to his 
fellows in the chorus and to singing in harmony 
with them }—Yes.—And so in the case of a sailor? 


4 οὕκουν ἄν Schenkl (οὔκουν Wachsmuth): οὐκ ἂν ἐν MSS. 
5 Canter and Wachsmuth: εἶδεν αὐτή(ν») MSS. 


441 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


τερον οὖν ὁ ἄνθρωπος αὐτὸς ἐφ᾽ αὑτοῦ πεποιῆ- 
σθαί σοι δοκεῖ ζῷον ἢ πρὸς κοινωνίαν ;—ITpos 
κοινωνίαν ὅ--- — Ὑπὸ τίνος "-- Ὑπὸ τῆς φύσεως .-- 
Τίνος οὔσης καὶ πῶς διοικούσης τὰ ὅλα καὶ 
πότερον οὔσης ἢ μή, ταῦτα οὐκέτι ἀναγκαῖον 
πολυπραγμονεῖν. 


5 (136). Stobaeus, IV. 44, 65 
᾿Αρριανοῦ ᾿᾿Ὀπικτητείου. 


‘O τοῖς παροῦσι καὶ δεδομένοις ὑ ὑπὸ τῆς τύχης 
δυσχεραίνων ἰδιώτης ἐν βίῳ, ὁ δὲ ταῦτα γενναίως 
φέρων καὶ εὐλογίδιτῶν πρὸς τὰ 3 ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν ἀνὴρ 
ἀγαθὸς ἄξιος * νομίξεσθαι. 


8 (136). Stobaeus, IV. 44, 66 
Τοῦ αὐτοῦ. 

Πάντα ὑπακούει τῷ κόσμῳ καὶ ὑπηρετεῖ καὶ 
γῆ καὶ θάλασσα καὶ ἥλιος, καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ ἄστρα 
καὶ τὰ γῆς φυτὰ καὶ ζῷα' ὑπακούει, δὲ αὐτῷ καὶ 
τὸ ἡμέτερον σῶμα καὶ νοσοῦν καὶ ὑγιαῖνον, ὅταν 
ἐκεῖνος θέλῃ, καὶ νέαζον καὶ γηρῶν καὶ τὰς ἄλλας 
διερχόμενον μεταβολάς. οὐκοῦν εὔλογον καί, ὃ 
ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν ἐστί, τουτέστι τὴν κρίσιν, μὴ ἀντιτείνειν 
μόνην πρὸς αὐτόν' καὶ γὰρ ἰσχυρός ἐστι καὶ 
κρείσσων καὶ ἄμεινον ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν βεβούλευται 


1 Cobet: ὑφ᾽ MSS. 

3. πρὸς κοινωνίαν supplied by Heeren. 
. Schenk: : εὐλογίστω τά MSS. 

4 Gesner: ἀξίως MSS. 


442 


FRAGMENTS 


or a soldier? Does it seem to you, then, that man 
has been made a creature to live all alone by himself, 
or for society?—For society.—By whom ?—By 
Nature.—What Nature is, and how she administers 
the universe, and whether she really exists or not, 
these are questions about which there is no need to 
go on to bother ourselves. 


2 
From Arrian the pupil of Epictetus 


He who is dissatisfied with what he has and what 
has been given him by fortune is a layman in the art 
of living, but the man who bears all this in a noble 
spirit and makes a reasonable use of all that comes 
from it deserves to be considered a good man. 


3 
From the same 


All things obey and serve the Cosmos, both earth, 
and sea, and sun, and the other stars, and the plants 
and animals of earth; obedient to it also is our 
body, both in sickness and in health, when the 
Cosmos wishes, both in youth and in old age, and 
when passing through all the otherchanges. There- 
fore it is reasonable also that the one thing which is 
under our control, that is, the decision of our will, 
should not be the only thing to stand out against it. 
For the Cosmos is mighty and superior to us, and has 
taken better counsel for us than we can, by uniting 


1 A pantheistic form of expression for God, common 
enough in Stoicism in general, but rare in Epictetus. Cf. 
also frag. 4, where, however, the expression may really 
belong to Rufus. 


443 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


μετὰ τῶν ὅλων καὶ ἡμᾶς συνδιοικῶν. πρὸς δὲ 
τούτοις καὶ ἡ ἀντίπραξις μετὰ τοῦ ἀλόγου καὶ 
πλέον οὐδὲν ποιοῦσα πλὴν τὸ διακενῆς σπᾶσθαι 
καὶ περιπίπτειν ὀδύναις καὶ λύπαις ποιεῖ, 


4 (169).». Stobaeus, II. 8, 30. Musonius, frag. 
38 (H. ) 
‘Povdou ἐκ τῶν ᾿Επικτήτου περὶ φιλίας. 

Τῶν ὄντων τὰ μὲν ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν ἔθετο ὁ θεός, τὰ 
δ᾽ οὐκ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν. ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν μὲν τὸ κάλλιστον καὶ 
σπουδαιότατον, ᾧ δὴ καὶ αὐτὸς εὐδαίμων ἐστί, 
τὴν χρῆσιν τῶν φαντασιῶν. τοῦτο γὰρ ὀρθῶς 
γιγνόμενον ἐλευθερία ἐστίν, εὔροια, εὐθυμία, 
εὐστάθεια, τοῦτο δὲ καὶ δίκη ἐ ἐστὶ καὶ νόμος καὶ 
σωφροσύνη καὶ ξύμπασα ἀρετή. τὰ δ᾽ ἄλλα 
πάντα οὐκ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν ἐποιήσατο. οὐκοῦν καὶ ἡμᾶς 
συμψήφους χρὴ τῷ θεῷ γενέσθαι καὶ ταύτῃ 
διελόντας τὰ πράγματα τῶν μὲν ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν πάντα 
τρόπον ἀντιποιεῖσθαι, τὰ δὲ μὴ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν ἐπιτρέψαι 
τῷ κόσμῳ Kat, εἴτε τῶν παίδων δέοιτο εἶτε τῆς 


πατρίδος εἴτε τοῦ σώματος εἴτε ὁτουοῦν, ἀσμένους 
παραχωρεῖν. 


5 (61). Stobaeus, III. 19,18, Musonius, frag. 
39 (H.) 


et a 
Povdovu ἐκ τοῦ ᾿Ε'πικτήτου περὶ φιλίας. 


Τὸ δὲ Λυκούργου τοῦ Λακεδαιμονίου τίς ἡμῶν 
οὐ θαυμάξει; πηρωθεὶς γὰρ ὑπό τινος τῶν 


1 Meineke: ὁτιοῦν MSS. 
444 


FRAGMENTS 


us together with the universe under its governance. 
Besides, to act against it is to side with unreason, 
and while accomplishing nothing but a vain struggle, 
it involves us in pains and sorrows. 


4. 
Rufus. From the remarks of Epictetus on friendship * 


Of things that are, God has put some under our 
control, and others not under our control. Under 
our control He put the finest and most important 
matter, that, indeed, by virtue of which He Himself 
is happy, the power to make use of external impres- 
sions. For when this power has its perfect work, it 
is freedom, serenity, cheerfulness, steadfastness ; it 
is also justice, and Jaw, and self-control, and the 
sum and substance of virtue. But all other things 
He has not put under our control. Therefore we 
also ought to become of one mind with God, and, 
dividing matters in this way, lay hold in every way 
we can upon the things that are under our control, 
but what is not under our control we ought to leave 
to the Cosmos, and gladly resign to it whatever it 
needs, be that our children, our country, our body, 
or anything whatsoever. 


5 
Rufus. From Epictetus on friendship 
What man among us does not admire the saying 
of Lycurgus the Lacedaemonian? For when he had 


i The natural way to take this and the next few titles is 
to assume that Epictetus had quoted with approval a fairly 
long passage from his revered teacher Musonius Rufus. 


445 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


πολιτῶν τῶν ὀφθαλμῶν τὸν ἕτερον Kal παρα- 
λαβὼν τὸν veavicxov παρὰ τοῦ δήμου, ἵνα 
τιμωρήσαιτο, ὅπως ἂν; αὐτὸς βούληται, τούτου 
μὲν ἀπέσχετο, παιδεύσας δὲ αὐτὸν καὶ ἀποφήνας 
ἄνδρα ἀγαθὸν παρήγαγεν εἰς τὸ θέατρον. θαυ- 
μαξόντων δὲ τῶν Λακεδαιμονίων “ τοῦτον μέντοι 
λαβών," ἔφη, “wap ὑμῶν ὑβριστὴν καὶ βίαιον 
ἀποδίδωμι ὑμῖν ἐπιεικῆ καὶ δημοτικόν." 


6 (69). Stobaeus, III. 20, 60. Musonius, frag. 
40 (H.) 


“Ῥούφου ἐκ τοῦ ᾿Επικτήτου περὶ φιλίας. 


, ᾿Αλλὰ παντὸς μᾶλλον τῆς μὲν φύσεως ἐκεῖνο 
τὸ ἔργον συνδῆσαι καὶ συναρμόσαι τὴν ὁρμὴν TH? 
τοῦ προσήκοντος καὶ ὠφελίμου φαντασίᾳ. 


7 (10). Stobaeus, III. 20, 61. Musonius, frag. 
41 (HL) 
Tod αὐτοῦ. 

To δὲ οἴεσθαι εὐκαταφρονήτους τοῖς ἄλλοις 
ἔσεσθαι, ἐὰν μὴ τοὺς πρώτους ἐχθροὺς παντὶ 
τρόπῳ βλάψωμεν, σφόδρα ἀγεννῶν καὶ ἀνοήτων 
ἀνθρώπων. φαμὲν γὰρ τὸν εὐκαταφρόνητον 
νοεῖσθαι μὲν καὶ κατὰ τὸ ἀδύνατον εἶναι βλάψει" 
ἀλλὰ πολὺ μᾶλλον νοεῖται κατὰ τὸ ἀδύνατον 
εἰναι ὠφελεῖν. 


1 ἄν added by C. Schenkl. 
446 


FRAGMENTS 


been blinded in one eye by one of his fellow-citizens, 
and the people had turned over the young man to 
him, to take whatever vengeance upon the culprit he 
might desire, this he refrained from doing, but 
brought him up and made a good man of him, and 
presented him in the theatre. And when the Lace- 
daemonians expressed their surprise, he said, “ This 
man when 1 received him at your hands was insolent 
and violent; I am returning him to you a reasonable 
and public-spirited person.”’ 


6 
Rufus, From Epictetus on friendship 


But above all else this is the function of nature, to 
bind together and to harmonize our choice with the 
conception of what is fitting and helpful. 


7 


The same 


To fancy that we shall be contemptible in the sight 
of other men, if we do not employ every means to 
hurt the first enemies we meet, is characteristic of 
extremely ignoble and thoughtless men. For it is 
a common saying among us that the contemptible 
man is recognized among other things by his 
incapacity to do harm; but he is much better 
recognized, by his incapacity to extend help. 


De eeameanaiel 


2 Biicheler: τῆς. . . φαντασίας MSS. 


447 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


8 (184). Stobaeus, IV. 44, 60. Musonius, frag. 
| 42 (H.) 


Ῥούφου ἐκ τῶν ᾿Εἰπικτήτου περὶ φιλίας. 


“Ὅτε τοιαύτη ἡ τοῦ κόσμον φύσις καὶ ἣν καὶ 
ἔστι καὶ ἔσται καὶ οὐχ οἷόν τε ἄλλως γίγνεσθαι 
τὰ γυγνόμενα ἢ ws νῦν ἔχει" καὶ ὅτι ταύτης τῆς 

a a ἡ 
τροπῆς καὶ τῆς μεταβολῆς οὐ μόνον οἱ ἄνθρωποι 
7 Ν ® ἊΝ 5) > N "n > Ν 
μετειλήφασι καὶ τἄλλα ζῷα τὰ ἐπὶ γῆς, ἀλλὰ 
καὶ τὰ θεῖα καὶ νὴ Δί᾽ αὐτὰ τὰ τέτταρα στοιχεῖα 
ἄνω καὶ κάτω τρέπεται καὶ μεταβάλλει καὶ γῆ 
τ 4 \ oof ὁ ἢ Φ \ / > 
τε ὕδωρ γίνεται καὶ ὕδωρ ἀήρ, οὗτος δὲ πάλιν εἰς 
αἰθέρα μεταβάλλει: καὶ ὁ αὐτὸς τρόπος τῆς 
μεταβολῆς ἄνωθεν κάτω. ἐὰν πρὸς ταῦτά τις 
~ Ν A Ν 
ἐπιχειρῇ ῥέπειν τὸν νοῦν καὶ πείθειν ἑαυτὸν 
f al 
ἑκόντα δέχεσθαι τὰ ἀναγκαῖα, πάνυ μετρίως. καὶ. 
μουσικῶς διαβιώσεται τὸν βίον. 


9 (180) Gellius, XIX. 1, 14-211 


14 Philosophus in disciplina Stoica celebratus .. . ex 
sarcinula sua kbrum protulit Epicteti philosophi quintum 
Διαλέξεων, quas ab Arriano digestas congruere scriptis 

15 Zenonis et Chrysippi non dubium est. in eo libro, 
graeca scilicet oratione scriptum ad hanc sententiam 
legimus: Visa animi (quas φαντασίας philosopht ap- 
pellant), quibus mens hominis prima statim specie 
accidentis ad animum rei pellitur, non voluntatis 


1 Also in abbreviated form (from Gellius) in Augustine, 
Civ. Dei, 9, 4 (cf. 9, δ), and Quaest. in Heptat. 1, 30. 





1 That is, from the heavier to the lighter, and again from 
the lighter to the heavier. 


448 


FRAGMENTS 


8 
Rufus, From the remarks of Epictetus on friendship 


Such was, and is, and will be, the nature of the 
universe, and it is not possible for the things that 
come into being to come into being otherwise than 
they nowdo, And not only has mankind participated 
in this process of change and transformation, and all 
the other living beings upon earth, but also those 
which are divine, and, by Zeus, even the four 
elements, which are changed and transformed up- 
wards and downwards,! as earth becomes water, and 
water air, and air again is transformed into ether; 
and there is the same kind of transformation also 
downwards. If a man endeavours to incline his 
mind to these things, and to persuade himself to 
accept of his own accord what needs must befall 
him, he will have a very reasonable and harmonious 
life. 


9 


A philosopher who ts well known in the Stoic school 
.. » brought out of his handbag the fifth book of the 
Discourses of the philosopher Epictetus, which had been 
arranged by Arrian, and agree, no doubt, with the 
writings of Zeno and Chrysippus. In that book, written 
of course in Greek, we find a passage to this purport : 
Things seen by the mind (which the philosophers call 
φαντασίας), whereby the intellect of man is struck 
at the very first sight of anything which penetrates 
to the mind, are not subject to his will, nor to his 


* External impressions. 


VOL. I, Ga 


16 
i7 


18 


19 


20 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


sunt neque arbitraria,! sed vi quadam sua inferunt 
sese hominibus noscitanda;? probationes autem (quas 
συγκαταθέσεις͵ vocunt), quibus eadem visa noscuntur, 
voluntariae sunt fiuntque hominum arbitratu. prop- 
terea cum sonus aliquis formidabilis ant caelo aut ex 
ruina aut repentinus nescio cuius? periculi nuntius 
vel quid aliud est* eiusmodi factum, sapientis quoque 
animum paulisper moveri et contrahi et pallescere 
necessum est, non opinione alicuius mali praecepta, 
sed quibusdam motibus rapidis et inconsultis officium 
mentis atque rationis praevertentibus. mox tamen 
ille sapiens ibidem τὰς τοιαύτας φαντασίας (id est visa 
istaec animi sut terrifica) non adprobat (hoc esl οὐ 
συγκατατίθεται οὐδὲ προσεπιδοξάζει), sed abicit re- 
spuitque nec ei metuendum esse in his quicquam 
videtur. atque hoe inter insipientis sapientisque 
animum differe dicunt quod insipiens, qualia sibi 
esse primo animi sui pulsu visa sunt saeva et aspera, 
talia esse vero putat et eadem incepta, tamquam 5 si 
iure metuenda sint, sua quoque adsensione adprobat 
καὶ “ προσεπιδοξάζει ᾿᾿ (hoc entm verbo Stoici, cum super 
ista re disserunt, uiuntur), sapiens autem, cum breviter 
et strictim colore atque vultu motus est, οὐ συγκατα- 
τίθεται, sed statum vigoremque sententiae suae reti- 
net, quam de huiuscemodi visis semper habuit, ut de 


1 L. Carrio: arbitrariae MSS. 

* Salmasius: noscitandae MSS. 

3 Ed. Greifswald 1537: nescius MSS. 
* J. Gronov: ex MSS (or omit) 

ὅ Edd. : quamquam MSS. 





1 Does not assent or confirm by approval. 

2 Such external impressions. 

8 Also confirms by his approval. 

* The word seems to occur only here, and may be peculiar 
to Epictetus. ἢ 


450 


FRAGMENTS 


control, but by virtue of a certain force of their own 
thrust themselves upon the attention of men; but 
the assents (which they call συγκαταθέσεις), where- 
by these same things seen by the mind are recog- 
nized, are subject to man’s will, and fall under his 
control. Therefore, when some terrifying sound 
comes from the sky, or from the collapse of a build- 
ing, or sudden word comes of some peril or other, 
or something else of the same sort happens, the 
mind of even the wise man cannot help but be 
disturbed, and shrink, and grow pale for a moment, 
not from any anticipation of some evil, but because 
of certain swift and unconsidered motions which 
forestall the action of the intellect and the reason. 
Soon, however, our wise man does not give his 
assent (this ts, οὐ συγκατατίθεται οὐδὲ προσεπιδοξάξει) + 
to τὰς τοιαύτας φαντασίας  (ἐλαί 15, these terrifying 
things seen by his mind), but rejects and repudiates 
them, and sees in them nothing to cause him fear. 
And this, they say, is the difference between the 
mind of the fool and the mind of the wise man, that 
the fool thinks the cruel and harsh things seen by 
his mind, when it is first struck by them, actually to 
be what they appear, and likewise afterwards, just 
as though they really were formidable, he confirms 
them by his own approval also, καὶ προσεπιδοξάζει 
(the word the Stotcs use when they discuss this 
matter) ;* whereas the wise man, when his colour 
and expression have changed for a brief instant, 
οὐ συγκατατίθεται,5, but keeps the even tenor and 
strength of the opinion which he has always had 
about merftal impressions of this kind, as things 


5 Does not give his consent. 


451 
aa? 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


minime metuendis, sed fronte falsa et formidine inani 
territantibus. 

2] Haec Epictetum philosophum ex decretis Stotcorum 
sensisse aique dixisse, in eo, quo αἰαῖ, libro legimus. 


10 (179). Gellius, XVII. 19 


Favorinum ego audivi dicere Epictetum philosophum 
dixisse plerosque istos, qui philosophari viderentur, 
philosophos esse eiuscemodi “ ἄνευ rod πράττειν, μέχρι 
τοῦ Aéyew” (id significat “factis procul, verbis tenus’’). 

2iam illud est vehementius, quod Arrianus solitum eum 
dictitare in libris, quos de disseriationibus etus composutt, 
3 scriptum reliquit. nam, cum, inquit, animadverterat 
hominem pudore amisso, inportuna industria, cor- 
ruptis moribus, audacem, confidentem lingua cetera- 
que omnia praeterquam animam procurantem, istius- 
modi, ἐπέ, hominem cum viderat studia quoque et 
disciplinas philosophiae contrectare et physica adire 
et meditari dialectica multaque id genus theoremata 
auspicari! sciscitarique: inclamabat deum atque 
hominum fidem ac plerumque inter clamandum his 
eum verbis increpabat: “"Av@pwre, ποῦ βάλλεις; σκέψαι, 
εἰ κεκάθαρται τὸ ἀγγεῖον. av yap eis τὴν οἴησιν αὐτὰ 
βάλῃς," ἀπώλετο: ἣν ὃ σαπῇ, οὖρον ἢ ὄξος ἐγένετο 4 ἢ εἴ 
τι τούτων χεῖρον. nzhil profecto his verbis gravius, 
4 nihil vertus: quibus declarabat maximus philosophorum 
litteras atque doctrinas philosophiae, cum in hominem 


1 Hussner: suspicari MSS. * Usener: βάλλῃς MSS. 

5. Ἢ or HC the MSS. 4 Usener: γένοιτο MSS. 
Siemens rr omnes neni 

1 Without doing, as far as speaking. 

* Man, where are you stowing all this? Look and see if 
the vessel has been cleansed. For if you stow it in the 


452 





FRAGMENTS 


that do not deserve to be feared at all, but terrify 
only with a false face and a vain fear. 

Thais ἐς the sentiment and expression of the philosopher 
Eimectetus, derived from the doctrines of the Stoics, that 
we have read in the book of which £ spoke above. 


10 


1 have heard Favorinus say that he had heard the 
philosopher Epictetus suy, that most of those who gave 
the appearance of philosophizing were philosophers 
of this kind: ἄνευ rod πράττειν, μέχρι τοῦ λέγειν (this 
means, “ apart from deeds, as far as words”). There 
is a still more vigorous expression which he was accus- 
tomed to use, that Arrian has recorded in the books 
which he wrote about his discourses. For Arrian says 
that when Epictetus had noticed a man lost to 
shame, of misdirected energy, and evil habits, bold, 
impudent in speech, and concerned with everything 
else but his soul, when he saw a man of that kind, 
continues Arrian, handling also the studies and pur- 
suits of philosophy, and taking up physics, and 
studying dialectics, and taking up and investigating 
many a theoretical principle of this sort, he would 
call upon gods and men, and frequently, in the 
midst of that appeal, he would denounce the man 
in these words: “Avépwre, ποῦ βάλλεις ; σκέψαι, εἰ 
κεκάθαρται τὸ ἀγγεῖον. ἂν γὰρ εἰς τὴν οἴησιν αὐτὰ βάλῃς, 
ἀπώλετο ἢν camry, οὖρον ἢ ὄξος ἐγένετο ἢ εἴ τι τούτων 
xetpov.2 Surely there is nothing wmeightier, nothing 
truer than these words, in which the greatest of philo- 
sophers declared that the writings and teachings of 
philosophy, when poured into a false and low-lived 


vessel of opinion, it is ruined ; if it spoils, it turns into urine, 
or vinegar, or, it may be, something worse. 
453 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


falsum atque degenerem tamquam in vas spurcum 
atque pollutum influxissent, verti, mutari, corrumpi 
et (quod ipse κυνικώτερον ait) urinam fieri aut si quid 
est urina spurcius. 

5  Praeterea idem ille Epictetus, quod ex eodem Favo- 
rino audivimus, solitus dicere est duo esse vitia multo 
omnium gravissima ac taeterrima, intolerantiam et 
incontinentiam, cum aut iniurias, quae sunt ferendae, 
non toleramus neque ferimus aut, a quibus rebus 
voluptatibusque nos tenere debemus, non tenemus. 

6 “itaque,” equi, “si quis haec duo verba cordi habeat 
eaque sibi imperando atque observando curet, is 
erit pleraque inpeccabilis vitamque vivet tranquil- 
lissimam.”’ verba haec duo dicebat: “ avéyov”’ ef 
ἐς G@aréyou.” 


10a (181). Arnobius, Adversus Gentes, ἃ, 78 


Cum de animarum agitur salute ac de respectu 
nostri, aliquid et sine “ratione faciendum est, ul 
Epictetum diatsse adprobat Arrianus. 


11 (174). Stobaeus, ΓΝ, 33, 28 
"Ex τῶν Apptavod προτρεπτικῶν ὁμιλιῶν. 


᾿Αλλὰ δὴ Σωκράτης ᾿Αρχελάου μεταπεμπο- 
μένου αὐτὸν ὡς _TOLNTOVTOS πλούσιον ἐκέλευσεν 
ἀπαγγεῖλαι αὐτῷ διότεϊ “ ᾿Αθήνησι τέσσαρές εἰσι 
χοίνικες τῶν ἀλφίτων ὀβολοῦ ὦνιοι καὶ κρῆναι 


1 Gesner: διὰ τί MSS. 





+ Somewhat after the fashion of the Cynics, 
454 


FRAGMENTS 


person, as though into a dirty and defiled vessel, 
turn, change, are spoiled, and (as he himself says 
κυνικώτερον) } become urine, or something, it may be, 
dirtier than urine. 

The same Epictetus, moreover, as we have heard 
from Favorinus, was in the habit of saying that there 
were two vices which are far more severe and 
atrocious than all others, want of endurance and 
want of self-control, when we do not endure or bear 
the wrongs which we have to bear, or do not abstain 
from, or forbear, those matters and pleasures which we 
ought to forbear. “ And so,” he says, “if aman should 
take to heart these two words and observe them in 
controlling and keeping watch over himself, he will, 
for the most part, be free from wrongdoing, and 
will live a highly peaceful life.’ These two words, 
he used to say, were ἀνέχου and ἀπέχου.3 


10a (181) 


When the salvation of our souls and regard for our 
true selves are at stake, something has to be done, 
even without stopping to think about it, a saying of 
Epictetus which Arrian quotes with approval. 


11 
From the homilies of Arrian, exhorting to virtue 


Now when Archelaus® sent for Socrates with 
the intention of making him rich, the latter bade 
the messenger take back the following answer: 
“At Athens four quarts of barley-meal can be 
bought for an obol,* and there are running springs 

* Bear and forbear. 8 The king of Macedon. 


4 A penny and a half, or three cents; in other terms, the 
sixth part of the day’s wage of an ordinary labourer. 
455 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ὕδατος ῥέουσιν." εἰ γάρ τοι μὴ ἱκανὰ τὰ ὄντα 
ἐμοί, ἀλλ᾽ ἐγὼ τούτοις ἱκανὸς καὶ οὕτω κἀκεῖνα 
ἐμοί. ἢ οὐχ ὁρᾷς, ὅτι οὐκ εὐφωνότερον οὐδὲ 
ἥδιον ὁ ὁ 1Τῶλος τὸν τύραννον Οἰδίποδα ὑπεκρί- 
VETO ἢ τὸν ἐπὶ Κολωνῷ ἀλήτην " καὶ πτωχὸν; 

εἶτα χείρων Πώλουν ὁ γενναῖος ἀνὴρ φανεῖται, 
ὡς μὴ πᾶν τὸ περιτεθὲν ἐκ τοῦ δαιμονίου πρόσω- 
πον ὑποκρίνασθαι καλῶς; οὐδὲ τὸν ᾽Οδυσσέα 
μιμήσεται, ὃς. καὶ ἐν τοῖς ῥάκεσιν οὐδὲν μεῖον 
διέπρεπεν ἢ ἐν τῇ οὔλῃ χλαίνῃ τῇ πορφυρᾷ; 


12 (note to frag. 71). Stobaeus, III. 20, 47 
᾿Αρριανοῦ. 


Μεγαλόθυμοι T Paws εἰσί τινες ἡσυχῇ καὶ οἷον 
ἀοργήτως πράττοντες ὅσα καὶ οἱ σφόδρα τῷ 
θυμῷ φερόμενοι. φυλακτέον οὖν καὶ τὸ τούτων 
ἀβλέπτημα ὡς πολὺ χεῖρον ὃν τοῦ διατεινόμενον 
ὀργίξεσθαι. οὗτοι μὲν “γὰρ ταχὺ κόρον τῆς 
τιμωρίας λαμβάνουσιν, οἱ δὲ εἰς μακρὸν παρα- 
τείνουσιν ὡς οἱ λεπτῶς πυρέττοντες. 


13 (omitted). Stobaeus, I. 3, 50 

‘Ex τῶν ᾿Επικτήτου ἀπομνημονευμάτων. 
᾿Αλλ᾽ ὁρῶ, φησί τις, τοὺς καλοὺς καὶ ἀγαθοὺς 
καὶ λιμῷ καὶ ῥίγει ἀπολλυμένους.----οὺς δὲ μὴ 


1 Gaisford : δὲ ὅν MSS. 
2. Schweighduser: ἀλείτην MSS. 


456 


FRAGMENTS 


of water.” For, look you, if what I have is not 
sufficient for me, still, I am sufficient for it, and so 
it too is sufficient for me. Or do you not see 
that Polus' was not accustomed to act Oedipus 
the King with any finer voice or more pleasure to 
his audience than Oedipus at Colonus, the outcast 
and beggar? And then shall the man of noble 
nature male a poorer showing than Polus, and 
not play well any réle to which the Deity assigns 
him? And will he not follow the example of 
Odysseus, who was no less pre-eminent in “his rags 
than in his rich and purple cloak ? 


12 
From Arrian 


There are certain persons who exhibit their high 
spirit rather gently,? and in a sort of passionless, 
manner do everything that even those who are 
swept away by their anger do. We must be on 
our guard, therefore, against the error of these 
persons, as something much worse than violent 
anger. For those who give way to violent anger 
are soon sated with their revenge, but the others 
prolong it like men who have a light fever. 


13 
From the Memorabilia of Epictetus 
But, says someone, I see the good and excellent 
perishing from hunger and cold.—And do you not see 


1 A famous actor of thefourth century. SeeJ. B. O’Connor, 
Chapters in the History of Actors and Acting (1908), 128-30. 
2 Capps suggests that ἡσυχῇ is used here as it is in 
Menander, Hero, 20. 
457 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


καλοὺς καὶ μὴ ἀγαθοὺς οὐχ ὁρᾷς τρυφῇ καὶ 
ἀλαζονείᾳ καὶ ἀπειροκαλίᾳ ἀπολλυμένους ; --- 
"AN αἰσχρὸν τὸ παρ᾽ ἄλλου τρέφεσθαι. —Kai 
τίς, ὦ κακόδαιμον, αὐτὸς ἐξ ἑαυτοῦ τρέφεται 
ἄλλος γε ἢ ὁ κόσμος; ὅστις γοῦν ἐγκαλεῖ τῇ 
προνοίᾳ, ὅτι οἱ πονηροὶ οὐ διδόασι δίκην, ὅτι 
ἰσχυροί εἰσι καὶ πλούσιοι, ὅμοιόν τί δρᾷ ὥσπερ 
εἰ τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς ἀπολωλεκότων αὐτῶν ἔλεγε 
μὴ δεδωκέναι δίκην αὐτούς, ὅτε οἱ ὄνυχες ὑγιεῖς 
εἶεν. ἐγὼ μὲν γάρ φημι πολὺ διαφέρειν μῶνλον 
ἀρετὴν κτήσεως 3 ἢ ὀφθαλμοὶ ὀνύχων διαφέρουσιν. 


14 (52). Stobaeus, III. 6, 57 
"Ex τῶν ᾿Επικτήτου arouyvnmovevpateov.® 


iain ποὺς δυσχερεῖς δὲ φιλοσόφους εἰς μέσον 
ἄγοντες, οἷς οὐ δοκεῖ κατὰ φύσιν ἡδονὴ εἶναι, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἐπυγίγνεσθαι τοῖς κατὰ φύσιν, δικαιοσύνῃ, 
σωφροσύνῃ, ἐλευθερίᾳ. τί ποτ᾽ οὖν ἡ ψυχὴ ἐπὶ 
μὲν τοῖς τοῦ σώματος ἀγαθοῖς μικροτέροις οὖσι 
χαίρει καὶ γαληνιᾷ, ὥς φησιν ᾿Επίκουρος, ἐπὶ δὲ 
τοῖς αὑτῆς ἀγαθοῖς μεγίστοις οὖσιν οὐχ ἥδεται; : 
καΐτοι καὶ δέδωκέ μοι ἡ φύσις αἰδῶ καὶ πολλὰ 
ὑπερυθριῶ, ὅταν τι ὑπολάβω αἰσχρὸν λέγειν. 
τοῦτό με τὸ κίνημα οὐκ ἐᾷ τὴν ἡδονὴν θέσθαι 
ἀγαθὸν καὶ τέλος τοῦ βίου. 


* αἱ (ἄν P*) after this word was deleted by Meineke. 
2 Suggested by Schenkl: κακίας MSS. 

3 The last word of the title added by Asmus. 

ὁ Schenk! indicated the lacuna. 


458 


FRAGMENTS 


those who are not good and excellent perishing from 
luxury, and bombast, and vulgarity >—Yes, but it is 
disgraceful to be supported by another.—And who, 
O miserable fellow, is supported by himself alone, 
except the Cosmos? Whoever accuses Providence, 
therefore, because the wicked are not punished, and 
because they are strong and rich, is acting just as 
though, when the wicked had lost their eyes, he 
said they were not being punished because their 
finger-nails were in good condition. Now, as for me, 
I assert that there is much more difference between 
virtue and property than there is between eyes and 
finger-nails. 


14 
From the Memorabilia of Epictetus 


... bring forward the ill-natured! philosophers, 
who think that pleasure is not something natural, 
but a sequel of things that are natural, as justice, 
self-control, and freedom. Why indeed, then, does 
the soul take delight in the lesser goods of the body, 
and enjoy calm therein, as Epicurus says,” and yet 
not find pleasure in its own goods, which are very 
great? Verily nature has also given me a sense of 
shame, and frequently I blush, when I feel that I 
am saying something disgraceful. It is this emotion 
which does not allow me to lay down pleasure as the 
good and end of life. 

1 Or ‘‘morose,” that is, from the point of view of the 
Epicureans. The reference is to the Stoics, who rejected the 
“pleasure” of Epicurus, and accepted only that which 
followed on virtuous conduct. 

3 Frag. 425 (Osener). 

459 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


15 (53). Stobaeus, Ill. 6, 58 
Ἔκ τῶν ᾿Επικτήτου ἀπομνημονευμάτων. 


Ἔν Ῥώμῃ αἱ γυναῖκες μετὰ χεῖρας ἔχουσι τὴν 
ΤἸΙλάτωνος Πολιτείαν, ὅτε κοινὰς ἀξιοῖ εἶναι τὰς 
γυναῖκας. τοῖς γὰρ ῥήμασι προσέχουσι τὸν νοῦν, 
οὐ τῇ διανοίᾳ τἀνδρός, ὅτι οὐ γαμεῖν κελεύων καὶ 
συνοικεῖν ἕνα. μιᾷ εἶτα κοινὰς εἶναι βούλεται τὰς 
γυναῖκας, ἀλλ᾽ ἐξαιρῶν τὸν τοιοῦτον γάμον καὶ 
ἄλλο τι εἶδος γάμου εἰσφέρων. καὶ τὸ ὅλον οἵ 
ἄνθρωποι χαίρουσιν ἀπολογίας τοῖς ἑαυτῶν ἅἁμαρ- 
τήμασι πορίζοντες" ἐπεί τοι φιλοσοφία φησίν, 
ὅτι οὐδὲ τὸν δάκτυλον ἐκτείνειν εἰκῆ προσήκει. 


16 (78). Stobaeus, III. 29, 84 
Ἔκ τῶν ᾿Επικτήτου ἀπομνημονευμάτων. 

Εἰδέναι χρή, ὅτε οὐ ῥάδιον δόγμα παραγενέσθαι 
ἀνθρώπῳ, εἰ μὴ Kal ἑκάστην ἡμέραν τὰ αὐτὰ 
καὶ λέγοι τις καὶ ἀκούοι καὶ ἅμα χρῷτο πρὸς 
τὸν βίον. 

17 (15). Stobaeus, ΠῚ, 4, 91 
᾿Επικτήτου. 


3 ; \ = , a 
Kis συμπόσιον μὲν οὖν παρακληθέντες τῷ 
παρόντι χρώμεθα" εἰ δέ τις κελεύοι τὸν ὑποδεχό- 


--- 





1 The community of women which Plato proposed was, 
first of all, restricted to a small, highly-trained, and devoted 
band of warrior-saints ; and, second, such that no man and 
woman should pair off for more than a very temporary “ marri- 
age,” all such matings being carefully supervised by the 
highest authorities. Instead of being more licentious than 


460 


FRAGMENTS 


15 
From the Memorabilia of Epictetus 


At Rome the women have in their hands Plato’s 
Republic, because he insists on community of women. 
For they pay attention only to the words, and not to 
the meaning of the man; the fact is, he does not 
bid people marry and live together, one man 
with one woman, and then go on to advocate the 
community of women, but he first abolishes that kind 
of marriage altogether, and introduces another kind 
in its place And in general people delight in 
finding excuses for their own faults; for, indeed, 
philosophy says we ought not to stretch out even 
our finger at random !? 


16 
From the Memorabilia of Epictetus 


One ought to know that it is not easy for a 
man to acquire a fixed judgement, unless he should 
day by day state and hear the same principles, and 
at the same time apply them to his life. 


17 
From Epictetus 


Now when we have been invited to a banquet, we 
take what is set before us; and if a person should 


ordinary monogamous marriage (which frequently deserves 
Bernard Shaw’s jibe, that it is popular largely because it 
combines the maximum of temptation with the maximum of 
opportunity), Plato’s proposal was relatively a denial of the 
flesh, and a marked move towards asceticism. 

2 See II. 11, 17. The remark in this connection is no 
doubt ironical, mockingly justifying the process of ‘‘ rational- 
ization” just described. 


αὖτ 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


μενον ἰχθῦς αὐτῷ παρατιθέναι ἢ πλακοῦντας, 


ἄτοπος ἂν δόξειεν. ἐν δὲ τῷ κόσμῳ αἰτοῦμεν 
τοὺς θεούς, ἃ μὴ διδόασι, καὶ ταῦτα πολλῶν 
ὄντων, ἅ γε ἡμῖν δεδώκασι. 


18 (16). Stobaeus, III. 4, 92 

Τοῦ αὐτοῦ. | 
Xapievtes, ἔφη, εἰσὶν οἱ μέγα φρονοῦντες ἐπὶ 
τοῖς οὐκ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν. “γώ, ᾿ φησί, “ κρείττων εἰμί 
σου" ᾿ ἀγροὺς γὰρ ἔχω πολλούς, σὺ δὲ λιμῷ Tapa 
τείνῃ." ἄλλος λέγει “ ἐγὼ ὑπατικός εἰμι." ἄλλος 
“ἀγὼ ἐπίτροπος. ἄλλος “ ἐγὼ οὔλας τρίχας 
ἔχω." " ἵππος δ᾽ ἢ ἵππῳ οὐ λέγει ὅτι “ κρείττων 
εἰμί σου' πολὺν γὰρ κέκτημαι χιλὸν καὶ κριθὰς 
πολλὰς καὶ χαλινοί μοί, εἰσι χρυσοῖ καὶ ἐφίππια 
ποικίλα," ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι “ ὠκύτερός σού εἰμι. καὶ 
πᾶν EGov κρεῖττον καὶ χεῖρόν ἐστιν ἐκ τῆς 
ἑαυτοῦ ἀρετῆς καὶ κακίας. ἄρ᾽ οὖν ἀνθρώπου 
μόνου ἀρετὴ οὐκ ἔστιν, ἀχλὰ δεῖ ἡμᾶς εἰς τὰς 8 
τρίχας ἀφορᾶν καὶ τὰ ἱμάτια καὶ τοὺς πάππους ; 


19 (17). Stobaeus, IIT. 4, 98 

Τοῦ αὐτοῦ." 
Τῷ μὲν ἰατρῷ μηδὲν συμβουλεύοντι ἄχθονται 
οἱ κάμνοντες καὶ ἡγοῦνται ἀπεγνῶσθαε ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ. 


1 gov added here by Schenkl; after ἐγώ ἡ man. alt,, and 
Gesner. 
3 ἔχω added by Gesner. 


462 


FRAGMENTS 


bid his host to set before him fish or cakes, he would 
be regarded as eccentric. Yet in the world at large 
we ask the gods for things which they do not give 
us, and that too when there are many things which 
they actually have given us. 


18 
From the same 


Those are amusing persons, he said, who take 
great pride in the things which are not under our 
control. A man says, “I am better than you; for I 
have many estates, and you are half-dead with 
hunger.’’! Another says, “1 am a consular.”” An- 
other, “I ama procurator.” Another, “I have thick 
curly hair.” But one horse ,does not say to another 
horse, “1 am better than you, for I have quantities 
of fodder, and a great deal of barley, and my bridles 
are of gold, and my saddle-cloths are embroidered,” 
but “I can run faster than you can.’’ And every 
creature is better or worse because of its own 
particular virtue or vice. Can it be, then, that 
man is the only creature without a special virtue, 
but he must have recourse to his hair, and his 
clothes, and his grandsires ? 


19 
The same 


When men are sick and their physician gives 
them no advice, they are annoyed, and think that 


1 The phrase is from Plato, Symposium, 207 B. 


3 ras added by Meineke. 
4 The superscription added by Gaisford. 





463 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


πρὸς δὲ τὸν φιλόσοφον διὰ Ti+ οὐκ ἄν τίς οὕτω 
διατεθείη, ὥστε οἰηθῆναι ἀπογνῶσθαι ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ 
σωφρονήσειν, εἰ μηδὲν λέγοι ἔτι ὃ πρὸς αὐτὸν τῶν 


χρησίμων ; 


0 (18). Stobaeus, III, 4, 94 
Τοῦ αὐτοῦ. 
Οἱ τὸ σῶμα εὖ διακείμενοι καὶ καύματα καὶ 
ψύχη ὑπομένουσιν" οὕτω δὲ καὶ οἱ τὴν ψυχὴν 


καλῶς διακείμενοι καὶ ὀργὴν καὶ λύπην καὶ περι- 
χάρειαν καὶ τὰ ἄλλα πάθη φέρουσιν. 


21 (66). Stobaeus, III. 7, 16 
Ἐπικτήτου. 


Διὰ τοῦτο ἐπαινεῖν ᾿Αγρυππῖνον δίκαιον, ὅτι 
πλείστου ἄξιος ἀνὴρ γενόμενος οὐδεπώποτε 
ἐπήνεσεν ἑαυτόν, ἀλλ᾽ εἰ καὶ ANOS τις αὐτὸν 
ἐπήνει, ἠρυθρία. οὗτος δ᾽, ἔφη, ὁ ἀνὴρ τοιοῦτος 
ἦν, ὥστε τοῦ συμβαίνοντος ἀεὶ ἑαυτῷ δυσκόλου 
ἔπαινον γράφειν' εἰ μὲν πυρέττοι, πυρετοῦ" εἰ δὲ 
ἀδοξοῖ, ἀδοξίας" εἰ δὲ φεύγοι, ὃ φυγῆς. καὶ ποτε 
μέλλοντι, ἔφη, αὐτῷ 4 ἀριστήσειν ἐπέστη Ο λέγων, 
ὅτι φεύγειν. αὐτὸν κελεύει Νέ ἐρων,. καὶ ὃς ὃ “ οὐκοῦν, 
εἶπεν, “ ἐν ᾿Αρικίᾳ ἀριστήσομεν." 

1 διὰ τί Gesner: διότι MSS. 2 Bucheler: τὸ MSS. 


5 Meineke: φύγοι MSS. 4 Gesner: τῷ or τῷ MSS. 
5 ἔφη after this word deleted by Schow. 





1 A distinguished Roman Stoic of the middle of the first 
century after Christ. See I. 1, 28-30; I. 2, 12-13; frag. 22. 


464 


FRAGMENTS 


he has given them up. And why should not a man 
fee] that way toward the philosopher, and so conclude 
that he has given up hope of one’s ever coming to a 
sound state of mind, if he no longer tells one any- 
thing that is of any use? 


20 
The same 


Those whose bodies are in good condition can 
endure heat and cold; so also those whose souls are 
in an excellent condition can endure anger, and grief, 
and great joy, and every other emotion. 


21 
From Epictetus 


For this reason it is right to praise Agrippinus,* 
because, although he was a man of the very highest 
worth, he never praised himself, but used to blush 
even if someone else praised him. His character 
was such, said Epictetus, that when any hardship 
befell him he would compose a eulogy upon it; on 
fever, if he had a fever; on disrepute, if he suffered 
from disrepute; on exile, if he went into exile. 
And once, he said, when Agrippinus was preparing 
to take lunch, a man brought him word that Nero 
ordered him into exile; “ Very well,” said he, “ we 
shall take our lunch in Aricia.”’ ? 


* The first stop outside Rome for persons travelling south 
and east, the common direction, as in the well known 
egressum maina me excepit Aricia Roma (Horace, Sat. I. 5, 1). 
Compare the version of the same incident in I. 1, 30. 


465 
VOL, IJ. H H 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


22. Stobaeus, IV. 7, 44 


Αγριππίνου ἃ 


Ὅ ᾿Αγριππῖνος ἡγεμονεύων ἐπειρᾶτο τοὺς 
καταδικαζομένους ὑ ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ πείθειν, ὅτι προσήκει 
αὐτοῖς καταδικασθῆναι. οὐ γὰρ ὡς πολέμιος 
αὐτοῖς, ἔφη, οὐδ᾽ ὡς λῃστὴς καταφέρω Τὴν 
ψῆφον αὐτῶν, ἀχλ᾽ ὡς ἐπιμελητὴς καὶ κηδεμών, 
ὥσπερ καὶ ὁ ἰατρὸς τὸν τεμνόμενον ππαραμυθεῖται 
καὶ πείθει παρέχειν ἑαυτόν, 


28 (94). Stobaeus, IV. 53, 29 


᾿Επικτήτου. 

Θαυμαστὴ ἡ φύσις καί, ὥς φησιν ὁ Ἐενοφῶν, 
φιλόξῳος. τὸ γοῦν σῶμα, τὸ πάντων ἀηδέστα- 
τον καὶ ῥυπαρώτατον, στέργομεν καὶ θεραπεύομεν' 
εἰ γὰρ ἔδει πέντε μόναις ἡμέραις θεραπεῦσαι. τὸ 
τοῦ γείτονος σῶμα, οὐκ ἂν ὑπεμείναμεν. ὅρα 
γὰρ οἷόν ἐστιν ἕωθεν ἀναστάντα τρίβειν τοὺς 
ὀδόντας τοὺς ἀλλοτρίους καί τι τῶν ἀναγκαίων 
ποιήσαντα ἀπονίξειν ἐκεῖνα τὰ μέρη. τῷ ὄντι 
θαυμαστόν ἐστι φιλεῖν πρᾶγμα, ᾧ τοσαῦτα 
λειτουργοῦμεν καθ᾽ ἑκάστην ἡμέραν. νάττω 
τουτονὶ τὸν θύλακον: εἶτα κενῶ' τί τούτου 
βαρύτερον ; ἀλλὰ θεῷ δεῖ με ὑπηρετεῖν. διὰ 
τοῦτο μένω καὶ ἀνέχομαι λούων τὸ δύστηνον 


1 See explanatory note, 





1 Aseribed to Epictetus by Gaisford and Asmus, but there 
is some doubt about the ascription, for the resemblance with 
I. 18 is not conclusive. 


466 


FRAGMENTS 


22 
From Agrippinus 1 

When Agrippinus was governor,” he used to try to 
persuade the persons whom he sentenced that it was 
proper for them to be sentenced, “ For,” he would 
say, “it is not as an enemy or as a brigand that 1 
record my vote against them, but as a curator and 
guardian ; just as also the physician encourages the 
man upon whom he is operating, and persuades him 

to submit to the operation.” 


23 
From Epictetus 


Nature is wonderful, and, as Xenophon® says, 
‘‘ fond of her creatures.” At all events we love and 
tend our body, the most unpleasant and dirtiest 
thing that there is; why, if we had had to tend our 
neighbour's body for no more than five days, we 
could not have endured it. Just consider what a 
nuisance it is to get up in the morning and brush 
some other person’s teeth, and then after attending 
to a call of nature to wash those parts. Truly it is 
wonderful to love a thing for which we perform so 
many services every day. I stuff this bag here ; * and 
then I empty it; what is more tiresome? But I 
must serve God. For that reason I remain, and 
endure to wash this miserable paltry body, and to 


* He was proconsul of Crete and Cyrenaica under Claudius. 
For all that is known about him see Prosopographia Imperti 
Romani, TIT. Ὁ. 4, No. 16. 

3 Memorabilia, I. 4, 7, where, however, the expression is 
used of a ‘‘ wise Creator.” 

* Pointing to his belly. 

407 
HH 2 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


“a a f \ 
τοῦτο σωμάτιον, χορτάξων, σκέπων' ὅτε δὲ 
νεώτερος ἣν, καὶ ἄλλο TL προσέταττέ μοι καὶ 

Ἂ ᾿ 
ὅμως ἠνειχόμην αὐτοῦ. διὰ τί οὖν οὐκ ἀνέχεσθε, 
fal a \ al “ 
ὅταν ἡ δοῦσα ἡμῖν φύσις TO σῶμα ἀφαιρῆται ;— 
Φιλῶ, φησίν, αὐτό.---Οὐκ οὖν, ὃ νῦν δὴ ἔλεγον, 

Δ ὅς cae οι ς , δέδ Ἂν: 
καὶ αὐτὸ τὸ φιλεῖν ἡ φύσις σοι δέδωκεν; ἢ 
αὐτὴ λέγει “ἄφες αὐτὸ ἤδη καὶ μηκέτι πρᾶγμα 


24 (95). Stobaeus, IV. 53, 30 
Τοῦ αὐτοῦ. 

Ἐδὼν νέος τελευτᾷ τὸν βίον, ἐγκαλεῖ τοῖς 
θεοῖς, . .,1 ὅτι δέον αὐτὸν ἤδη ἀναπεπαῦσθαι 
πρᾶγμα . ἔχει, καὶ οὐδὲν ἧττον, ὅταν προσίῃ 3 
ὁ θάνατος, ζῆν βούλεται καὶ πέμπει παρὰ τὸν 
ἰατρὸν καὶ δεῖται αὐτοῦ μηδὲν ἀπολιπεῖν προ- 
θυμίας καὶ ἐπιμελείας. θαυμαστοί, ἔφη, ἄν- 

nn , 
θρωποι μήτε ζῆν θέλοντες μήτε ἀποθνήσκειν. 


25 (11). Stobaeus, III. 20, 67 
3 / 
Επικτήτου. 

Ὅτῳ μετὰ ἀνατάσεως καὶ ἀπειλῆς ἐπιχειρεῖς, 
μέμνησο προλέγειν, ὅτι ἥμερος εἶ" καὶ οὐδὲν ἄγριον 
δράσας ἀμετανόητος καὶ ἀνεύθυνος διαγενήσῃ. 

1 For the obvious lacuna the best suggestions seem to be: 
ὅτι πρὸ τῆς ὥρας ἁρπάζεται (Cobet): ἐὰν δὲ γέρων τις ὧν μὴ 
τελευτᾷ τὸν βίον (Schweighiuser), καὶ οὗτος ἐγκαλεῖ τοῖς θεοῖς 


(Cobet). 
2 Meibom: προσήη or προσήει MSS. 


468 


FRAGMENTS 


feed and shelter it; and when I was younger, there 
was still another behest which it Jaid upon me, yet 
nevertheless [ endured it. Why,then, when Nature, 
which gave us our body, takes it away, do you not 
bear it?—I love it, says somebody.—Well, but as I 
was Just now saying, is it not Nature that has given 
you this very affection? But the same Nature also 
says, “Let it go now, and have no more trouble 
with it.” 


24 
The same 


If a man dies young, he blames the gods <because 
he is carried off before his time. But if a man fails 
to die when he is old, he too blames the gods), 
because, when it was long since time for him to rest, 
he has trouble; yet none the less, when death draws 
nigh, he wishes to live, and sends for the doctor, and 
implores him to spare no zealand pains. People are 
very strange, he used to say, wishing neither to live 
nor to die. 


25 
From Epictetus 


When you attack someone with vehemence and 
threatening, remember to tell yourself beforehand 
that you are a tame animal;! and then you will 
never do anything fierce, and so will come to the 
end of your life without having to repent, or to be 
called to account. 


4 See IV. 5, 10. 
469 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


26 (176). Marcus Aurelius, 4, 41 


? , 
Ψυχάριον εἶ βαστάζον νεκρόν, ws ‘Emixtytos 


27 (177). Marcus Aurelius, 11, 37 


Τέχνην ἔφη δὲ περὶ τὸ συγκατατίθεσθαι 
εὑρεῖν καὶ ἐν τῷ περὶ τὰς ὁρμὰς τόπῳ τὸ 
προσεκτικὸν φυλάσσειν, ἵνα μεθ᾽ ὑπεξαιρέσεως, 
ἵνα κοινωνικαί, ἵνα cat ἀξίαν, καὶ ὀρέξεως μὲν 
παντάπασιν ἀπέχεσθαι, ἐκκλίσει δὲ πρὸς μηδὲν 
τῶν οὐκ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν χρῆσθαι. 


28 (178). Marcus Aurelius, 11, 38 
᾿ \ a , Cy ” ᾿ \ e 9 , 
Οὐ περὶ τοῦ τυχόντος οὖν, ἔφη, ἐστὶν ὁ ἀγῶν, 
ἀλλὰ περὶ τοῦ μαίνεσθαι ἢ μή. 


28a. Marcus Aurelius, 11, 391 

Ὁ Σωκρώτης ἔλεγεν “τί θέλετε; λογικῶν 

ψυχὰς ἔχειν ἢ ἀλόγων ; " “ λογικῶν." “τίνων 
ns nm 4 al 3 z 
λογικῶν; ὑγιῶν ἢ davrtov;” “ὑγιῶν.᾽ “τί 
κῃ 3 n < 33 gg ὦ wv 399 ({ la Φ 4 

οὖν ov Cnteite;” “dre ἔχομεν." “τί οὖν μάχεσθε 
καὶ διαφέρεσθε; 


286. Marcus Aurelius, 4, 49, 2~6 2 


“CAruyns ἐγώ, ὅτι τοῦτό μοι συνέβη. οὐμε- 
νοῦν" ἀλλ᾽ " εὐτυχὴς ἐγώ, ὅτε τούτου μοι συμβε- 

* Ascribed to Epictetus by Leopold and Breithaupt. 

2 Convincingly assigned to Epictetus for many reasons, 
chiefly lexicographical, by H. Frankel, Philologus 80 (1924), 


221. I give the text of Schenkl (1913), with the quotation 
marks adjusted to the new interpretation. 


470 


FRAGMENTS 


26 


You are a little soul, carrying around a corpse, as 
Epictetus used to say. 


27 


We must discover, said he, an art that deals with 
assent, and in the sphere of the choices we must be 
careful to maintain close attention, that they be 
made with due reservations, that they be social, and 
that they be according to merit; and from desire we 
must refrain altogether, and must exercise aversion 
towards none of the things that are not under our 
control. 


28 


It is no ordinary matter that is at stake, said he, 
but it is a question of either madness or sanity. 


28 a 


Socrates used to say, “What do you want? To 
have souls of rational or irrational animals?”’ “Of 
rational animals.” “Of what kind of rational 
animals? Sound or vicious?’’ “Sound.” “ Why, 
then, do you not try to get them?” “ Because 
we have them.” “Why, then, do you strive and 
quarrel ?”’ | 

28 61 

« Me miserable, that this has befallen me!”’ Say 

not so, but rather, “ Fortunate that I am, because, 


1 This whole passage is taken to be a direct quotation 
from Epietetus, with the exception of the first two lines in 
the second paragraph, where Marcus Aurelius applies the 
doctrine to himself, and the last two lines, in which he 
characteristically condenses and summarizes it, 

47° 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


βηκότος ἄλυπος διατελῶ οὔτε ὑπὸ παρόντος 
θρανόμενος, οὔτε ἐπιὸν φοβούμενος. συμβῆναι 
μὲν γὰρ τὸ τοιοῦτον παντὶ ἐδύνωατο' ἄλυπος δὲ 
οὐ πᾶς ἐπὶ τούτῳ ἂν διετέλεσεν. διὰ τί οὖν 
ἐκεῖνο μᾶλλον ἀτύχημα ἢ τοῦτο εὐτύχημα; 
λέγεις δὲ ὅλως ἀτύχημα ἀνθρώπου, ὃ οὐκ ἔστιν 
ἀπότευγμα τῆς φύσεως τοῦ ἀνθρώπου; ἀπό- 
τευγμα δὲ τῆς φύσεως τοῦ ἀνθρώπου εἶναι δοκεῖ 
σοί, ὃ μὴ παρὰ τὸ βούλημα τῆς φύσεως αὐτοῦ 
ἐστί; τί οὖν; τὸ βούλημα μεμάθηκας. μή τί 
οὖν τὸ συμβεβηκὸς τοῦτο κωλύει σε δίκαιον 
εἶναι, μεγαλόψυχον, σώφρονα, ἔμφρονα, ἀπρό- 
Trwtov, ἀδιάψευστον, αἰδήμονα, ἐλεύθερον, τἄλ- 
λα, ὧν συμπαρόντων ἡ φύσις ἡ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου 
ἀπέχει τὰ ἴδια ;᾿ 

Μέμνησο λοιπὸν ἐπὶ παντὸς τοῦ εἰς λύπην 
σε προαγομένου, τούτῳ χρῆσθαι τῷ δόγματι" 
“οὐχ ὅτι τοῦτο ἀτύχημα, ἀλλὰ τὸ φέρειν αὐτὸ 
γενναίως εὐτύχημα." 


FRAGMENTA DUBIA ET 
SPURIA 


29 (77). Stobaeus, ITI. 35, 101 
‘Ex τοῦ ᾿Εἰπικτήτου ἐγχειριδίου. 


Μηδενὸς οὕτως ἐν παντὶ προνόει, ὡς τοῦ 
ἀσφαλοῦς" ἀσφαλέστερον γὰρ τοῦ λέγειν τὸ 
σιγᾶν" ἐᾶν δὲ τὸ λέγειν, ὅσα δίχα ἔσται νοῦ 
καὶ ψόγον μεστά.3 

* These words are not found in the Encheiridion, and may 
very possibly not be by Epictetus at all. 
472 


DOUBTFUL AND SPURIOUS FRAGMENTS 


although this has befallen me, I continue to live 
untroubled, being neither crushed by the present 
nor afraid of the future.” For something of this 
kind might have befallen anyone; but not everyone 
would have continued to live untroubled by it, 
Why, then, count the former aspect of the matter 
a misfortune, rather than this latter good fortune? 
And in general do you call a man’s misfortune that 
which is not an aberration from man’s nature? And 
does that seem to you to be an aberration from the 
nature of man which does not contravene the will of 
his nature? What then? This will of man’s nature 
you have already learned; this, then, which has be- 
fallen you does not prevent you, does it, from being 
just, high-minded, self-controlled, self-possessed, 
deliberate, free from deceit, self-respecting, free, 
and everything else, the possession of which enables 
the nature of man to come into its own? 

Remember for the future, whenever anything begins 
fo trouble you, to make use of the folloning judgement : 
This thing is not a misfortune, but to bear it ina 
noble spirit is good fortune. 


DOUBTFUL AND SPURIOUS 
FRAGMENTS 


29 


From the Encheiridion of Epictetus 


Under all circumstances take thought of nothing 
so much as safety; for it is safer to keep silence 
than to speak; and refrain from saying what will 
be devoid of sense and full of censure. 


* Supplied by Hense. 


4 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


30 (89). Stobaeus, IV. 46, 221 
[Ἐπικτήτου. 
Οὔτε ναῦν ἐξ ἑνὸς ἀγκυρίου οὔτε βίον ἐκ μιᾶς 
ἐλπίδος ἁρμοστέον. 
31 (90). Stobaeus, IV. 46, 28 
Τοῦ αὐτοῦ. 
Kal τοῖς σκέλεσι καὶ ταῖς ἐλπίσι τὰ δυνατὰ 
δεῖ διαβαίνειν. 


32 (92). Stobaeus, IV. 53, 27 2 
[Επικτήτου.] 


Ψυχὴν σώματος ἀναγκαιότερον ἰᾶσθαι' τοῦ 
γὰρ κακῶς ζῆν τὸ τεθνάναι κρεῖσσον. 


38 (64). Stobaeus, III. 6, 59. Democritus, frag. 
232 (Diels) 
[Tod αὐτοῦ ([Ἐπικλήτου) 3 
“Τῶν ἡδέων τὰ σπανιώτατα γινόμενα μάλιστα 
τέρπει. 


34 (55). Stobaeus, III. 6, 60, Democritus, frag. 
233 (Diels) 
Tod αὐτοῦ. 
Ei τις ὑπερβάλλοι τὸ μέτριον, τὰ ἐπιτερπέσ- 
Tata ἀτερπέστατα ἂν γίνοιτο." 


1 This and the next fragment probably belong to the 
collection of Aristonymus. 
* Variously ascribed elsewhere. 


474 


DOUBTFUL AND SPURIOUS FRAGMENTS 


30 
From Epictetus 


We ought neither to fasten our ship to one small 
anchor nor our life to a single hope. 


91 
From the same 
We ought to measure both the length of our 
stride, and the extent of our hope, by what is 
possible. 
32 
From Epictetus 


It is much more necessary to cure the soul than 
the body; for death is better than a bad life. 


33 
From the same 


Those of our pleasures which come most rarely 
give the greatest delight. 


94 
From the same 


If a man should overpass the mean, the most 
delightful things would become least delightful. 


* Soin Florileyium, Cod. Paris. 1168 [5600 ἘΠ. The frag- 
ment belongs to Democritus. 
4 Burchard: γίγνοιτο or γένοιτο MSS. The fragment 
belongs to Democritus. 


475 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


35 (114). Florilegium, Cod. Paris. 1168 [501 E] 
Οὐδεὶς ἐλεύθερος ἑαυτοῦ μὴ κρατῶν. 


96 (140). Antonius, 1, 21? 
᾿Αθάνατον χρῆμα ἡ ἀλήθεια καὶ ἀΐδιον, 
παρέχει δὲ ἡμῖν οὐ κάλλος χρόνῳ μαραινόμενον 
οὔτε παρρησίαν adarpetny® ὑπὸ δίκης, ἀλλὰ 
τὰ δίκαια καὶ τὰ νόμιμα διακρίνουσα ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν 
τὰ ἄδικα καὶ ἀπελέγχουσα. 
1 In Stobaeus the maxim is aseribed to Pythagoras. 


* The style of this fragment is alien to Epictetus. 
3 Kronenberg: ddapetrny MS. 


476 


DOUBTFUL AND SPURIOUS FRAGMENTS 


35 


No man is free who is not master of himself. 


36 


The truth is something immortal and eternal, and 
does not present us with a beauty that withers from 
the passage of time, nor a freedom of speech which 
can be taken away by justice, but it presents us 
with what is just and lawful, distinguishing the 
unlawful therefrom, and refuting it. 


477 


THE ENCHEIRIDION, OR MANUAL 


Tuts celebrated work is a compilation made by 
Arrian himself from the Discourses, and the great 
majority of those who know Epictetus at all have 
come to do so from this little book alone. That is 
a pity, because the necessary aridity and formalism 
of such a systematization obscure the more modest, 
human, and sympathetic aspects of the great 
teacher’s character. Most of the unfavourable 
criticism which has been passed upon Epictetus— 
and there is some of this, although not much—is 
clearly based upon the occasionally somewhat in- 
adequate impressions which any compendium must 
produce. For it may be doubted whether even 
so noble a statement as the Apostles’ Creed has ever 
made a single convert. 

Occasionally Arrian has modified to a slight degree 
the form of statement, as we may observe from the 
numerous instances, amounting to somewhat more 
than half of the book, where material from the first 
four books of the Discourses has been employed ; 
but the substance seems to have been faithfully 
preserved, wherever it is possible to follow his 
procedure in detail. ; 

The separate editions and translations of the 
Encheiridion! are extremely numerous. Few, how- 

1 Those who are curious about bibliographical information 


may be referred to a separate study, Contributions toward 
a Biblivyrapy of Hvictetus, Urbana, Illinois, 1927. 


479 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ever, have been of any notable value, except, per- 
haps, the celebrated translations by Politian and 
Leopardi, and Schweighiuser's separate edition of 
1798,! which is still the last independent critical 
text,2 and has been reprinted by most subsequent 
editors, even Schenkl, although the latter has added 
much useful critical material in his notes, especially 
those which indicate the probable sources of such 
passages as seem to be derived from the four 
books of the Dzéscourses, and in particular has 
arranged the apparatus criticus in more convenient 
terms. 

The sigla which Schenk] has devised for Schweig- 
hiuser’s apparatus, and which may occasionally be 
employed below, are the following: 


A MSS. in which portions of the Enchetridion 
precede the corresponding commentary of 
Simplicius. 


Ὗ The ed. of 1528. 


1 For some unknown reason Schweighduser in his 
Epicteteae Philosophi @ 111. 1729, renradneed, 
Dpton’s τοῦς atistactory text. 

2 One reason for this delay is the extremely large number 
of MSS. involved, not merely of the work itself, but of the 
two Christian paraphrases and of the huge commentary by 
Simplicius, which is more than ten times the bulk of the 
original. The texts of these must first be critically deter- 
mined before their value for the Encheiridion can be esti- 
mated, so that in reality four works instead of one have 
to be edited from the very foundations. Another is the 
very slight probability that any really notable contributions 
to knowledge might result therefrom. As an intellectual 
problem the preparation of a new edition of the Hncheiridion 
presents certain interesting features, but as ‘a practical 
undertaking it is outranked by a good many other possible 
investigations. 


480 


THE ENCHEIRIDION, OR MANUAL 


B 


MSS. in which the entire Encheiridion pre- 
cedes the commentary of Simplicius. 

MSS. containing the Lnchewridion alone. 

The edition of Trincavelli (1535). 

MSS. of Class B which exhibit the text of the 
Encheiridion (frequently abbreviated) as 
lemmata before the commentary of Sim- 
plicius. 

unus. 

nonnulli. 

singuli. 

The LEncheiridion in the paraphrase of St. 
Nilus (Schweighduser, V. 95-138). 

The Encheiridion in the anonymous Christian 
paraphrase (Schweighduser, V. 1-94). 


1 


£ 


ἘΠΙΚΤΉΤΟΥ EPXEIPIAION 


a > δ᾽ A Ν Ν 
ο, 1. Τῶν ὄντων τὰ μέν ἐστιν ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν, τὰ δὲ 
“ A t ¢ Sf oof 
οὐκ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν. ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν μὲν ὑπόληψις, ὁρμή, ὄρεξις, 
, 93? 
ἔκκλισις καὶ ἑνὶ λόγῳ ὅσα ἡμέτερα ἔργα" οὐκ ἐφ 
ec ” Ν Ν a t fo) f 3 Ν Ἀ ey 
ἡμῖν δὲ τὸ σῶμα, ἡ κτῆσις, δόξαι, ἀρχαὶ Kai ἑνὶ 
\ 343 
λόγῳ ὅσα οὐχ ἡμέτερα ἔργα. Kal τὰ μὲν ἐφ 
“ ᾿ ; 
ἡμῖν ἐστὶ φύσει ἐλεύθερα, ἀκώλυτα, ἀπαραπό- 
διστα, τὰ δὲ οὐκ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν ἀσθενῆ, δοῦλα, κωλυτά, 
ἀλλότρια. μέμνησο οὖν, ὅτι, ἐὰν τὰ φύσει δοῦλα 
ἐλεύθερα οἰηθῆς καὶ τὰ ἀλλότρια ἴδια, ἐμποδισ- 
; n \ 
θήσῃ, πενθήσεις, ταραχθήσῃ, μέμψῃ καὶ θεοὺς 
Ἀ > f 2X \ Ν Ἁ ? 3 * Ν 
καὶ ἀνθρώπους, ἐὰν δὲ τὸ σὸν μόνον οἰηθῇς σὸν 
εἶναι, τὸ δὲ ἀλλότριον, ὥσπερ ἐστίν, ἀλλότριον, 
3 ’ 3 ¢ 3 / 3 , A 
οὐδείς σε ἀναγκάσει οὐδέποτε, οὐδείς σε κωλύσει, 
᾿ / 3 / 32 3 ‘a 3» 
οὐ μέμψῃ οὐδένα, οὐκ ἐγκαλέσεις τινί, ἄκων 
/ "δὲ ef 3 θ \ > Ψ 1 "ὃ ᾽ 
πράξεις οὐδὲ ἕν, ἐχθρὸν οὐχ ἕξεις, οὐδείς σε 
βλάψει, οὐδὲ γὰρ βλαβερόν τι πείσῃ. 
/ mn 
Τηλικούτων οὖν ἐφιέμενος μέμνησο, ὅτι οὐ δεῖ 
μετρίως κεκινημένον ἅπτεσθαι αὐτῶν, ἀλλὰ τὰ 


- 


1 This is the order for the last phrase in Nil. All other 
authorities put it after βλάψει. 


482 


THE ENCHEIRIDION OF 
EPICTETUS 


1. Some things are under our control, while others 
are not under our control. Under our control are 
conception, choice, desire, aversion, and, in a word, 
everything that is our own doing; not under our 
control are our body, our property, reputation, office, 
and, in a word, everything that is not our own 
doing. Furthermore, the things under our control 
are by nature free, unhindered, and unimpeded ; 
while the things not under our control are weak, 
servile, subject to hindrance, and not our own. 
Remember, therefore, that if what is naturally 
slavish you think to be free, and what is not your 
own to be your own, you will be hampered, will 
grieve, will be in turmoil, and will blame both 
gods and men; while if you think only what 
is your own to be your own, and what is not 
your own to be, as it really is, not your own, then 
no one will ever be able to exert compulsion upon 
_ you, no one will hinder you, you will blame no one, 
will find fault with no one, will do absolutely 
nothing against your will, you will have no personal 
enemy, no one will harm you, for neither is there 
any harm that can touch you. 

With stich high aims, therefore, remember that 
you must bestir yourself with no slight effort to lay 
hold of them, but you will have to give up some 


483 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


μὲν ἀφιέναι παντελῶς, τὰ δ᾽ ὑπερτίθεσθαι πρὸς 
τὸ παρόν. ἐὰν δὲ καὶ ταῦτ᾽ ἐθέλῃς καὶ ἄρχειν 
καὶ πλουτεῖν, τυχὸν μὲν οὐδ᾽ αὐτῶν τούτων τεύξῃ 
διὰ τὸ καὶ τῶν προτέρων ἐφίεσθαι, πάντως γε 
μὴν ἐκείνων ἀποτεύξῃ, δι’ ὧν μόνων ἐλευθερία καὶ 
εὐδαιμονία περιγίνεται. 

δ Εὐθὺς οὖν πάσῃ φαντασίᾳ τραχείᾳ μελέτα 
ἐπιλέγειν ὅτι “ φαντασία εἶ καὶ οὐ πάντως τὸ 
φαινόμενον." ἔπειτα ἐξέταξε αὐτὴν καὶ δοκίμαξε 
τοῖς κανόσι τούτοις οἷς ἔχεις, πρώτῳ δὲ τούτῳ 
καὶ μάλιστα, πότερον περὶ τὰ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν ἐστὶν 
ἢ περὶ τὰ οὐκ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν' κἂν περί τι τῶν οὐκ ἐφ᾽ 
ἡμῖν ἦ, πρόχειρον ἔστω τὸ διότι “ οὐδὲν πρὸς 
éué.” 

1 c.2. Μέμνησο, ὅτι ὀρέξεως ἐπαγγελία ἐπι- 
τυχία! οὗ dpéyn, ἐκκλίσεως ἐπαγγελία τὸ μὴ 
περιπεσεῖν ἐκείνῳ ὃ ἐκκλίνεται, καὶ ὁ μὲν ἐν 
ὀρέξει ἀποτυγχάνων ἀτυχής, ὁ δὲ ἐν ® ἐκκλίσει 
περιπίπτων δυστυχής. ἂν μὲν οὖν μόνα ἐκκλίνῃς 
τὰ παρὰ φύσιν τῶν ἐπὶ col, οὐδενί, ὧν ἐκκλίνεις, 
περιπεσῇ' νόσον δ᾽ ἂν ἐκκλίνῃς ἢ θάνατον ἢ 

3 πενίαν, δυστυχήσεις. ἄρον οὖν τὴν ἔκκλισιν 
ἀπὸ πάντων τῶν οὐκ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν καὶ μετάθες ἐπὶ 
τὰ παρὰ φύσιν τῶν ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν. τὴν ὄρεξιν δὲ 
παντελῶς ἐπὶ τοῦ παρόντος ἄνελε' ἄν τε γὰρ 
ὀρέγῃ τῶν οὐκ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν τινός, ἀτυχεῖν ἀνάγκη, 

1 Nil, alone: ἐστὶν ἐπιτυχία AD, ἐστὶ τὸ ἐπιτυχεῖν O, τὸ 


ἐπιτυχεῖν Β (τυχεῖν Par., τὸ τυχεῖν Simpl.). 
2 Nil. C un. 2 Nil. alone. 





1 The remark, as many others of the admonitions, is 
addressed to a student or a beginner. 


484 


THE ENCHEIRIDION OF EPICTETUS 


things entirely, and defer others for the time being. 
But if you wish for these things also, and at the 
same time for both office and wealth, it may be that 
you will not get even these latter, because you aim 
also at the former, and certainly you will fail to 
get the former, which alone bring freedom and 
happiness. 

Make it, therefore, your study at the very outset 
to say to every harsh external impression, “ You 
are an external impression and not at all what you 
appear to be.” After that examine it and test it 
by these rules which you have, the first and most 
important of which is this: Whether the impression 
has to do with the things which are under our con- 
trol, or with those which are not under our con- 
trol; and, if it has to do with some one of the 
things not under our control, have ready to hand 
the answer, “It is nothing to me.” 

2. Remember that the promise of desire is the 
attainment of what you desire, that of aversion is not 
to fall into what is avoided, and that he who fails 
in his desire is unfortunate, while he who falls into 
what he would avoid experiences misfortune. If, 
then, you avoid only what is unnatural among those 
things which are under your control, you will fall 
into none of the things which you avoid; but if you 
try to avoid disease, or death, or poverty, you will 
experience misfortune. Withdraw, therefore, your 
aversion from all the matters that are not under our 
control, and transfer it to what is unnatural among 
those which are under our control. But for the time 
being + remove utterly your desire; for if you desire 
some one of the things that are not under our con- 
trol you are bound to be unfortunate; and, at the 


485 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


τῶν τε ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν, ὅσων ὀρέγεσθαι καλὸν ἄν, οὐδὲν 

οὐδέπω σοι πάρεστι. μόνῳ δὲ τῷ ὁρμᾶν καὶ 
ἀφορμᾶν χρῶ, κούφως μέντοι καὶ μεθ᾽ ὑπεξαιρέ- 
σεως καὶ ἀνειμένως. 

ο, ὃ, "Ep ἑκάστου τῶν ψυχαγωγούντων ἢ 
χρείαν παρεχόντων ἢ στεργομένων μέμνησο 
ἐπιλέγειν, ὁποῖόν ἐστιν, ἀπὸ τῶν σμικροτάτων 
ἀρξάμενος. ἂν χύτραν στέργῃς, ὅτι “χύτραν 
στέργω Ms κατεαγείσης γὰρ αὐτῆς οὐ ταραχθήσῃ. 
ἂν παιδίον σαυτοῦ καταφιλῇς ἢ γυναῖκα, ὅτι 
ἄνθρωπον καταφιλεῖς: ἀποθανόντος γὰρ οὐ 
ὠὰ 

c. 4. Ὅταν ἅπτεσθαί τινος ἔργου μέλλῃς, 
ὑπομίμνῃσκε σεαυτόν, ὁποῖόν ἐστι τὸ ἔργον. 
ἐὰν λουσόμενος ἀπίῃς, TpoBarnre σεαυτῷ τὰ 
γινόμενα ἐν βαλανείῳ, τοὺς ἀπορραίνοντας, τοὺς 
ἐγκρονομένους, τοὺς λοιδοροῦντας, τοὺς κλέπτον- 
τας. καὶ οὕτως ἀσφαλέστερον ἅψῃ τοῦ ἔργου, 
ἐὰν ἐπιλέγῃς εὐθὺς ὅτι “ λούσασθαι θέλω καὶ 
τὴν ἐμαυτοῦ προαίρεσιν κατὰ φύσιν ἔχουσαν 
τηρῆσαι." καὶ ὡσαύτως ἐφ᾽ ἑκάστου ἔργου. 
οὕτω yap ἄν τι πρὸς τὸ λούσασθαι γένηται 
ἐμποδών, πρόχειρον ἔσται διότι “ἀλλ᾽ οὐ τοῦτο 
ἤθελον μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὴν ἐμαυτοῦ προαίρεσιν 
κατὰ φύσιν ἐ ἔχουσαν τηρῆσαι! οὐ τηρήσω δέ, ἐὰν 
ἀγανακτῶ πρὸς τὰ γινόμενα." 

c. 5. “Ταράσσει τοὺς ἀνθρώπους οὐ τὰ πράγ- 
ματα, ἀλλὰ τὰ περὶ τῶν πραγμάτων δόγματα" 





1 See M. Aurelius, 1, 4, where Mr. Haines (in 2.0..}.) 
suggests that the reference is to some such reservations as 


486 


THE ENCHEIRIDION OF EPICTETUS 


same time, not one of the things that are under our 
control, which it would be excellent for you to 
desire, is within your grasp. But employ only 
choice and refusal, and these too but lightly, and 
with reservations, and without straining. 

3. With everything which entertains you, is useful, 
or of which you are fond, remember to say to your- 
self, beginning with the very least things, “ What is 
its nature?”’ If you are fond of a jug, say, “I am 
fond of a jug”; for when it is broken you will not 
be disturbed. If you kiss your own child or wife, 
say to yourself that you are kissing a human being; 
for when it dies you will not be disturbed. 

4, When you are on the point of putting your 
hand to some undertaking, remind yourself what 
the nature of that undertaking is. If you are going 
out of the house to bathe, put before your mind 
what happens at a public bath—those who splash 
you with water, those who jostle against you, those 
who vilify you and rob you. And thus you will 
set about your undertaking more securely if at 
the outset you say to yourself, “I want to take 
a bath, and, at the same time, to keep my moral 
purpose in harmony with nature.” And so do in 
every undertaking. For thus, if anything happens 
to hinder you in your bathing, you will be ready to 
say, ‘Oh, well, this was not the only thing that I 
wanted, but I wanted also to keep my moral pur- 
pose in harmony with nature; and I shall not so 
keep it if I am vexed at what is going on.” 

5. It is not the things themselves that disturb 
men, but their judgements about these things. For 


recommended in James iv. 15: ‘‘ For that ye ought to say is, 
Tf the Lord will,.we shall live, and do this, or that.” 
487 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


οἷον ὁ θάνατος οὐδὲν δεινόν, ἐπεὶ καὶ Σωκράτει 
ἂν ἐφαίνετο, ἀλλὰ τὸ δόγμα τὸ περὶ τοῦ θανάτου, 
διότι δεινόν, ἐκεῖνο τὸ δεινόν ἐστιν. ὅταν οὖν 
ἐμποδιζώμεθα ἢ ταρασσώμεθα ἢ δλυπώμεθα, 
μηδέποτε ἄλλον αἰτιώμεθα, GAN ἑαυτούς, τοῦτ᾽ 
ἔστι τὰ ἑαυτῶν δόγματα. ἀπαιδεύτου ἔργον τὸ 
of + μὰ S52 3 Ν ͵ al ὦ 
ἄλλοις ἐγκαλεῖν, ἐφ οἷς αὐτὸς πράσσει κακῶς 
ἠργμένου παιδεύεσθαι τὸ ἑαυτῷ' πεπαιδευμένου 
τὸ UATE ἄλλῳ μήτε ἑαυτῷ. 

c. 6. Ἐπὶ μηδενὶ ἐπαρθῇς ἀλλοτρίῳ προτερή- 
ματι. εἰ ὁ ἵππος ἐπαιρόμενος ἔλεγεν ὅτι “ καλός 
εἰμι," oloroy ἂν ἣν: σὺ δέ, ὅταν λέγῃς ἐπαιρό- 
μενος ὅτε “ἵππον καλὸν ἔχω, ἴσθι, ὅτι ἐπὶ 
ἵππου ἀγαθῷ ἐπαίρῃ. τί οὗῃ ἐστὶ cov; χρῆσις 
φαντασιῶν. ὥσθ᾽, ὅταν ἐν χρήσει φαντασιῶν 
κατὰ φύσιν σχῆς, τηνικαῦτα ἐπάρθητι' τότε 
γὰρ ἐπὶ σῷ τινὶ ἀγαθῷ ἐπαρθήσῃ. 

c. 7. Καθάπερ ἐν πλῷ τοῦ πλοίου καθορμιο- 
θέντος εἰ ἐξέλθοις ὑρεύσασθαι, ὁδοῦ μὲν πάρερ- 
yov καὶ κοχλίδιον ἀναλέξῃ καὶ βολβάριον, 
τετάσθαι δὲ δεῖ τὴν διάνοιαν ἐπὶ τὸ πλοῖον καὶ 
συνεχῶς ἐπιστρέφεσθαι, μή ποτε ὁ κυβερνήτης 
καλέσῃ, κἂν καλέσῃ, πάντα ἐκεῖνα ἀφιέναι, ἵνα 
μὴ δεδεμένος ἐμβληθῆς ὡς τὰ πρόβατα’ οὕτω 
καὶ ἐν τῷ βίῳ, ἐὰν διδῶται ἀντὶ βολβαρίου καὶ 
κοχλιδίου γυναικάριον καὶ παιδίον, οὐδὲν κωλύσ ει" 
ἐὰν δὲ ὁ κυβερνήτης καλέσῃ, τρέχε ἐπὶ τὸ πλοῖον 


1 Upton, after Simplicius : ὕσπῳ practically all MSS. 





1 The Greeks ate a good many different bulbous plants, 
as we use a variety of different plants for “ὁ greens.”’ 


488 


THE ENCHEIRIDION OF EPICTETUS 


example, death is nothing dreadful, or else Socrates 
too would have thought so, but the judgement 
that death is dreadful, ἐλ is the dreadful thing. 
When, therefore, we are hindered, or disturbed, 
or grieved, let us never blame anyone but our- 
selves, that means, our own judgements. It is 
the part of an uneducated person to blame others 
where he himself fares ill; to blame himself is the 
part of one whose education has begun; to blame 
neither another nor his own self is the part of one 
whose education is already complete. 

6. Be not elated at any excellence which is not 
your own. If the horse in his elation were to say, 
“T am beautiful,” it could be endured; but when 
you say in your elation, “1 have a beautiful horse,” 
rest assured that you are elated at something good 
which belongs to a horse. What, then, is your 
own? The use of external impressions. There- 
fore, when you are in harmony with nature in the 
use of external impressions, then be elated; for 
then it will be some good of your own at which you 
will be elated. 

7. Just as on a voyage, when your ship has 
anchored, if you should go on shore to get fresh 
water, you may pick up a small shell-fish or little 
bulb! on the way, but you have to keep your atten- 
tion fixed on the ship, and turn about frequently for 
fear lest the captain should call; and if he calls, you 
must give up all these things, if you would escape 
being thrown on board all tied up like the sheep. 
So it is also in life: If there be given you, instead 
of a little bulb and a small shell-fish, a little wife 
and child, there will be no objection to that; only, 
if the Captain calls, give up all these things and run 


489 


1 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


΄ ὟΝ 4 
ἀφεὶς ἐκεῖνα ἅπαντα μηδὲ ἐπιστρεφόμενος. ἐὰν de 


γέρων ἧς, μηδὲ ἀπαλλαγῇς ποτὲ τοῦ πλοίου 
μακράν, μή ποτε καλοῦντος ἐλλύπηῃς. 

c. 8, Μὴ ζήτει τὰ γινόμενα γίνεσθαι ὡς θέλεις, 
ἀλλὰ θέλε τὰ γινόμενα ὡς γίνεται καὶ εὐροήσεις. 

c. 9. Νόσος σώματός ἐστιν ἐμπόδιον, qT poatpe- 
σεως δὲ οὔ, ἐὰν μὴ αὐτὴ θέλῃ. χώλανσις σκέλους 
ἐστὶν ἐμπόδιον, προαιρέσεως δὲ οὔ. καὶ τοῦτο 
ἐφ᾽ ἑκάστου τῶν ἐμπιπτόντων ἐπίλεγε' εὑρήσεις 
γὰρ αὐτὸ ἄλλου τινὸς ἐμπόδιον, σὸν δὲ οὔ. 

10. Ἐφ᾽ ἑκάστου τῶν προσπιπτόντων μέ- 
μνῆσο ἐπιστρέφων ἐπὶ σεαυτὸν ζητεῖν, τίνα δύνα- 
μιν ἔχεις πρὸς τὴν χρῆσιν αὐτοῦ. ἐὰν καλὸν ἴδης 
ἢ καλήν, εὑρήσεις δύναμιν πρὸς ταῦτα ἐγκράτειαν" 
ἐὰν πόνος προσφέρηται, εὑρήσεις καρτερίαν' ἂν 
λοιδορία, εὑρήσεις ἀνεξικακίαν. καὶ οὕτως ἐθεζό- 
μενὸν σε οὐ συναρπάσουσιν αἱ φαντασίαι. 

6, 11. Μηδέποτε ἐπὶ μηδενὸς εἴπῃς ὅτε “ ἀπώ- 
λεσα AUTO, ἀλλ᾽ Ste “ἀπέδωκα. τὸ παιδίον 
ἀπέθανεν ; ἀπεδόθη. ἡ γυνὴ ἀπέθανεν; ἀπεδόθη. 

“τὸ χωρίον ἀφῃρέθην." οὐκοῦν καὶ τοῦτο ἀπε- 

δόθη. “ἀλλὰ κακὸς ὁ ἀφελόμενος." τί δὲ σοὶ 
μέλει, διὰ τίνος σε ὁ δοὺς ἀπήτησε; μέχρι δ᾽ 
ἂν διδῷ, ὡς ἀλλοτρίου αὐτοῦ ἐπιμελοῦ, ὡς τοῦ 
πανδοχείου οἱ παριόντες. 

9,12, Ei προκόψαι θέλεις, ἄφες τοὺς Τοιούτους 


490 


THE ENCHEIRIDION OF EPICTETUS 


to the ship, without even turning around to look 
back. And if you are an old man, never even get 
very far away from the ship, for fear that when He 
calls you may be missing. 

8. Do not seek to have everything that happens 
happen as you wish, but wish for everything to 
happen as it actually does happen, and your life will 
be serene. 

9. Disease is an impediment to the body, but not 
to the moral purpose, unless that consents. Lameness 
is an impediment to the leg, but not to the moral 
purpose. And say this to yourself at each thing 
that befalls you; for you wil] find the thing to be an 
impediment to something else, but not to yourself. 

10. In the case of everything that befalls you, 
remember to turn to yourself and see what faculty 
you have to deal with it. Ifyou see a handsome 
lad or woman, you will find continence the faculty 
to employ here; if hard labour is laid upon you, 
you will find endurance; if reviling, you will find 
patience to bear evil. And if you habituate your- 
self in this fashion, your external impressions will 
not run away with you. 

11. Never say about anything, ‘I have lost it,” 
but only “I have given it back.”’ Is your child dead ? 
It has been given back. Is your wife dead? She 
has been given back. “I have had my farm taken 
away.” Very well, this too has been given back. 
“Yet it was a rascal who took it away.” But what 
concern is it of yours by whose instrumentality the 
Giver called for its return? So long as He gives 
it you, take care of it as of a thing that is not your 
own, as travellers treat their inn. 

12. If you wish to make progress, dismiss all 


401 


4 nm % 
ἐπιλογισμούς. “ ἐὰν ἀμελήσω τῶν ἐμῶν, οὐχ 
δι ‘ al 
ἕξω Siatpodds”: “ἐὰν μὴ κολάσω τὸν παῖδα, 

χὰ Ν [οὶ Ἴ wn 
πονηρὸς ἔσται. κρεῖσσον yap λιμῷ ἀποθανεῖν 
Ὁ, ἴω Ἵ f 
ἄλυπον καὶ ἄφοβον γενόμενον ἢ ζῆν ἐν ἀφθόνοις 
“ \ a \ 
ταρασσόμενον. κρεῖττον δὲ τὸν παῖδα κακὸν 
a! + ‘ 
εἶναι ἢ σὲ κακοδαίμονα. ἄρξαι τοιγαροῦν ἀπο 
a a δι / 
τῶν σμικρῶν. ἐκχεῖται TO ἐλάδιον, κλέπτεται 
τὸ οἰνάριον' ἐπίλεγε ὅτι “τοσούτου πωλεῖται 
3 t / 3 ) 49 nN Ν δὲ 
ἀπάθεια, τοσούτου ἀταραξία". προῖκα δὲ οὐδὲν 
περιγίνεται. ὅταν δὲ καλῇς τὸν παῖδα, ἐνθυμοῦ, 
/ Lal ἕ 
ὅτε δύναται μὴ ὑπακοῦσαι καὶ ὑπακούσας μηδὲν 
io x f 3 ? 3 A > Ν + om 
ποιῆσαι ὧν θέλεις" GAN οὐχ οὕτως ἐστὶν αὐτῷ 
καλῶς, ἵνα ἐπ᾽ ἐκείνῳ ἡ τὸ σὲ μὴ ταραχθῆναι. 
9. 18. Ei προκόψαι θέλεις, ὑπόμεινον ἕνεκα τῶν 
\ / 
ἐκτὸς ἀνόητος δόξας καὶ ἠλίθιος, μηδὲν βούλου 
δοκεῖν ἐπίστασθαι: κἂν δόξης τις εἶναί τισιν, 
/ Ν' ᾿ 
ἀπίστει σεαυτῷ. ἴσθι γὰρ ὅτι οὐ ῥᾷάδιον τὴν 
7 fe) \ 
προαίρεσιν» τὴν σεαυτοῦ κατὰ φύσιν ἔχουσαν 
, a \ 3 f > \ a e 7 3 
φυλάξαι καὶ τὰ ἐκτός, ἀλλὰ TOD ἑτέρου ἐπι- 
ἢ ry “ ἴω 
μελούμενον τοῦ ἑτέρου ἀμελῆσαι πᾶσα ἀνάγκη. 
1 α. 14, ᾽Εὰν θέλῃς τὰ τέκνα cov καὶ τὴν γυναῖκα 
ἈΝ \ ΄ δᾺ f 
καὶ τοὺς φίλους σου πάντοτε ζῆν, ἠλίθιος εἶ" 
\ \ \ 32 Ν \ lA 2 4 \ > \ \ 
Ta γὰρ μὴ ἐπὶ σοὶ θέλεις ἐπὶ σοὶ εἶναι καὶ τὰ 
id A 4] “ 
ἀλλότρια σὰ εἷἶναι' οὕτω κἂν τὸν παῖδα θέλῃς 
\ ¢ 7 
μὴ ἁμαρτάνειν, μωρὸς εἶ: θέλεις γὰρ τὴν κακίαν 


[Ὁ 





1 That is, the slave-boy would be in a remarkable position 
of advantage if his master’s peace of mind depended, not 


upon the master himself, but upon the actions of his 
slave-boy. 


492 


THE ENCHEIRIDION OF EPICTETUS 


reasoning of this sort: “If I neglect my affairs, I 
shall have nothing to live on.” “If I do not punish 
my slave-boy he will turn out bad.” For it is 
better to die of hunger, but in a state of freedom 
from grief and fear, than to live in plenty, but 
troubled in mind. And it is better for your slave- 
boy to be bad than for you to be unhappy. Begin, 
therefore, with the little things. Your paltry oil 
gets spilled, your miserable wine stolen; say to 
yourself, “ This is the price paid for a calm spirit, 
this the price for peace of mind.”’ Nothing is got 
without a price. And when you call your slave-boy, 
bear in mind that it is possible he may not heed you, 
and again, that even if he does heed, he may not do 
what yot want done. But he is not in so happy a 
condition that your peace of mind depends upon him. 

13. If you wish to make progress, then be con- 
tent to appear senseless and foolish in externals, do 
not make it your wish to give the appearance of 
knowing anything ; and if some people think you to 
be an important personage, distrust yourself. For 
be assured that it is no easy matter to keep your 
moral purpose in a state of conformity with nature, 
and, at the same time, to keep externals; but the man 
who devotes his attention to one of these two things 
must inevitably neglect the other, 

14. If you make it your will that your children 
and your wife and your friends should live for ever, 
you are silly; for you are making it your will that 
things not under your control should be under your 
control, and that what is not your own should be your 
own. In’the same way, too, if you make it your will 
that your slave-boy be free from faults, you are a 
fool; for you are making it your will that vice be not 


493 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


μὴ εἶναι κακίαν, GAN ἄνλο τι, ἐὰν δὲ θέλῃς 
ὀρεγόμενος μὴ ἀποτυγχάνειν, τοῦτο δύνασαι. 
τοῦτο οὖν ἄσκει, ὃ δύνασαι. κύριος ἑκάστου 
ἐστὶν 6 τῶν ὑπ᾽ ἐκείνου θελομένων ἢ μὴ θελο- 
μένων ἔχων τὴν ἐξουσίαν εἰς τὸ περιποιῆσαι ἢ 
ἀφελέσθαι. ὅστις οὖν ἐλεύθερος εἶναι βούλεται, 
μήτε θελέτω τι μήτε φευγέτω Te τῶν ἐπ᾽ ἄλλοις" 
εἰ δὲ μή, δουλεύειν ἀνάγκη. 

ec 15. Μέμνησο, ὅτι ὡς ἐν συμποσίῳ σε δεῖ 
ἀναστρέφεσθαι. περιφερόμενον γέγονέ τι κατὰ 
σέ' ἐκτείνας τὴν χεῖρα κοσμίως μετάλαβε. πα- 
ρέρχεται' μὴ κάτεχε. οὕπω Tee μὴ ἐπίβαλλε 
πόρρω τὴν ὄρεξιν, ἀλλὰ περίμενε, μέχρις ἂν 
γένηται κατὰ σέ. οὕτω πρὸς τέκνα, οὕτω πρὸς 
γυναῖκα, οὕτω πρὸς ἀρχάς, οὕτω πρὸς πλοῦτον" 
καὶ ἔσῃ ποτὲ ἄξιος τῶν θεῶν συμπότης. ἂν δὲ 
καὶ παρατεθέντων σοι μὴ λάβῃς, ἀλλ᾽ ὑπερίδῃς, 
τότε οὐ μόνον συμπότης τῶν θεῶν ἔσῃ, ἀλλὰ καὶ 
συνάρχων. οὕτω γὰρ ποιῶν Διογένης καὶ “Ηρά. 
κλεῖίτος καὶ οἱ ὅμοιοι ἀξίως θεῖοί τε ἦσαν καὶ 
ἐλέγοντο. 

6. 160. Ὅταν κλαίοντα ἴδῃς τινὰ ἐν πένθει ἡ 
ἀποδημοῦντος τέκνου ἢ ἀπολωλεκότα τὰ ἑαυτοῦ, 
πρόσεχε μή σε ἡ φαντασία συναρπάσῃ ὡς ἐν 
κακοῖς ὄντος αὐτοῦ τοῖς ἐκτός, ἀλλ᾽ εὐθὺς ἔστω 
πρόχειρον ὅτι “τοῦτον θλίβει οὐ τὸ συμβεβηκός 


(ἄλλον γὰρ οὐ θλίβει), ἀλλὰ τὸ δόγμα τὸ περὶ 
494 


THE ENCHEIRIDION OF EPICTETUS 


vice, but something else. If, however, it is your 
will not to fail in what you desire, this is in your 
power. Wherefore, exercise yourself in that which 
is in your power. Each man’s master is the person 
who has the authority over what the man wishes or 
does not wish, so as to secure it, or take it away. 
Whoever, therefore, wants to be free, let him 
neither wish for anything, nor avoid anything, that 
is under the control of others; or else he is necessarily 
a slave. 

15. Remember that you ought to behave in life 
as you would at a banquet. As something is being 
passed around it comes to you; stretch out your 
hand and take a portion of it pdlitely. It passes on ; 
do not detain it. Or it has not come to you yet; 
do not project your desire to meet it, but wait 
until it comes in front of you. So act toward 
children, so toward a wife, so toward office, so 
toward wealth; and then some day you will be 
worthy of the banquets of the gods. But if you 
do not take these things even when they are set 
before you, but despise them, then you will not only 
share the banquet of the gods, but share also their 
rule. For it was by so doing that Diogenes and 
Heracleitus, and men like them, were deservedly 
divine and deservedly so called. 

16. When you see someone weeping in sorrow, 
either because a child has gone on a journey, or 
because he has lost his property, beware that you 
be not carried.away by the impression that the man 
is in the midst of externa] ills, but straightway keep 
before yeu this thought: “It is not what has 
happened that distresses this man (for it does not 
distress another), but his judgement about it.” Do 


495 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICrETUS 


τούτου." μέχρι μέντοι λόγου un ὄκνει συμπερι- 
φέρεσθαι αὐτῷ, Kav οὕτω τύχῃ, καὶ συνεπίστενά- 
"1 πρόσεχε μέντοι μὴ καὶ ἔσωθεν στενάξῃς. 

= We Μεέμνησο, ὅτι ὑποκριτὴς εἶ δράματος, 
οἵον ἂν θέλῃ ὁ διδάσκαλος" ἂν βραχύ, βραχέος" 
ἂν μακρόν, μακροῦ' ἂν πτωχὸν ὑποκρίνασθαί σε 
θέλῃ, ἵ ἵνα καὶ τοῦτον εὐφυῶς ὑποκρίνῃ: ἂν χωλόν, 
ἂν ἄρχοντα, ἂν ἰδιώτην. σὸν γὰρ τοῦτ᾽ ἔστι, τὸ 
δοθὲν ὑποκρίνασθαι πρόσωπον καλῶς" ἐκλέ- 
ξασθαι δ᾽ αὐτὸ ἄλλου. 

6. 18. Κόραξ ὅταν μὴ αἴσιον κεκράγῃ, μὴ συ- 
ναρπαζέτω σε ἡ φαντασία' adn εὐθὺς διαίρει 
παρὰ σεαυτῷ καὶ λέγε ὅτι “ τούτων ἐμοὶ οὐδὲν 
ἐπισημαίνεται, GAN ἢ τῷ σωματίῳ μου ἢ τῷ 
κτησειδίῳ μου ἢ τῷ δοξαρίῳ μου ἢ τοῖς τέκνοις 
ἢ τῇ γυναικί. ἐμοὶ δὲ πάντα αἴσια σημαίνεται, 
ἐὰν ἐγὼ θέλω" ὅ τι γὰρ ἂν τούτων ἀποβαίνῃ, ἐπ᾽ 
ἐμοΐ ἐστιν ὠφεληθῆναι am αὐτοῦ." 

1 ς. 19. ᾿Ανίκητος εἶναι δύνασαι, ἐὰν εἰς μηδένα 
ἀγῶνα καταβαίνῃς, ὃν οὐκ ἔστιν ἐπὶ σοὶ νικῆσαι. 

8 ὅρα μήποτε ἰδών τινα προτιμώμενον ἢ μέγα 
δυνάμενον ἢ ἄλλως εὐδοκιμοῦντα μακαρίσῃς, ὑπὸ 
τῆς φαντασίας συναρπασθεΐς. ἐὰν γὰρ ἐν τοῖς 
ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν ἡ οὐσία τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ 7, οὔτε φθόνος οὔτε 
ξηλοτυπία χώραν ἔχει" σύ τε αὐτὸς οὐ στρα- 
THYOS, οὐ πρύτανις ἢ ὕπατος εἶναι θελήσεις, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἐλεύθερος. μία δὲ ὁδὸς πρὸς τοῦτο, κατα- 
φρόνησις τῶν οὐκ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν. 





ΤΑ reverent designation for God. See I. 25, 13. 
496 


THE ENCHEIRIDION OF EPICTETUS 


not, however, hesitate to sympathize with him so 
far as words go, and, if occasion offers, even to 
groan with him; but be careful not to groan also 
in the centre of your being. 

17. Remember that you are an actor in a play, 
the character of which is determined by the Play- 
wright: if He wishes the play to be short, it is short ; 
if long, it islong; if He wishes you to play the part 
of a beggar, remember to act even this réle adroitly ; 
and so if your réle be that of a cripple, an official, 
or a layman. For this is your business, to play 
admirably the réle assigned you; but the selection 
of that réle is Another’s,+ 

18. When a raven croaks inauspiciously, let not the 
external impression carry you away, but straightway 
draw a distinction in yourown mind, and say, “‘ None: 
of these portents are for me, but either for my paltry 
body, or my paltry estate, or my paltry opinion, or 
my children, or my wife. But for me every portent 
is favourable, if I so wish ; for whatever be the out- 
come, it is within my power to derive benefit from it.” 

19. You can be invincible if you never enter a 
contest in which victory is not under your control. 
Beware lest, when you see some person preferred 
to you in honour, or possessing great power, or other- 
wise enjoying high repute, you are ever carried away 
by the external impression, and deem him happy. 
For if the true nature of the good is one of the 
things that are under our control, there is no place 
for either envy or jealousy; and you yourself will 
not wish to be a praetor, or a senator, or a consul, 
but a tree man. Now there is but one way that 
leads to this, and that is to despise the things that 
are not under our control. 


497 
VOL, II. K K 


1 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ο. 20. Méuvnoo, ὅτι οὐχ ὁ λοιδορῶν ἢ ὁ τύπτων 
ὑβρίζει, ἀλλὰ τὸ δόγμα τὸ περὶ τούτων ὡς ὑβρι- 
ξόντων. ὅταν οὖν ἐρεθίσῃ σέ τις, ἴσθι, ὅτι ἡ σή 
σε ὑπόληψις ἠρέθικε. τουγαροῦν ἐν πρώτοις 
πειρῶ ὑπὸ τῆς φαντασίας μὴ συναρπασθῆγναι' 
ἂν γὰρ ἅπαξ χρόνου καὶ διατριβῆς τύχῃς, ῥᾷον 
κρατήσεις σεαυτοῦ. 

6, 21. Θάνατος καὶ φυγὴ καὶ πάντα τὰ δεινὰ 
φαινόμενα πρὸ ὀφθαλμῶν ἔστω σοι Kad’ ἡμέραν, 
μάλιστα δὲ πάντων ὁ θάνατος" καὶ οὐδὲν οὐδέ- 
ποτε οὔτε ταπεινὸν ἐνθυμηθήσῃ οὔτε ἄγαν 
ἐπιθυμήσεις τινός. 

ο, 22. Εἰ φιλοσοφίας ἐπιθυμεῖς, παρασκευάξον 
αὐτόθεν ὡς καταγελασθησόμενος, ὡς καταμω- 
κησομένων σου πολλῶν, ὡς ἐρούντων ὅτι “ ἄφνω 
φιλόσοφος ἡμῖν ἐπανελήλυθε᾽᾽ καὶ ““πόθεν ἡμῖν 
αὕτη ἡ ὀφρύς ; σὺ δὲ ὀφρὺν μὲν μὴ σχῆς" τῶν 
δὲ βελτίστων σοι φαινομένων οὕτως ἔχου, ὡς 
ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ τεταγμένος εἰς ταύτην τὴν χώραν' 
μέμνησό τε διότι, ἐὰν μὲν ἐμμείνῃς τοῖς αὐτοῖς, 
οἱ καταγελῶντές σου τὸ πρότερον οὗτοί σε ὕστε- 
ρον θαυμάσονται, ἐὰν δὲ ἡττηθῇς αὐτῶν, διπλοῦν 
προσλήψῃ καταγέλωτα. 

6, 28, ᾽᾿Εάν ποτέ σοι γένηται ἔξω στραφῆναι 
πρὸς τὸ βούλεσθαι ἀρέσαι τινί, ἴσθι ὅτι ἀπώ- 
λεσᾶς τὴν ἔνστασιν. ἀρκοῦ οὖν ἐν παντὶ τῷ 
εἶναι φιλόσοφος, εἰ δὲ καὶ δοκεῖν βούλει,3 σαυτῷ 
φαΐνον καὶ ἱκανὸς ἔσῃ. ᾿ 

ce, 24, Οὗτοί σε οἱ διαλογισμοὶ μὴ θλιβέτωσαν'" 


Lore διότι Nil. : δὲ ὅτι Hnch. 
* The words τῷ εἶναι at this point are omitted by Par. 


498 


THE ENCHEIRIDION OF EPICTETUS 


20. Bear in mind that it is not the man wh 
reviles or strikes you that insults you, but it is you 
judgement that these men are insulting you 
Therefore, when someone irritates you, be assurec 
that it is your own opinion which has irritated you 
And so make it your first endeavour not to be 
carried away by the external impression ; for if once 
you gain time and delay, you will more easily 
become master of yourself, 

21. Keep before your eyes day by day death anc 
exile, and everything that seems terrible, but most 
of all death; and then you will never have any 
abject thought, nor will you yearn for anything 
. beyond measure. 

22. If you yearn for philosophy, prepare at once 
to be met with ridicule, to have many people [66] 
at you, and say, “ Here he is again, turned philo 
sopher all of a sudden,” and “ Where do you suppose 
he got that high brow?” But do you not put on 
a high brow, and do you so hold fast to the things 
which to you seem best, as a man who has been 
assigned by God to this post; and remember that 
if you abide by the same principles, those whc 
formerly used to laugh at you will later come tc 
admire you, but if you are worsted by them, you 
will get the laugh on yourself twice. 

23. If it should ever happen to you that you turn 
to externals with a view to pleasing someone, rest 
assured that you have lost your plan of life. Be 
content, therefore, in everything to be a philosopher, 
and if you wish also to be taken for one, show tc 
yourself that you are one, and you will be able tc 
accomplish it. 

24. Let not these reflections oppress you: “] 

49¢ 
K K 2 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


wy 3 4 , δ οὐ δεξὶ "ὃ A 3 
ἄτιμος ἐγὼ βιώσομαι καὶ οὐδεὶς οὐδαμοῦ. εἰ 
γὰρ ἡ ἀτιμία ἐστὶ κακόν, οὐ δύνασαι ἐν κακῷ 
εἶναι δι’ ἄλλον, οὐ μᾶλλον ἢ ἐν αἰσχρῷ" μή τι 
f a“ Ὁ 
οὖν σόν ἐστιν ἔργον τὸ ἀρχῆς τυχεῖν ἢ παρα- 
-- n ἴω Δ f 
ληφθῆναι ἐφ᾽ ἑστίασιν ; οὐδαμῶς. πῶς οὖν ἔτι 
a 3 ¥ Ύ 7 a “ δὲ "ὃ \ "ὃ ~ of 
τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν ἀτιμία ; πῶς δὲ οὐδεὶς οὐδαμοῦ ἔσῃ, 
ὃν ἐν μόνοις εἶναί τινα δεῖ τοῖς ἐπὶ cot, ἐν οἷς 
€ 
2 ἔξεστί σοι εἶναι πλείστου ἀξίῳ; ἀλλά σοι οἱ 
, 
φίλοι ἀβοήθητοι ἔσονται ; τί λέγεις τὸ ἀβοήθη- 
\ 
τοι; οὐχ ἕξουσι παρὰ σοῦ κερμάτιον' οὐδὲ 
ς 
πολίτας Ῥωμαίων αὐτοὺς ποιήσεις. τίς οὖν σοι 
εἶπεν, ὅτι ταῦτα τῷν ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν ἐστίν, οὐχὶ δὲ 
3 f ¥ f δὲ Δ ᾿ ξ f ἃ 
ἀλλότρια ἔργα ; τίς δὲ δοῦναι δύναται ἑτέρῳ, ἃ 
ΓΜ 7 “ “a oS 3 7 cw? ς ~ 
μὴ ἔχει αὐτὸς ; “κτῆσαι οὖν, φησίν, “ἵνα ἡμεῖς 
8 ἔχωμεν." εἰ δύναμαι κτήσασθαι τηρῶν ἐμαυτὸν 
αἰδήμονα καὶ πιστὸν καὶ μεγαλόφρονα, δείκνυε 
Ἢ ἐῶν \ ? 93 > 3 \ 2 a 
τὴν ὁδὸν καὶ κτήσομαι. εἰ δ᾽ ἐμὲ ἀξιοῦτε τὰ 
ἀγαθὰ τὰ ἐμαυτοῦ ἀπολέσαι, ἵνα ὑμεῖς τὰ μὴ 
ἀγαθὰ περιποιήσησθε, ὁρᾶτε ὑμεῖς, was ἄνισ οἵ 
ἐστε καὶ ἀγνώμονες. τί δὲ καὶ βούλεσθε μᾶλλον ; 
3 A x 7 Ν \ ? a 3 
ἀργύριον ἢ φίλον πιστὸν καὶ αἰδήμονα; εἰς 
ἴω a 3 
τοῦτο οὖν μοι μᾶλλον συλλαμβάνετε καὶ μή, δι 
ὧν ἀποβαλῶ αὐτὰ ταῦτα, ἐκεῖνά με πράσσειν 
ἀξιοῦτε. | 
3 3 e “ Φ 3 3 9 ΄ 
4 “᾿Αλλ ἡ πατρίς, ὅσον ἐπ᾽ ἐμοί, φησίν, 





1 That is, every man is exclusively responsible for his own 
good or evil. But honour and the lack of it are thmgs which 
are obviously not under a man’s control, since they depend 
upon the action of other people. It follows, therefore, that 


500 


THE ENCHEIRIDION OF EPICTETUS 


shall live without honour, and be nobody any 
where.” For, if lack of honour is an evil, you 
cannot be in evil through the instrumentality ΟἹ 
some other person, any more than you can be in 
shame.t It is not your business, is it, to get office, 
or to be invited toa dinner-party? Certainly not. 
How, then, can this be any longer a lack of honour? 
And how is it that you will be “nobody anywhere,” 
when you ought to be somebody only in those 
things which are under your control, wherein you 
are privileged to be a man of the very greatest 
honour? But your friends will be without assist- 
ance? What do you mean by being “without 
assistance’?? They will not have paltry coin from 
you, and you will not make them Roman citizens. 
Well, who told you that these are some of the 
matters under our control, and not rather things 
which others do? And who is able to give another 
what he does not himself have? ‘‘Get money, 
then,’ says some friend, “in order that we too may 
have it.” If I can get money and at the same time 
keep myself self-respecting, and faithful, and high- 
minded, show me the way and 1 will get it. But 
if you require me to lose the good things that 
belong to me, in order that you may acquire the 
things that are not good, you can see for yourselves 
how unfair and inconsiderate you are. And which 
do you really prefer? Money, or a faithful and 
self-respecting friend? Help me, therefore, rather 
to this end, and do not require me to do those 
things which will make me lose these qualities. 

« But ‘my country,” says he, “so far as lies in me, 


lack of honour cannot be an evil, but must be something 
indifferent. 
501 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


/ \ ‘ 

“ἀβοήθητος ἔσται." πάλιν, ποίαν καὶ ταύτην 

bs \ Ul a“ 
βοήθειαν ; στοὰς οὐχ ἕξει διὰ σὲ οὔτε βαλανεῖα. 
s rd a Oe 4 ¢ ὃ / μὴ ὃ \ Ἀ 
καὶ τί τοῦτο; οὐδὲ γὰρ ὑποδήματα ἔχει OL τὸν 

\ f 9X 
χαλκέα οὐδ᾽ ὅπλα διὰ τὸν σκυτέα" ἱκανὸν δέ, ἐὰν 
“ \ λ΄ 
ἕκαστος ἐκπληρώσῃ τὸ ἑαυτοῦ ἔργον. εἰ δὲ ἄλλον 
“A [4 Ν \ 
τινὰ αὐτῇ κατεσκεύαζες πολίτην πιστὸν καὶ 
/ ar 
αἰδήμονα, οὐδὲν ἂν αὐτὴν ὠφέλεις ; “ναί. 
οὐκοῦν οὐδὲ σὺ αὐτὸς ἀνωφελὴς ἂν εἴης αὐτῇ. 
‘riva οὖν ἕξω, φησί, “χώραν ἐν τῇ πόλει ;” 
a ‘A ay 7 . \ \ \ 
ἣν ἂν δύνῃ φυλάττων ἅμα τὸν πίστον καὶ 
Ὰ 

5 αἰδήμονα. εἰ δὲ ἐκείνην ὠφελεῖν βουλόμενος 
ἀποβαλεῖς ταῦτα, τί ὄφελος ἂν αὐτῇ γένοιο 
ἀναιδὴς καὶ ἄπιστος ἀποτελεσθείς ; 

1 oc. 25. Προετιμήθη σού τις ἐν ἑστιάσει ἢ ἐν 
προσαγορεύσει ἢ ἐν τῷ παραληφθῆναι εἰς συμ- 
βουλίαν; εἰ μὲν ἀγαθὰ ταῦτά ἐστι, χαίρειν σε 
δεῖ, ὅτι ἔτυχεν αὐτῶν ἐκεῖνος" εἰ δὲ κακά, μὴ 
bla θ 4 \ + A 2 , f ef 
ἄχθου, ὅτι συ αὐτῶν οὐκ ἔτυχες" μέμνησο δέ, ὅτι 

, \ nr 
ov δύνασαι μὴ ταὐτὰ ποιῶν πρὸς TO τυγχάνειν 

ῷ fa 2 Set CoA a " 2 a " \ 

2 τῶν οὐκ ἐφ ἡμῖν τῶν ἴσων ἀξιοῦσθαι. πῶς γὰρ 
2, ” δύ ξ \ la > \ / ‘ 
ἰσον ἔχειν δύναται ὁ μὴ φοιτῶν ἐπὶ θύρας τινὸς 
Ἂ a € a 
τῷ φοιτῶντι; ὁ μὴ παραπέμπων τῷ παραπέμ- 

» £ \ a“ al “ 
TOVTL; ὁ μὴ ἐπαινῶν TO ἐπαινοῦντι; ἄδικος οὖν 
3; 4 Pd 4 ao na 
ἔσῃ καὶ ἄπληστος, εἰ μὴ προϊέμενος ταῦτα, ἀνθ᾽ 


Ψ 9 “ / al > Ν 2 
ὧν exelva πυπράσκεται, προῖκα αὐτὰ βουλήσῃ 
502 


THE ENCHEIRIDION OF EPICTETUS 


will be without assistance.” Again I ask, what 
kind of assistance do you mean? It will not have 
loggias or baths of your providing. And what does 
that signify? For neither does it have shoes pro- 
vided by the blacksmith, nor has it arms provided by 
the cobbler; but it is sufficient if each man fulfil 
his own proper function. And if you secured for it 
another faithful and self-respecting citizen, would 
you not be doing it any good? “Yes.” Very well, 
and then you also would not be useless to it. 
“What place, then, shall I have in the State?” 
says he. Whatever place you can have, and at the 
same time maintain the man of fidelity and self- 
respect that isin you. But if, through your desire 
to help the State, you lose these qualities, of what 
good would you become to it, when in the end you 
turned out to be shameless and unfaithful ? 

25. Has someone been honoured above you at a 
dinner-party, or in salutation, or in being called in 
to give advice? Now if these matters are good, 
you ought to be happy that he got them; but if 
evil, be not distressed because you did not get 
them ; and bear in mind that, if you do not act the 
same way that others do, with a view to getting 
things which are not under our control, you cannot 
be considered worthy to receive an equal share with 
others. Why, how is it possible for a person who 
does not haunt some man’s door, to have equal 
shares with the man who does? For the man who 
does not do escort duty, with the man who does? 
For the man who does not praise, with the man who 
does? -You will be unjust, therefore, and insatiable, 
if, while refusing to pay the price for which such 
things are bought, you want to obtain them for 


593 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


᾽ 
8 λαμβάνειν. ἀλλὰ πόσου πιπράσκονται θρίδακες ; 
κα’, Ἢ ͵ 7, \ 
ὀβολοῦ, ἂν οὕτω τύχῃ. ἂν οὖν τις προέμενος τὸν 
‘ \ , \ 
ὀβολὸν λάβῃ Opidaxas, σὺ δὲ μὴ προέμενος μὴ 
“ “ 
λάβῃς, μὴ olov ἔλαττον ἔχειν τοῦ λαβόντος. ὡς 
n \ 3 ) 
γὰρ ἐκεῖνος ἔχει θρίδακας, οὕτω σὺ τὸν ὀβολόν, ὃν 
οὐκ ἔδωκας. 
4 Τὸν αὐτὸν δὴ τρόπον καὶ ἐνταῦθα. οὐ παρε- 
“ >)? ¢ ? 7 ‘6 3 Ἀ of “ 
κλήθης ἐφ᾽ éotiaciv τινος; οὐ yap ἔδωκας τῷ 
“ ef ἴω. ἈΝ ὃ ad 3 ὔ δ᾽ 
καλοῦντι, ὅσου πωλεῖ τὸ δεῖπνον. ἐπαίνου 
αὐτὸ πωλεῖ, θεραπείας πωλεῖ. δὸς οὖν τὸ διά- 
Ly “ [4 » 3 \ 
φορον, εἴ σοι λυσιτελεῖ, ὅσου πωλεῖται. εἰ δὲ 
κἀκεῖνα θέλεις μὴ προΐεσθαι καὶ ταῦτα λαμβάνειν, 
5 ἄπληστος εἰ καὶ ἀβέλτερος. οὐδὲν οὖν ἔχεις 
ἀντὶ τοῦ δείπνου ; ἔχεις μὲν οὖν τὸ μὴ ἐπαινέσαι 
fe! 3 » Ν \ > A 3 a“ 
τοῦτον, by οὐκ ἤθελες, TO μὴ ἀνασχέσθαι αὐτοῦ 
τῶν ἐπὶ τῆς εἰσόδου. 
ce. 26. Τὸ βούλημα τῆς φύσεως καταμαθεῖν 
ἔστιν ἐξ ὧν οὐ διαφερόμεθα πρὸς ἀλλήλους. 
Ϊ va Tr ὃ f / \ , 
οἷον, ὅταν ἄλλου παιδάριον κατεάξῃ τὸ ποτήριον, 
7 cal 
πρόχειρον εὐθὺς λέγειν ὅτε “τῶν γινομένων 
ἐστίν." ἴσθι οὖν, ὅτι, ὅταν καὶ τὸ σὸν κατεαγῇ, 
τοιοῦτον εἶναί σε δεῖ, ὁποῖον ὅτε καὶ τὸ τοῦ 
x 
ἄλλον κατεάγη. οὕτω μετατέθει καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ 
μείξονα. τέκνον ἄλλου τέθνηκεν ἢ γυνή" οὐδείς 
ἐστιν ὃς οὐκ ἂν εἴποι ὅτι “ ἀνθρώπινον." ἀλλ᾽ 
7 ἊΝ 
ὅταν τὸ αὐτοῦ τινὸς ἀποθάνῃ, εὐθὺς “ οἴμοι, τάλας 





1 See note on frag. 11. 


594 


THE ENCHEIRIDION OF EPICTETUS 


nothing. Well, whatis the price for heads of lettuce? 
An obol,! perhaps. If, then, somebody gives up his 
obol and gets his heads of lettuce, while you do not 
give your obol, and do not get them, do not imagine 
that you are worse off than the man who gets his 
lettuce. For as he has his heads of lettuce, so you 
have your obol which you have not given away. 

Now it is the same way also in life. You have 
not been invited to somebody’s dinner-party? Of 
course not; for you didn’t give the host the price at 
which he sells his dinner. He sells it for praise ; 
he sells it for personal attention. Give him the 
price, then, for which it is sold, if it is to your 
interest. But if you wish both not to give up the 
one and yet to get the other, you are insatiable and 
a simpleton. Have you, then, nothing in place of 
the dinner? Indeed you have; you have not had to 
praise the man you did not want to praise; you 
have not had to put up with the insolence of his 
doorkeepers. 

26. What the will of nature is may be learned 
from a consideration of the points in which we do 
not differ from one another. For example, when 
some other person’s slave-boy breaks his drink- 
ing-cup, you are instantly ready to say, “ That’s 
one of the things which happen,” Rest assured, 
then, that when your own drinking-cup gets broken, 
you ought to behave in the same way that you do 
when the other man’s cup is broken. Apply now 
the same principle to the matters of greater im- 
portance. Some other person’s child or wife has 
died; no. one but would say, “Such is the fate 
of man.’ Yet when a man’s own child dies, imme- 
diately the ery is, “Alas! Woe is me!” But we 


505 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ἐγώ." ἐχρῆν δὲ μεμνῆσθαι, τί πάσχομεν περὶ 
ἄλλων αὐτὸ ἀκούσαντες. 

6, 21. Ὥσπερ σκοπὸς πρὸς τὸ ἀποτυχεῖν οὐ 
τίθεται, οὕτως οὐδὲ κακοῦ φύσις ἐν κόσμῳ γίνεται. 

c. 28. Ei μὲν τὸ σῶμά σού τις ἐπέτρεπε τῷ 
ἀπαντήσαντι, ἠγανάκτεις ἄν: ὅτι δὲ σὺ τὴν 
γνώμην τὴν σεαυτοῦ ἐπιτρέπεις τῷ τυχόντι, ἵνα, 
ἐὰν λοιδορήσηταί σοι, ταρωαχθῇ ἐκείνη καὶ συγ- 
χυθῇ, οὐκ αἰσχύνῃ τούτου ἕνεκα; 

ο, 29. Ἑκάστον ἔργου σκόπει τὰ καθηγού- 
μενα καὶ τὰ ἀκόλουθα αὐτοῦ καὶ οὕτως ἔρχου 
ér αὐτό. εἰ δὲ μή, τὴν μὲν πρώτην προθύμως 
ἥξεις ἅτε μηδὲν τῶν ἑξῆς ἐντεθυμημένος, ὕστερον 
δὲ ἀναφανέντων δυσχερῶν τινῶν αἰσχρῶς ἀπο- 
2 στήσῃ. θέλεις Ὀλύμπια νικῆσαι; κἀγώ, νὴ 
τοὺς θεούς" κομψὸν γάρ ἐστιν. ἀλλὰ σκόπει τὰ 
καθηγούμενα καὶ τὰ ἀκόλουθα καὶ οὕτως ἅπτου 
τοῦ ἔργου. δεῖ σ᾽ εὐτακτεῖν, ἀναγκοτροφεῖν, 
ἀπέχεσθαι πεμμάτων, γυμνάζεσθαι πρὸς ἀνάγκην, 
ἐν ὥρᾳ τεταγμένῃ, ἐν καύματι, ἐν ψύχει, μὴ 
ψυχρὸν πίνειν, μὴ οἷνον, ὡς ἔτυχεν, ἁπλῶς ὡς 
ἰατρῷ παραδεδωκέναι σεαυτὸν τῷ ἐπιστάτῃ, εἶτα 
ἐν τῷ ἀγῶνι παρορύσσεσθαι," ἔστι δὲ ὅτε χεῖρα 
ἐκβαλεῖν, σφυρὸν στρέψαι, πολλὴν ἁφὴν κατα- 

1 Upton from the Disc. : παρέρχεσθαι or παρέχεσθαι MSS. 
3 Upton from the Dise.: βαλεῖν, λαβεῖν, or βλαβεῖν MSS. 





1 That is, it is inconceivable that the universe should 
exist in order that some things may go wrong; hence, 
nothing natural is evil, and nothing that is by nature evil 
can arise.-—Thus in effect Simplicius, and correctly, it seems. 

* This chapter is practically word for word identical with 
III. 15. Since it was omitted in Par., and not com- 
mented on by Simplicius, it may have been added in some 
second edition, whether by Arrian or not. 


506 


THE ENCHEIRIDION OF EPICTETUS 


ought to remember how we feel when we hear of 
the same misfortune befalling others. 

27. Just as a mark is not set up in order to be missed, 
so neither does the nature of evil arise in the universe. 

28. If someone handed over your body to any 
person who met you, you would be vexed; but 
that you hand over your mind to any person that 
comes along, so that, if he reviles you, it is disturbed 
and troubled—are you not ashamed of that? 

29.2 In each separate thing that you do, consider 
the matters which come first and those which follow 
after, and only then approach the thing itself. 
Otherwise, at the start you will come to it enthusi- 
astically, because you have never reflected upon 
any of the subsequent steps, but later on, when 
some difficulties appear, you will give up disgracefully. 
Do you wish to win an Olympic victory? So do I, 
by the gods! for it is a fine thing. But consider 
the matters which come before that, and those which 
follow after, and only when you have done that, put 
your hand to the task. You have to submit to 
discipline, follow a strict diet, give up sweet cakes, 
train under compulsion, at a fixed hour, in heat or in 
cold; you must not drink cold water,’ nor wine just 
whenever you feel like it; you must have turned 
yourself over to your trainer precisely as you would to 
a physician. Then when the contest comes on, you 
have to “dig in” + beside your opponent, and some- 
times dislocate your wrist, sprain your ankle, swallow 


3 That is, cold water not at all; while wine may be 
drunk, but only at certain times, 1. 6., probably with one’s 
meals. Such prohibitions are still common in Europe, 
particularly in popular therapeutics. 

4 See note on III. 15, 4. 


5°7 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


πιεῖν, ἔσθ᾽ ὅτε μαστιγωθῆναι, καὶ μετὰ τουτων > 

8 πάντων νικηθῆναι. ταῦτα ἐπισκεψάμενος, ἂν ἔτι 
θέλῃς, ἔρχου ἐπὶ τὸ ἀθλεῖν. εἰ δὲ μή, ὡς τὰ παιδία 
ἀναστραφήσῃ, ἃ νῦν μὲν παλαιστὰς παίξει, νῦν 
δὲ μονομάχους, νῦν δὲ σαλπίζει, εἶτα τραγῳδεῖ' 
οὕτω καὶ σὺ νῦν μὲν ἀθλητής, νῦν δὲ μονομάχος, 
εἶτα ῥήτωρ, εἶτα φιλόσοφος, ὅλῃ δὲ τῇ ψυχῇ 
οὐδέν: ἀλλ᾽ ὡς πίθηκος πᾶσαν θέαν, ἣν ἂν ἴδῃς, 
μιμῇ καὶ ἄλλο ἐξ ἄλλου σοι ἀρέσκει. οὐ γὰρ 
μετὰ σκέψεως ἦλθες ἐπί τι οὐδὲ περιοδεύσας, 
ἀλλ᾽ εἰκῆ καὶ κατὰ ψυχρὰν ἐπιθυμίαν. 

4 Οὕτω θεασάμενοί τινες φιλόσοφον καὶ 
ἀκούσαντες οὕτω τινὸς λέγοντος, ὡς υὐφράτης 5 
λέγει (καΐτοι τίς οὕτω δύναται εἰπεῖν, ὡς ἐκεῖνος 5), 

ὅ θέλουσι καὶ αὐτοὶ φιλοσοφεῖν. ἄνθρωπε, πρῶτον 
ἐπίσκεψαι, ὁποῖόν ἐστε τὸ πρᾶγμα" εἶτα καὶ τὴν 
σεαυτοῦ φύσιν κατάμαθε, εἰ δύνασαι βαστάσαι. 
πένταθλος εἶναι βούλει ἢ παλαιστής; ἴδε 
σεαυτοῦ τοὺς βραχίονας, τοὺς μηρούς, τὴν ὀσφὺν 

6 κατάμαθε. ἄλλος3 γὰρ πρὸς ἄλλο πέφυκε. 
δοκεῖς, ὅτε ταῦτα ποιῶν ὡσαύτως δύνασαι 
ἐσθίειν, ὡσαύτως πίνειν, ὁμοίως ὀρέγεσθαι, 
ὁμοίως δυσαρεστεῖν ; ἀγρυπνῆσαι δεῖ, πονῆσαι, 
ἀπὸ τῶν οἰκείων ἀπελθεῖν, ὑπὸ παιδαρίου 
καταφρονηθῆναι, ὑπὸ τῶν ἀπαντώντων ὦ καταγε- 
λασθῆναι, ἐν παντὶ ἧττον ἔχειν, ἐν τιμῇ, ἐν ἀρχῇ, 

7 ἐν δίκῃ, ἐν πραγματίῳ παντί. ταῦτα ἐπίσκεψαι, 

1 Nil. and the Discourses: τῶν Ench. 

53 Wolf from the Discourses: ὡς εὖ Σωκράτης Linch. ; ὡς εὖ 
τις σοφῶν Nil. : 

* Nilus and the Discourses: ἄλλο Ench. 

* Schweighaéuser from the Discourses: ἁπάντων A wn, 


Nil. ; the clause om. by other MSS. 
508 


THE ENCHEIRIDION OF EPICTETUS 


quantities of sand, sometimes take a scourging, and 
along with all that get beaten. After you have 
considered all these points, go on into the games, if 
you still wish to do so; otherwise, you will be turning 
back like children. Sometimes they play wrestlers, 
again gladiators, again they blow trumpets, and 
then act a play. So you too are now an athlete, 
now a gladiator, then a rhetorician, then a philo- 
sopher, yet with your whole soul nothing; but like 
an ape you imitate whatever you see, and one thing 
after another strikes your fancy. For you have 
never gone out after anything with circumspection, 
nor after you had examined it all over, but you act 
at haphazard and half-heartedly. 

In the same way, when some people have seen 
a philosopher and have heard someone speaking like 
Euphrates! (though, indeed, who can speak like 
him?), they wish to be philosophers themselves. 
Man, consider first the nature of the business, and 
then learn your own natural ability, if you are able to 
bear it. Do you wish to be a contender in the 
pentathlon, or a wrestler? Look to your arms, 
your thighs, see what your loins are like. For one 
man has a natural talent for one thing, another for 
another. Do you suppose that you can eat in the 
same fashion, drink in the same fashion, give way 
to anger and to irritation, just as you do now? You 
must keep vigils, work hard, abandon your own people, 
be despised by a paltry slave, be laughed to scorn 
by those who meet you, in everything get the worst 
of it, in honour, in office, in court, in every paltry 
affair. Look these drawbacks over carefully, if you 


1 See note on III. 15, 8. 
509 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


εἰ θέλεις ἀντικαταλλάξασθαι τούτων ἀπάθειαν, 
ἐλευθερίαν, ἀταραξίαν' εἰ δὲ μή, μὴ προσάγαγε, 
μὴ ὡς τὰ παιδία νῦν φιλόσοφος, ὕστερον δὲ 
τελώνης, εἶτα ῥήτωρ, εἶτα ἐπίτροπος Καίσαρος. 
ταῦτα ov συμφωνεῖ. ἕνα σε δεῖ ἄνθρωπον ἢ 
ἀγαθὸν ἢ κακὸν εἶναι" ἢ τὸ ἡγεμονικόν σε δεῖ 
ἐξεργάξεσθαι τὸ σαυτοῦ ἢ τὰ ἐκτός" ἢ περὶ τὰ 
ἔσω φιλοτεχνεῖν ἢ περὶ τὸ ἔξω: τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν 4} 
φιλοσόφου τάξιν ἐ ἐπέχειν ἢ ἰδιώτου. 

ce. 80, Τὰ καθήκοντα ὡς ἐπίπαν ταῖς σχέσεσι 
παραμετρεῖται. πατήρ ἐστιν" ὑπαγορεύεται ἐπι- 
μελεῖσθαι, παραχωρεῖν ἁπάντων, ἀνέχεσθαι 
λοιδοροῦντος, παίοντος. “ἀλλὰ πατὴρ κακός 
ἐστι. μή τι οὖν πρὸς ἀγαθὸν πατέρα φύσει 
ὠκειώθης; ἀλλὰ πρὸς πατέρα. ‘0 ἀδελφὸς 
ἀδικεῖ." τήρει τοιγαροῦν τὴν τάξιν τὴν σεαυτοῦ 
πρὸς αὐτόν' μηδὲ σκόπει, τί ἐκεῖνος ποιεῖ, ἀλλὰ 
τί σοὶ ποιήσαντι κατὰ φύσιν ἡ σὴ ἕξει προαίρε- 
σις. σὲ γὰρ ἄλλος οὐ βλάψει, ἂν μὴ σὺ θέλῃς" 
τότε δὲ ἔσῃ βεβλχαμμένος, ὅταν ὑπολάβῃς 
βλάπτεσθαι. οὕτως οὖν ἀπὸ τοῦ γείτονος, ἀπὸ 
τοῦ πολίτου, ἀπὸ τοῦ στρατηγοῦ τὸ καθῆκον 
εὑρήσεις, ἐὰν τὰς σχέσεις ἐθίξῃ θεωρεῖν. 

1 « Bl. Ths περὶ τοὺς θεοὺς εὐσεβείας ἴσθι ὅτι 
τὸ κυριώτατον ἐκεῖνό ἐστιν, ὀρθὰς ὑπολήψεις 
περὶ αὐτῶν ἔχειν ὡς ὄντων καὶ διοικούντων τὰ 
ὅλα καλῶς καὶ δικαίως, καὶ σαυτὸν εἰς τοῦτο 
κατατεταχέναι,, τὸ πείθεσθαι αὐτοῖς καὶ εἴκειν 
πᾶσι τοῖς γινομένοις καὶ ἀκολουθεῖν ἑκόντα ὡς 


1 κατατεταχύτων suggested by Schweighiiuser. The sense 
would then be: “‘and have appointed you to,” referring to 
the gods, 


510 


THE ENCHEIRIDION OF EPICTETUS 


are willing at the price of these things to secure 
tranquillity, freedom and calm. Otherwise, do not 
approach philosophy; don’t act like a child—now 
a philosopher, later on a tax-gatherer, then a 
rhetorician, then a procurator of Caesar. These 
things do not go together. You must be one person, 
either good or bad; you must labour to improve 
either your own governing principle or external ; 
you must work hard either on the inner man, or 
on things outside; that is, play either the réle of a 
philosopher or else that of a layman. 

30. Our duties are in general measured by our 
social relationships. He is a father. One is called 
upon to take care of him, to give way to him in 
all things, to submit when he reviles or strikes you. 
“ But he is a bad father.” Did nature, then, bring 
you into relationship with a good father? No, 
but simply with a father. “My brother does me 
wrong.” Very well, then, maintain the relation 
that you have toward him; and do not consider 
what he is doing, but what you will have to do, if 
your moral purpose is to be in harmony with nature. 
For no one will harm you without your consent; you 
will have been harmed only when you think you are 
harmed, In this way, therefore, you will discover 
what duty to expect of your neighbour, your citizen, 
your commanding officer, if you acquire the habit of 
looking at your social relations with them. 

31. In piety towards the gods, I would have you 
know, the chief element in this, to have right 
opinions about them—as existing and as administer- 
ing the wniverse well and justly—and to have set 
yourself to obey them and to submit to everything 
that happens, and to follow it voluntarily, in the 


51Ι 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


“a Ζ / ef 
ὑπὸ τῆς ἀρίστης γνώμης ἐπιτεέλουμένοις. οὕτω 
\ > / ‘ \ @ ‘ ν᾽} ΩΣ λέ 
γὰρ οὐ μέμψῃ ποτὲ τοὺς θεοὺς οὔτε ἐγκαλέσεις 
\ 2 ἢ »"» 
ἢ ὡς ἀμελούμενος. ἄλλως δὲ οὐχ οἷόν τε τοῦτο 
ῥ aN 4 a +] Ν ~ Ε 999 δ᾽ Ὁ \ 
γίνεσθαι, ἐὰν μὴ ἄρῃς ἀπὸ τῶν οὐκ eh ἡμῖν Kab 
3 ἴω 9 7? e ral } AF \ 4 Ac \ \ 
ἐν τοῖς ἐφ ἡμῖν μόνοις θῇς τὸ ayaloy καὶ TO 
" ᾽ ἥ \ 
κακόν. WS, ἄν γέ τι ἐκείνων ὑπολάβῃς ἀγαθὸν 
᾿ / * ¢ - a 
ἢ κακὸν, πᾶσα ἀνάγκη, ὅταν ἀποτυγχάνῃς ὧν 
/ \ ; e \ , " , 
θέλεις καὶ περιπίπτῃς οἷς μὴ θέλεις, μέμψασθαϊῖ 
n ᾽ ᾿ \ 
8 σε Kal μισεῖν τοὺς αἰτίους. πέφυκε yap πρὸς 
ΓΝ ΩΝ fa! f \ 
τοῦτο wav ζῷον τὰ μὲν βλαβερὰ φαινόμενα καὶ 
5, “ \ \ 
τὰ αἴτια αὐτῶν φεύγειν καὶ ἐκτρέπεσθαι, τὰ δὲ 
ὠφέλιμα καὶ τὰ αἴτια αὐτῶν μετιέναι τε καὶ 
,ὔὕ 
τεθηπέναι ἀμήχανον οὖν βλάπτεσθαι τινὰ 
οἰόμενον χαίρειν τῷ δοκοῦντι βλάπτειν, ὥσπερ 
4 n »"Ἤ 2 
4 καὶ τὸ αὐτῇ τῇ βλάβῃ χαίρειν ἀδύνατον. ἔνθεν 
\ ~ wn A 
καὶ πατὴρ ὑπὸ υἱοῦ λοιδορεῖται, ὅταν τῶν δο- 
κούντων ἀγαθῶν εἶναι τῷ παιδὶ μὴ μεταδιδῷ' 
καὶ ἸΠολυνείκην καὶ ᾿Ἑτεοκλέα τοῦτ᾽ ἐποίησε 
πολεμίους ἀλλήλοις τὸ ἀγαθὸν οἴεσθαι τὴν 
, 4 al \ ς Ἀ ~ 
τυραννίδα. διὰ τοῦτο καὶ ὃ γεωργὸς λοιδορεῖ 
τοὺς θεούς, διὰ τοῦτο ὁ ναύτης, διὰ τοῦτο ὃ 
ἔωπορος, διὰ τοῦτο οἱ τὰς γυναῖκας καὶ τὰ τέκνα 
> , we LE re 4 * / 2 ,ᾳ 4 
ἀπολλύντες. ὅποῦ yap τὸ συμφέρον, ἐκεῖ καὶ 
τὸ εὐσεβές. ὥστε, ὅστις ἐπιμελεῖται τοῦ ὀρέ- 
γεσθαε ὡς δεῖ καὶ ἐκκλίνειν, ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ καὶ 
ΠῚ 3 ’ 3 a , ὃ δὲ i % é 
5 εὐσεβείας ἐπιμελεῖται. σπένδειν δὲ καὶ θύειν 


1 Vv: τεθαυμακέναι Ench. (ΝῊ, ; Simpl.). 
512 


THE ENCHEIRIDION OF EPICTETUS 


belief that it is being fulfilled by the highest in- 
telligence. For if you act in this way, you will 
never blame the gods, nor find fault with them 
for neglecting you. But this result cannot be 
secured in any other way than by withdrawing your 
idea of the good and the evil from the things which 
are not under our control, and placing it in those 
which are under our control, and in those alone. 
Because, if you think any of those former things 
to be good or evil, then, when you fail to get what 
you want and fall into what you do not want, it is 
altogether inevitable that you will blame and hate 
those who are responsible for these results, For 
this is the nature of every living creature, to flee 
from and to turn aside from the things that appear 
harmful, and all that produces them, and to pursue 
after and to admire the things that are helpful, and 
all that produces them. Therefore, it is impossible 
for a man who thinks that he is being hurt to take 
pleasure in that which he thinks is hurting him, 
just as it is also impossible for him to take pleasure 
in the hurt itself. Hence it follows that even a 
father is reviled by a son when he does not give 
his child some share in the things that seem to be 
good ; and this it was which made Polyneices and 
Eteocles enemies of one another, the thought that 
the royal power was a good thing. That is why the 
farmer reviles the gods, and so also the sailor, and 
the merchant, and those who have lost their wives 
and their children. For where a man’s interest lies, 
there is also his piety. Wherefore, whoever is 
careful to exercise desire and aversion as he should, 
is at the same time careful also about piety. But 
it is always appropriate to make libations, and sacri- 


513 
VOL, 1]. LL 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


Kab ἀπάρχεσθαι κατὰ τὰ πάτρια ἑκάστοτε 
προσήκει καθαρῶς καὶ μὴ ἐπισεσυρμένως μηδὲ 
ἀμελῶς μηδέ γε γλίσχρως μηδὲ ὑ ὑπὲρ δύναμιν. 

1 0, 82. “Ὅταν μαντικῇ προσίῃς, μέμνησο, 
ὅτι, τί μὲν ἀποβήσεται, οὐκ οἶδας, ἀλλὰ 
ἥκεις ὡς παρὰ τοῦ μάντεως αὐτὸ πευσόμενος, 
ὁποῖον δὲ τι ἐστίν, ἐλήλυθας εἰδώς, εἴπερ εἶ 
φιλόσοφος. εἰ γάρ ἐστί τι τῶν. οὐκ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν, 
πᾶσα ἀνάγκη. μήτε ἀγαθὸν αὐτὸ εἶναι μήτε 

2 κακόν, μὴ φέρε οὖν πρὸς τὸν μάντιν ὄρεξιν ἢ 
ἔκκλισιν μηδεὶ τρέμων αὐτῷ πρόσει, ἀλλὰ 
διεγνωκώς, ὅ ὅτι πᾶν τὸ ἀποβησόμενον ἀδιάφορον 
καὶ οὐδὲν πρὸς σέ, ὁποῖον δ᾽ ἂν ἡ, ἔσται αὐτῷ 
χρήσασθαι καλῶς καὶ τοῦτο οὐδεὶς κωλύσει. 
θαρρῶν οὖν ὡς ἐπὶ συμβούλους ἔρχου τοὺς 
θεούς" καὶ λοιπόν, ὅταν τί σοι συμβουλευθῇ, 
μέμνησο, τίνας συμβούλους παρέλαβες καὶ τίνων 

3 παρακοὕὔύσεις ἀπειθήσας. ἔρχου δὲ ἐπὶ τὸ pav- 
τεύεσθαι, καθάπερ ἠξίου Σωκράτης, ἐφ᾽ ὧν ἡ 
πᾶσα σκέψις τὴν ἀναφορὰν εἰς τὴν ἔκβασιν ἔχει 
καὶ οὔτε ἐκ λόγου οὔτε ἐκ τέχνης τινὸς ἄλλης 
ἀφορμαὶ δίδονται πρὸς τὸ συνιδεῖν τὸ προκεί- 
μενον" ὥστε, ὅταν δεήσῃ συγκινδυνεῦσαι φέλῳ 
ἢ πατρίδι, μὴ μαντεύεσθαι, εἰ ᾿συγκινδυνευτέον. 
καὶ γὰρ ἂν , προείπῃ ὃ σοί ὁ μάντις φαῦλα 
Helios τὰ ἱερά, δῆλον ὅ ὅτι θάνατος σημαίνεται 

ἢ πήρωσις μέρους τινὸς τοῦ σώματος ἢ φυγή; 
: Cun.: εἰ δὲ μή Ench. 


5. Cun.: ἔσσαι γάρ MSS. 
> Cun: : προείπῃ or προσείποι MSS. ὁ 





* See II. 7 where the principal points made here are 
illustrated at greater length. 


514 


THE ENCHEIRIDION OF EPICTETUS 


fices, and to give of the firstfruits after the manner 
of our fathers, and to do all this with purity, and 
not in a slovenly or careless fashion, nor, indeed, 

in a niggardly way, nor yet beyond our means. 
32.4 When you have recourse to divination, re- 
member that you do not know what the issue is 
going to be, but that you have come in order to 
find this out from the diviner ; yet if you are indeed a 
philosopher, you know, when you arrive, what the 
nature of itis. For if it is one of the things which 
are not under our control, it is altogether necessary 
that what is going to take place is neither good 
nor evil. Do not, therefore, bring to the diviner 
desire or aversion, and do not approach him with 
trembling, but having first made up your mind that 
every issue is indifferent and nothing to you, but 
that, whatever it may be, it will be possible for 
you to turn it to good use, and that no one will 
prevent this. Go, then, with confidence to the 
gods as to counsellors; and after that, when some 
counsel has been given you, remember whom you 
have taken as counsellors, and whom you will be 
disregarding if you disobey. But go to divination 
as Socrates thought that men should go, that is, in 
cases where the whole inquiry has reference to the 
outcome, and where neither from reason nor from 
any other technical art are means vouchsafed for 
discovering the matter in question. Hence, when 
it is your duty to share the danger of a friend or of 
your country, do not ask of the diviner whether you 
ought to share that danger, For if the diviner 
forewarns you that the omens of sacrifice have been 
unfavourable, it is clear that death is portended, or 
the injury of some member of your body, or exile ; 
515 


nal 


1 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ἀλλ᾽ αἱρεῖ! ὁ λόγος Kal σὺν τούτοις παρίστα- 
σθαι τῷ φίλῳ καὶ τῇ ὃ πατρίδι συγκινδυνεύειν. 
τοιγαροῦν τῷ μείζονι μάντει πρόσεχε, τῷ Τυθίῳ, 
ὃς ἐξέβαλε τοῦ ναοῦ τὸν οὐ βοηθήσαντα ἀναι- 
ρουμένῳ τῷ hiro. 

c. 38. Τάξον τινὰ ἤδη χαρακτῆρα σαυτῷ καὶ 
τύπον, ὃν φυλάξεις ἐπί τε σεαυτοῦ ay καὶ 


2 ἀνθρώποις ἐντυγχάνων. καὶ σιωπὴ τὸ πολὺ 


ἔστω ἢ λαλείσθω τὰ ἀναγκαῖα καὶ δι’ ὀλίγων. 
σπανίως δέ ποτε καιροῦ παρακαλοῦντος ἐπὶ τὸ 
λέγειν λέξον μέν, ἀλλὰ περὶ οὐδενὸς τῶν τυ- 
χόντων' μὴ περὶ μονομαχιῶν, μὴ περὶ ἵππο- 
δρομιῶν, μὴ περὶ ἀθλητῶν, μὴ περὶ βρωμάτων 
ἢ πομάτων, τῶν ἑκασταχοῦ, μάλιστα δὲ μὴ 
περὶ ἀνθρώπων ψέγων ἢ ἐπαινῶν ἢ συγκρίνων. 


8 ἂν μὲν οὖν οἷός τε ἧς, μετάγαγε τοῖς σοῖς λόγοις 5. 


καὶ τοὺς τῶν συνόντων ἐπὶ τὸ προσῆκον. εἰ δὲ 
ἐν ἀλλοφύλοις ἀποληφθεὶς τύχοις, σιώπα. 


4 ΓΤΓέλως μὴ πολὺς ἔστω μηδὲ ἐπὶ πολλοῖς μηδὲ 


ἀνειμένος. 


(A / 
5 “OpKov παραίτησαι, εἰ μὲν οἷόν τε, εἰς ἅπαν, 


> Ἀ 7 3 “" > 7 
εἰ δὲ μή, ἐκ τῶν ἐνόντων. 


¢ ἈΝ 7 ᾿ 
6. Ἑστιάσεις τὰς ἔξω καὶ ἰδιωτικὰς διακρούου" 


7% f / 7 9 ἤ 6 
ἐὰν δέ ποτε γίνηται καιρός, ἐντετώσθω σοι ἡ 


1 Salmasius and Schweighduser: ἐρεῖ or ἔνι MSS. 
2 Salmasius and Schweighauser: παρίσταται MSS. 
8 Added by Salmasius and Schweighauser. 

4 Nil., Simplicius: ἑκασταχοῦ λεγομένων Ench. 

δ Cun.: τοὺς σοὺς λόγους MSS. 








1 A few more unimportant details are given by Aelian, 
Varia Historia, 3, 44; and Simplicius in his commentary on 


this passage, Ὁ. 258 c ff, (Heinsius), or Ὁ. 411 (Schweighiuser), 


516 


THE ENCHEIRIDION OF EPICTETUS 


yet reason requires that even at this risk you are 
to stand by your friend, and share the danger with 
your country. Wherefore, give heed to the greater 
diviner, the Pythian Apollo, who cast out of his 
temple the man who had not helped his friend 
when he was being murdered.} 

33. Lay down for yourself, at the outset, a certain 
stamp and type of character for yourself, which you 
are to maintain whether you are by yourself or are 
meeting with people. And be silent for the most 
part, or else make only the most necessary remarks, 
and express these in few words. But rarely,and when 
occasion requires you to talk, talk, indeed, but about 
no ordinary topics. Do not talk about gladiators, 
or horse-races, or athletes, or things to eat or drink 
—topics that arise on all occasions; but above all, 
do not talk about people, either blaming, or praising, 
or comparing them. If, then, you can, by your own 
conversation bring over that of your companions to 
what is seemly. But if you happen to be left alone 
in the presence of aliens, keep silence. 

Do not laugh much, nor at many things, nor 
boisterously. 

Refuse, if you can, to take an oath at all, but if 
that is impossible, refuse as far as circumstances 
allow. 

Avoid entertainments given by outsiders and by 
persons ignorant of philosophy; but if an appro- 
priate occasion arises for you to attend, be on the 
The point of the story is that a man does not need to go to 
a diviner in order to learn whether he should defend his 
country er his friends. That question was long ago settled 
hy the greatest of diviners, Apollo at Delphi, who ordered to 
be cast out of his temple an inquirer that had once failed to 
defend his own friend. 

517 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


> 9 t 
προσοχή, μήποτε ἄρα ὑπορρυῇς εἰς ἰδιωτισμόν. 
a a ¢ δ ἽΝ ει φ “ ‘4 Ἃ f ‘ 
ἴσθι γάρ, ὅτι, ἐὰν ὁ ἑταῖρος ἢ μεμολυσμένος, καὶ 

[οὶ , 
τὸν συνανατριβόμενον αὐτῷ συμμολύνεσθαι 
f 

ἀνάγκη, κἂν αὐτὸς ὧν τύχῃ καθαρός. 

ΝᾺ , ”~ , ᾽ν 

1 Ta περὶ τὸ σῶμα μέχρι τῆς χρείας ψιλῆς 

i > ? 
maparduBave, οἷον τροφάς, πόμα, ἀμπεχόνην, 

f x Ν 
οἰκίαν, οἰκετίαν' τὸ δὲ πρὸς δόξαν ἢ τρυφὴν 
ἅπαν περίγραφε. 

8 Περὶ ἀφροδίσια εἰς δύναμιν πρὸ γάμου κα- 

ro ! 1 ἢ ἢ ν 
θαρευτέον' ἁπτομένῳ δὲ ὧν νομιμόν ἐστι με 
μ Ν ? b] Ν , a 
ταληπτέον. μὴ μέντοι ἐπαχθὴς γίνου τοῖς 
ἔ δὲ ἐ ἧς" μηδὲ πολλαχοῦ τὸ 
χρωμένοις μηδὲ ἐλεγκτικὸς" μηδέ πολλαχου TO 
ὅτε αὐτὸς οὐ χρῇ, παράφερε. 

9 Ἐὰν τίς σοι ἀπαγγείλῃ ὅτε ὁ δεῖνά σε κακῶς 
λέγει, μὴ ἀπολογοῦ πρὸς τὰ λεχθέντα, ἀλλ᾽ 
3 ͵ f “2 ἢ , so \ 
ἀποκρίνου διότι “ἠγνόει yap τὰ ἄλλα τὰ προ- 
σόντα por κακά, ἐπεὶ οὐκ ἂν ταῦτα μόνα 
ἔλεγεν." 

10 Εἰς τὰ θέατρα τὸ πολὺ παριέναι οὐκ ἀναγκαῖον. 
3 7 Ν "᾽ Ν 7 é 
εἰ δέ ποτε καιρὸς εἴη, μηδενὶ σπουδάξων φαΐίνου 
ἢ σεαυτῷ, τοῦτ᾽ ἔστι θέλε γίνεσθαι μόνα τὰ 
γενόμενα καὶ νικᾶν μόνον τὸν νικῶντα" οὕτω γὰρ 

Ε , / “A \ \ “ 3 “ 
οὐκ ἐμποδισθήσῃ. βοῆς δὲ καὶ τοῦ ἐπιγελᾶν 
τινὶ ἢ ἐπὶ πολὺ συγκινεῖσθαι παντελῶς ἀπέχον. 

Ν Ν Ν 3 ot Ν Ν Ν nm 
καὶ μετὰ TO ATAAMaAYHVAL μὴ πολλὰ περὶ τῶν 
γεγενημένων διωλέγου, ὅσα μὴ φέρει πρὸς τὴν 

᾿ n 
σὴν ἐπανόρθωσιν' ἐμφαίνεται yap ἐκ τοῦ τοιού- 
του, ὅτι ἐθαύμασας τὸν θέαν. 

518 


THE ENCHEIRIDION OF EPICTETUS 


alert to avoid lapsing into the behaviour of such 
laymen. For you may rest assured, that, if a man’s 
companion be dirty, the person who keeps close 
company with him must of necessity get a share of 
his dirt, even though he himself happens to be clean. 

In things that pertain to the body take only as 
much as your bare need requires, I mean such 
things as food, drink, clothing, shelter, and house- 
hold slaves; but cut down everything which is for 
outward show or luxury. 

In your sex-life preserve purity, as far as you can, 
before marriage, and, if you indulge, take only those 
privileges which are lawful. However, do not make 
yourself offensive, or censorious, to those who do 
indulge, and do not make frequent mention of the 
fact that you do not yourself indulge. 

If someone brings you word that So-and-so is 
speaking ill of you, do not defend yourself against 
what has been said, but answer, “‘ Yes, indeed, for 
he did not know the rest of the faults that attach 
to me; if he had, these would not have been the 
only ones he mentioned.” 

It is not necessary, for the most part, to go to 
the public shows. If, however, a suitable occasion 
ever arises, show that your principal concern is for 
none other than yourself, which means, wish only 
for that to happen which does happen, and for him 
only to win who does win; for so you will suffer no 
hindrance, But refrain utterly from shouting, or 
laughter at anyone, or great excitement. And after 
you have left, do not talk a great deal about what 
took place, except in so far as it contributes to your 
own improvement ; for such behaviour indicates that 
the spectacle has aroused your admiration. . 


519 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


f 


ll Els ἀκροάσεις τινῶν μὴ εἰκῆ μηδὲ ῥᾳδίως 
πάριθι' παριὼν δὲ τὸ σεμνὸν καὶ τὸ εὐσταθὲς 
καὶ ἅμα ἀνεπαχθὲς φύλασσς. 

12 Ὅταν τινὶ μέλλῃς συμβωλεῖν, μάλιστα τῶν 
ἐν ὑπεροχῇ δοκούντων, πρόβαλε σαυτῷ, τί ἂν 
ἐποίησεν ἐν τούτῳ Σωκράτης ἢ Ζήνων, καὶ οὐκ 
ἀπορήσεις τοῦ χρήσασθαι προσηκόντως τῷ 

18 ἐμπεσόντι. ὅταν φοιτᾷς πρός τινα τῶν μέγα 
δυναμένων, πρόβαλε, ὅτε οὐχ εὑρήσεις αὐτὸν 
ἔνδον, ὅτε ἀποκλεισθήσῃ, ὅτι ἐντιναχθήσονταί 3 
σοι αἱ θύραι, ὅτι οὐ φροντιεῖ σου. κἂν σὺν 
τούτοις ἐλθεῖν καθήκῃ, ἐλθὼν φέρε τὰ γινόμενα 
καὶ μηδέποτε εἴπης αὐτὸς πρὸς ἑαυτὸν ὅτι “ οὐκ 
ἣν τοσούτου "" ἰδιωτικὸν γὰρ καὶ διαβεβλημένον 
πρὸς τὰ ἐκτός. 

14 Ἔν ταῖς ὁμιλίαις ἀπέστω τὸ ἑαυτοῦ τινῶν 
ἔργων ἢ κινδύνων ἐπὶ πολὺ καὶ ἀμέτρως μεμνῆ- 
σθαι. οὐ γάρ, ὡς σοὶ ἡδύ ἐστι τὸ τῶν σῶν 
κινδύνων μεμνῆσθαι, οὕτω καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις ἡδύ 
ἐστι τὸ τῶν col συμβεβηκότων ἀκούειν. 

16 ᾿Απέστω δὲ καὶ τὸ γέλωτα κινεῖν" ὀλισθηρὸς 
γὰρ ὃ τρόπος εἰς ἰδιωτισμὸν καὶ ἅμα ἱκανὸς 
τὴν αἰδῶ τὴν πρὸς σὲ τῶν πλησίον ἀνιέναι. 

16 ἐπεσφαλὲς δὲ καὶ τὸ εἰς αἰσχρολογίαν προελθεῖν. 
ὅταν οὖν Ts συμβῇ τοιοῦτον, ἂν μὲν εὔκαιρον ἦ, 


1 In Nil. only. 2 Nil.: ἐκτιναχθήσονται MSS. 
$ Cun., Nil., Simpl.: τόπος MSS. 


s 





1 A favourite way of introducing a new work of literature 
to the reading public, somewhat like our modern musical 


520 


THE ENCHEIRIDION OF EPICTETUS 


Do not go rashly or readily to people’s public 
readings,’ but when you do go, maintain your own 
dignity and gravity, and at the same time be careful 
not to make yourself disagreeable. 

When you are about to meet somebody, in 
particular when it is one of those men who are 
held in very high esteem, propose to yourself the 
question, “What would Socrates or Zeno have done 
under these circumstances?’ and then you will 
not be at a loss to make proper use of the occasion. 
When you go to see one of those men who have 
great power, propose to yourself the thought, that 
you will not find him at home, that you will be 
shut out, that the door will be slammed in your 
face, that he will pay no attention to you. And 
if, despite all this, it is your duty to go, go and 
take what comes, and never say to yourself, “It 
was not worth all the trouble.” For this is character- 
istic of the layman, that is, a man who is vexed at 
externals. 

In your conversation avoid making mention at 
great length and excessively of your own deeds or 
dangers, because it is not as pleasant for others to 
hear about your adventures, as it is for you to call 
to mind your own dangers. 

Avoid also raising a laugh, for this is a kind of 
behaviour that slips easily into vulgarity, and at 
the same time is calculated to lessen the respect 
which your neighbours have of you. It is dangerous 
also to lapse into foul language. When, therefore, 
anything of the sort occurs, if the occasion be 
suitable, go even so far as to reprove the person 


recitals, or artists’ exhibitions. See also ITI. 23 for similar 
public lectures given by a philosopher. 
521 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


καὶ ἐπίπληξον τῷ προελθόντι" εἰ δὲ μή, τῷ γε 
ἀποσιωπῆσαι καὶ ἐρυθριᾶσαι καὶ σκυθρωπάσαι 
δῆλος γίνου δυσχεραίνων τῷ λόγῳ. 

ὁ, 84. “Ὅταν ἡδονῆς τινὸς φαντασίαν λάβῃς, 
καθάπερ ἐπὶ τῶν ἄλλων, φύλασσε σαυτόν, μὴ 
συναρπασθῇς ὑπ᾽ αὐτῆς" ἀλλ᾽ ἐκδεξάσθω σε τὸ 
πρᾶγμα, καὶ ἀναβολήν τινα παρὰ σεαυτοῦ λάβε. 
ἔπειτα μνήσθητι ἀμφοτέρων τῶν χρόνων, Kal’ ὅν 
τε ἀπολαύσεις τῆς ἡδονῆς, καὶ καθ᾽ ὃν ἀπολαύσας 
ὕστερον μετανοήσεις καὶ αὐτὸς σεαυτῷ λοιδο- 
pyoy καὶ τούτοις ἀντίθες ὅπως ἀποσχόμενος 
χαιρήσεις καὶ ἐπαινέσεις αὐτὸς σεαυτόν. ἐὰν 
δέ σοι καιρὸὲ φανῇ ἅψασθαι τοῦ ἔργον, 
πρόσεχε, μὴ ἡττήσῃ σε τὸ προσηνὲς αὐτοῦ κα 
ἡδὺ καὶ ἐπαγωγόν' ἀλλ᾽ ἀντιτίθει, πόσῳ ἄμεινον 
τὸ συνειδέναι σεαυτῷ ταύτην τὴν νίκην vevixn- 
κότι. 

ο. 35. “Ὅταν te διαγνούς, ὅτε ποιητέον ἐστί, 
ποιῇς, μηδέποτε φύγῃς ὀφθῆναι πράσσων αὐτό, 
κἂν ἀλλοῖόν τι μέλλωσιν οἱ πολλοὶ περὶ αὐτοῦ 
ὑπολαμβάνειν. εἰ μὲν γὰρ οὐκ ὀρθῶς ποιεῖς, 
αὐτὸ τὸ ἔργον φεῦγε' εἰ δὲ ὀρθῶς, τί φοβῇ τοὺς 
ἐπιπλήξοντας οὐκ ὀρθῶς; 

6, 86. Ὡς τὸ “ἡμέρα ἐστί" καὶ “νύξ ἐστι" 
πρὸς μὲν τὸ διεξευγμένον μεγάλην ἔχει ἀξίαν, 
πρὸς δὲ τὸ συμπεπλεγμένον ἀπαξίαν, οὕτω καὶ 





1 The ordinary person, to be sure, can no more call up a 
blush off-hand than he can a sneeze or a hiccough, and the 
observation of nature implied by the command is, therefore, 
imperfect (cf. note in IV.11,1). But all Epictetus means is 
that one should make no effort to conceal any natural ex- 
pression of moral resentment under such circumstances, 


522 


THE ENCHEIRIDION OF EPICTETUS 


who has made sucha lapse; if, however, the occasion 
does not arise, at all events show by keeping silence, 
and blushing,! and frowning, that you are displeased 
by what has been said. 

34, When you get an external impression of 
some pleasure, guard yourself, as with impressions 
in general, against being carried away by it; nay, let 
the matter wait upon your leisure, and give yourselt 
alittle delay. Next think of the two periods of time, 
first, that in which you will enjoy your pleasure, and 
second, that in which, after the enjoyment is over, 
you will later repent and revile your own self; and 
set over against these two periods of time how much 
joy and self-satisfaction you will get if you refrain. 
However, if you feel that a suitable occasion has 
arisen to do the deed, be careful not to allow its 
enticement, and sweetness, and attractiveness to 
overcome you; but set over against all this the 
thought, how much better is the consciousness of 
having won a victory over it. 

35. When you do a thing which you have made 
up your mind ought to be done, never try not to be 
seen doing it, even though most people are likely 
to think unfavourably about it. If, however, what 
you are doing is not right, avoid the deed itself 
altogether; but if it is right, why fear those who 
are going to rebuke you wrongly? 

36. Just as the propositions, “It is day,’’ and “ It 
is night,” are full of meaning when separated, but 
meaningless if united;2 so also, granted that for 

2 Compare I. 25, 11-13. 1t does not seem possible in our 
idiom to*use the same expressions for ἀξία, ‘* worth,” or 
‘‘value,” which occurs three times in this section, and 
ἀπαξία, “lack of worth,” or ‘(lack of value,” which occurs 
twice. 

523 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


TO τὴν μείξω μερίδα ἐκλέξασθαι πρὸς μὲν τὸ 
σῶμα ἐχέτω ἀξίαν, πρὸς δὲ τὸϊ τὸ κοινωνικὸν 
ἐν ἑστιάσει, οἷον δεῖ, φυλάξαι, ἀπαξίαν ἔχει. 
ὅταν οὖν συνεσθίῃς ἑτέρῳ, μέμνησο, μὴ μόνον 
τὴν πρὸς τὸ σῶμα ἀξίαν τῶν παρακειμένων ὁρᾶν, 
ἀλλὰ καὶ τὴν πρὸς τὸν ἑστιάτορα αἰδῶ φυλάξαι." 

c. 81. "Bay ὑπὲρ δύναμιν ἀναλάβῃς τί πρό- 
σωώπον, καὶ ἐν τούτῳ ἠσχημόνησας Kat, ὃ ἠδύνασο 
ἐκπληρῶσαι, παρέλιπες. 

ο. 88. "Ev τῷ περιπατεῖν καθάπερ προσέχεις, 
μὴ ἐπιβῇς ἥχῳ ἢ στρέψῃς τὸν πόδα σου, οὕτω 
πρόσεχε, μὴ καὶ τὸ ἡγεμονικὸν βιλάψῃς τὸ 
σεαυτοῦ. καὶ τοῦτο ἐὰν ἐφ᾽ ἑκάστου ἔργου 
παραφυλάσσωμεν, ἀσφαλέστερον ἁψόμεθα τοῦ 
ἔργου. 

0. 39. Mérpov κτήσεως τὸ σῶμα ἑκάστῳ ὡς 
ὑ ποὺς ὑποδήματος. ἐὰν μὲν οὖν ἐπὶ τούτου 
στῇς, φυλάξεις τὸ μέτρον" ἐὰν δὲ ὑπερβῆς, ὡς 
κατὰ κρημνοῦ λοιπὸν ἀνάγκη φέρεσθαι καθάπερ 
καὶ ἐπὶ τοῦ ὑποδήματος, ἐὰν ὑπὲρ τὸν πόδα 
ὑπερβῇς, γίνεται κατάχρυσον ὑπόδημα, εἶτα 
πορφυροῦν, κεντητόν. τοῦ γὰρ ἅπαξ ὑπὲρ τὸ 
μέτρον ὅρος οὐθείς ἐστιν. 

c. 40, Αἱ γυναῖκες εὐθὺς ἀπὸ τεσσαρεσκαίδεκα 
ἐτῶν ὑπὸ τῶν ἀνδρῶν κυρίαι καλοῦνται. τοι- 
γωροῦν ὁρῶσαι, ὅτε ἄλλο μὲν οὐδὲν αὐταῖς 
πρόσεστι, μόνον δὲ συγκοιμῶνται τοῖς ἀνδράσι, 
ἄρχονται καλλωπίξεσθαι καὶ ἐν τούτῳ πάσας 


1 ré added by Schweighauser from Simplicius. 


2 


2 αἰδῶ φυλάξαι Schweighduser: οἵαν δεῖ φυλαχθῆναι MSS. 





Σ That is, property, which is of use only for the body, 
should be adjusted to a man’s actual bodily needs, just as a 


524 


THE ENCHEIRIDION OF EPICTETUS 


you to take the larger share at a dinner is good for 
your body, still, it is bad for the maintenance of the 
proper kind of social feeling. When, therefore, you 
are eating with another person, remember to regard, 
not merely the value for your body of what lies 
before you, but also to maintain your respect for 
your host, 

ov. If you undertake ἃ réle which is beyond your 
powers, you both disgrace yourself in that one, and 
at the same time neglect the réle which you might 
have filled with success. 

38. Just as you are careful, in walking about, not 
to step on a nail or to sprain your ankle, so be care- 
ful also not to hurt your governing principle. And 
if we observe this rule in every action, we shall be 
more secure in setting about it. 

39. Hach man’s body is a measure for his property,+ 
just as the foot is a measure for his shoe. If, then, 
you abide by this principle, you will maintain the 
proper measure, but if you go beyond it, you cannot 
help but fall headlong over a precipice, as it were, 
in the end. So also in the case of your shoe; if 
once you go beyond the foot, you get first a gilded 
shoe, then a purple one, then an embroidered one. 
For once you go beyond the measure there is no 
limit. 

40. Immediately after they are fourteen, women 
are called “ladies”’ by men. And so when they see 
that they have nothing else but only to be the bed- 
fellows of men, they begin to beautify themselves, 


shoe is (or,at least should be) adjusted to the actual needs of 
a man’s foot. The comparison seems to have been a 
commonplace ; see Demophilus, Simdilitudines, 20 (Mullach) ; 
Horace, Epist. I. 7, 98 and 10, 42 f. 


§25 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ἔχειν τὰς ἐλπίδας. προσέχειν οὖν ἄξιον, ἵνα 
αἴσθωνται, διότι ἐπ᾽ οὐδενὶ ἄλλῳ τιμῶνται ἢ τῷ 
κόσμιαι φαίνεσθαι καὶ αἰδήμονες. 

ὁ. 41. ᾿Αφυΐας σημεῖον τὸ ἐνδιατρίβειν τοῖς 
περὶ τὸ σῶμα, οἷον ἐπὶ πολὺ γυμνάζεσθαι, ἐπὶ 
πολὺ ἐσθίειν, ἐπὶ πολὺ πίνειν, ἐπὶ πολὺ ἀπο- 
πατεῖν, ὀχεύειν. ἀλλὰ ταῦτα μὲν ἐν παρέργῳ 
ποιητέον" περὶ δὲ τὴν γνώμην ἡ πᾶσα ἔστω 
ἐπιστροφή. 

6, 42. Ὅταν σέ τις κακῶς ποιῇ ἢ κακῶς λέγῃ, 
μέμνησο, ὅτε καθήκειν αὐτῷ οἰόμενος ποιεῖ ἢ 
λέγει. οὐχ οἷόν τε οὖν ἀκολουθεῖν αὐτὸν τῷ σοὶ 
φαινομένῳ, ἀλλὰ τῷ ἑαυτῷ, ὥστε, εἰ κακῶς αὐτῷ " 
φαίνεται, ἐκεῖνος βλάπτεται, ὅστις καὶ ἐξη- 
πάτηται. καὶ γὰρ τὸ ἀληθὲς συμπεπλεγμένον 
ἄν τις ὑπολάβῃ ψεῦδος, οὐ τὸ συμπεπλεγμένον 
βέβλαπται, ἀλλ’ ὁ ἐξαπατηθείς. ἀπὸ τούτων 
οὖν ὁρμώμενος πρᾷάως ἕξεις πρὸς τὸν λοιδοροῦντα. 
ἐπιφθέγγου γὰρ ἐφ᾽ ἑκάστῳ ὅτι “ ἔδοξεν αὐτῷ." 

6, 43. Πᾶν πρᾶγμα δύο ἔχει λαβάς, τὴν μὲν 
φορητήν, τὴν δὲ ἀφόρητον. ὁ ἀδελφὸς ἐὰν 
ἀδικῇ, ἐντεῦθεν αὐτὸ μὴ λάμβανε, ὅτι ἀδικεῖ 
(αὕτη γὰρ ἡ λαβή ἐστιν αὐτοῦ οὐ φορητή), ἀλλὰ 
ἐκεῖθεν μᾶλλον, ὅτι ἀδελφός, ὅτε σύντροφος, καὶ 
λήψῃ αὐτὸ καθ᾽ ὃ φορητόν. 


: Cun., Nil.: αἰδήμονες ἂν σωφροσύνῃ other MSS. 
* Cun., Nil. (ed. Rom.): om. other MSS. 





* Two judgements connected with “and. Zeller, Philo- 
sophie der Griechen,* IIT. 1 (1909), 106, and note 3. Compare 
also I. 26, 14; IL 9, 8 An example of an inconsistent 
composite judgement is given in Ench. 36. 


526 


THE ENCHEIRIDION OF EPICTETUS 


and put all their hopes in that. It is worth while 
for us to take pains, therefore, to make them under- 
stand that they are honoured for nothing else but 
only for appearing modest and self-respecting. 

41, It is a mark of an ungifted man to spend a 
great deal of time in what concerns his body, as in 
much exercise, much eating, much drinking, much 
evacuating of the bowels, much copulating. But 
these things are to be done in passing ; and let your 
whole attention be devoted to the mind. 

42. When someone treats you ill or speaks ill 
of you, remember that he acts or speaks thus 
because he thinks it is incumbent upon him. That 
being the case, it is impossible for him to follow 
what appears good to you, but what appears good 
to himself; whence it follows, that, if he gets a 
wrong view of things, the man that suffers is the 
man that has been deceived. For if a person thinks 
a composite judgement? to be false, the composite 
judgement does not suffer, but the person who has 
been deceived. If, therefore, you start from this 
point of view, you will be gentle with the man who 
reviles you. For you should say on each occasion, 
“ He thought that way about it.”’ 

43. Everything has two handles, by one of which 
it ought to be carried and by the other not. If 
your brother wrongs you, do not lay hold of the 
matter by the handle of the wrong that he is doing, 
because this is the handle by which the matter 
ought not to be carried; but rather by the other 
handle—that he is your brother, that you were 
brought, up together, and then you will be laying 
hold of the matter by the handle by which it ought 
to be carried. 


527 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ἢ, 44. Οὗτοι ot λόγοι ἀσύνακτοι" “ ἐγώ σου 
πλουσιώτερός εἰμι, ἐγώ σου ἄρα κρείσσων "" 

“ ἐγώ σου λογιώτερος, ἐγώ σου ἄρα κρείσσων “" 
ἐκεῖνον δὲ μᾶλλον συνακτικοί" “ ἐγώ σου πλου- 
σιώτερός εἰμι, ἡ ἐμὴ ἄρα κτῆσις τῆς σῆς κρείσ ‘ 
σων “ἐγώ σου λογιώτερος, ἡ ἐμὴ ἄρα λέξις τῆς 
σῆς κρείσσων." σὺ δέγς οὔτε κτῆσις εἶ οὔτε λέξις. 

6, 45. Λούεταί τις ταχέως" μὴ εἴπῃς ὅτι κακῶς, 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι ταχέως. πίνει τις πολὺν οἶνον" μὴ 
εἴπῃς ὅτι κακῶς, GAN ὅτι πολυν. πρὶν yap 
διαγνῶναι τὸ δόγμα, πόθεν οἶσθα, εἰ κακῶς ; 
οὕτως ov} συμβήσεταί σοι ἄλλων 3 μὲν φαντα- 
σίας καταληπτικὰς λαμβάνειν, ἄλλοις δὲ συγκα- 
τατίθεσθαι. 

1 6. 46. Μηδαμοῦ σεαυτὸν εἴπῃς φιλόσοφον μηδὲ 
λάλει τὸ πολὺ ἐν ἰδιώταις περὶ τῶν θεωρημάτων, 
ἀλλὰ ποίει τὸ ἀπὸ τῶν θεωρημάτων' οἷον ἐν. 
συμποσίῳ μὴ λέγε, πῶς δεῖ ἐσθίειν, GAN ἔσθιε, 
ὡς δεῖ. μέμνησο γάρ, ὅτε οὕτως ἀφῃρήκει TavTa- 
χόθεν Σωκράτης τὸ ἐπιδεικτικόν, ὥστε ἤρχοντο 
πρὸς αὐτὸν βουλόμενοι φιλοσόφοις ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ 
συσταθῆναι, κἀκεῖνος ἀπῆγεν αὐτούς. οὕτως 

2 ἠνείχετο παρορώμενος. κἂν περὶ θεωρήματός 
τίνος ἐν ἰδιώταις ἐμπίπτῃ λόγος, σιώπα τὸ πολύ' 
μέγας γὰρ ὁ κίνδυνος εὐθὺς ἐξεμέσαι, ὃ οὐκ 
1 Nil.: οὖν ποῖ. 

3 Cun., Nil., Simpl. ; ἄλλας other MSS. 


2 Cun., Nil: καταλαμβάνειν other MSS. 


4 Ὁ on,, Nil., Simpl.: om. here but placed before κἂν 
(below) by other MSS. 


528 





THE ENCHEIRIDION OF EPICTETUS 


44, The following statements constitute a non 
sequitur: “51 am richer than you are, therefore I am 
superior to you’; or, “I am more eloquent than 
you are, therefore I am superior to you,’ But the 
following conclusions are better: “I am richer than 
you are, therefore my property is superior to yours” ; 
or, “ I am more eloquent than you are, therefore my 
elocution is superior to yours,” But you are neither 
property nor elocution. 

45, Somebody is hasty about bathing ;! do not say 
that he bathes badly, but that he is hasty about 
bathing. Somebody drinks a good deal of wine; do 
not say that he drinks badly, but that he drinks a 
good deal. For until you have decided what judge- 
ment prompts him, how do you know that what he 
is doing is bad? And thus the final result will not 
be that you receive convincing sense-impressions of 
some things, but give your assent to others. 

46. On no occasion call yourself a philosopher, 
and do not, for the most part, talk among laymen 
about your philosophic principles, but do what 
follows from your principles. For example, at a 
banquet do not say how people ought to eat, but 
eat as a man ought. For remember how Socrates 
had so completely eliminated the thought of osten- 
tation, that people came to him when they wanted 
him to introduce them to philosophers, and he used 
to bring them along. So well did he submit to being 
overlooked. And if talk about some philosophic 
principle arises among laymen, keep silence for the 
most part, for there is great danger that you will 
spew up jmmediately what you have not digested. 


1 The implication must be that a hurried bath, like a 
hurried shave, is apt to leave something to be desired. 
529 
VOL. I. MM 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ἔπεψας. καὶ ὅταν εἴπῃ col τίς, ὅτι οὐδὲν οἶσθα, 
καὶ σὺ μὴ δηχθῇς, τότε ἶσθι, ὁ ὅτι ἄρχῃ τοῦ ἔργου. 
ἐπεὶ καὶ τὰ πρόβατα οὐ χόρτον φέροντα τοῖς 
ποιμέσιν ἐπιδεικνύει πόσον ἔφαγεν, ἀλλὰ τὴν 
νομὴν ἔσω πέψαντα ἔρια ἔξω φέρει καὶ γάλα: 
καὶ σὺ τοίνυν μὴ τὰ θεωρήματα τοῖς ἰδιώταις 
ἐπιδείκνυε, GN ἀπ’ αὐτῶν πεφθέντων τὰ 
ἔργα. 

ο. 47. Ὅταν εὐτελῶς ἡρμοσμένος ἧς κατὼ τὸ 
σῶμα, μὴ καχλωπίξου ἐπὶ τούτῳ μηδ᾽, ἂν ὕδωρ 
πίνῃς, ἐκ πάσης ἀφορμῆς "λέγε, ὅτι ὕδωρ πίνεις,. 
κἂν ἀσκῆσαί ποτε πρὸς πόνον θέλῃς, σεαυτῷ καὶ 
μὴ τοῖς ἔξω" μὴ τοὺς ἀνδριάντας περιλάμβανε: 
ἀλλὰ διψῶν ποτὲ σφοδρῶς ἐπίσπασαι ψυχροῦ 
ὕδατος καὶ ἔκπτυσον καὶ μηδενὶ εἴπῃς. 

1. 0. 48, ᾿Ιδιώτου στάσις καὶ χαρακτήρ' οὐδέποτε 
ἐξ ἑαυτοῦ προσδοκᾷ ὠφέλειαν ἢ βλάβην, ἀλλ᾽ 
ἀπὸ τῶν ἔξω. φιλοσόφου στάσις καὶ χαρακτήρ' 
πᾶσαν ὠφέλειαν καὶ βλάβην ἐξ ἑαυτοῦ προσ- 
δοκᾷ. 

2 Σημεῖα προκόπτοντος" οὐδένα ψέγει, οὐδένα 
ἐπαινεῖ, οὐδένα μέμφεται, οὐδενὶ ἐγκαλεῖ, οὐδὲν 
περὶ ἑαυτοῦ λέγει ὡς ὄντος τινὸς ἢ εἰδότος TL, ὅταν 
ἐμποδισθῇ τε ἢ κωλυθῇ, ἑαυτῷ ἐγκαλεῖ, κἄν τις 
αὐτὸν ἐπαινῇ, καταγελᾷ τοῦ ἐπαινοῦντος αὐτὸς 
map ἑαυτῷ: κἂν ψέγῃ, οὐκ ἀπολογεῖται. περίει- 





1 That is, in cold weather (see III. 12, 2 and #0), because 


this takes a person out of doors where people can see him. 
* See III. 12, 17, and note, 


539 


THE ENCHEIRIDION OF EPICTETUS 


So when a man tells you that you know nothing, 
and you, like Socrates, are not hurt, then rest 
assured that you are making a beginning with the 
business you have undertaken. For sheep, too, do 
not bring their fodder to the shepherds and show 
how much they have eaten, but they digest their 
food within them, and on the outside produce wool 
and milk. And so do you, therefore, make no dis- 
play to the laymen of your philosophical principles, 
but let them see the results which come from these 
principles when digested. 

47. When you have become adjusted to simple 
living in regard to your bodily wants, do not preen 
yourself about the accomplishment; and so likewise, 
if you are a water-drinker, do not on every occasion 
say that you are a water-drinker. And if ever you 
want to train to develop physical endurance, do it 
by yourself and not for outsiders to behold; do not 
throw your arms around statues,’ but on occasion, 
when you are very thirsty, take cold water into your 
mouth, and then spit it out, without telling anybody. 

48, This is the position and character of a layman : 
He never looks for either help or harm from him- 
self, but only from externals. This is the position 
and character of the philosopher: He looks for all 
his help or harm from himself. 

Signs of one who is making progress are: He 
censures no one, praises no one, blames no one, 
finds fault with no one, says nothing about himself 
as though he were somebody or knew something. 
When he is hampered or prevented, he blames him- 
self. And if anyone compliments him, he smiles to 
himself at the person complimenting; while if any- 
one censures him, he makes no defence. He goes 
531 
MM2 ” 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ot δὲ καθάπερ οἱ ἄρρωστοι, εὐλαβούμενος τι κι- 
νῆσαι τῶν καθισταμένων, πρὶν πῆξιν λαβεῖν. 
ὄρεξιν ἅπασαν ἧρκεν ἐξ ἑαυτοῦ" τὴν δ᾽ ἔκκλισιν 
εἰς μόνα τὰ παρὰ φύσιν τῶν ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν μετατέθεικεν. 
ὁρμῇ πρὸς ἅπαντα ἀνειμένῃ χρῆται. ἂν ἠλίθιος 
ἢ ἀμαθὴς δοκῇ, οὐ πεφρόντικεν, ἑνί τε λόγῳ, ὡς 
ἐχθρὸν ἑαυτὸν π᾿αραφυλάσσει καὶ ἐπίβουλον. 

c. 49, Ὅταν tis ἐπὶ τῷ νοεῖν καὶ ἐξηγεῖσθαι 
δύνασθαι τὰ Χρυσίππου βιβλία σεμνύνηται, λέγε 
αὐτὸς πρὸς ἑαυτὸν ὅτι “ εἰ μὴ Χρύσιππος ἀσαφῶς 
ἐγεγράφει, οὐδὲν ἂν εἶχεν οὗτος, ἐφ᾽ ᾧ ἐσεμνύ- 
VETO.” 

᾿Εγὼ δὲ τέ βούλομαι; καταμαθεῖν τὴν φύσιν 
καὶ ταύτῃ ἔπεσθαι. Entre οὗν, τίς ἐστὶν ὁ ἐξηγού- 
μενος" καὶ ἀκούσας, ὅτε Χρύσιππος, ἔρχομαι 
πρὸς αὐτόν. ἀλλ᾽ οὐ νοῶ τὰ γεγραμμένα' ζητῶ 
οὖν τὸν ἐξηγούμενον. καὶ μέχρι τούτων οὔπω 
σεμνὸν οὐδέν. ὅταν δὲ εὕρω τὸν ἐξηγούμενον, 
ἀπολείπεται χρῆσθαι τοῖς παρηγγελμένοις' τοῦ- 
TO αὐτὸ μόνον σεμνόν ἐστιν. ἂν δὲ αὐτὸ τοῦτο 
τὸ ἐξηγεῖσθαι θαυμάσω, τί ἄλλο ἢ γραμματικὸς 
ὠπετελέσθην ἀντὶ φιλοσόφου; πλήν γε δὴ ὅτι 
ἀντὶ .“ΘΟμήρου Χρύσιππον ἐξηγούμενος. μᾶλλον 
οὖν, ὅταν Tes εἴπῃ μοι “ ἐπανάγνωθί port Χρύ- 
cimmov, ἐρυθριῶ, ὅταν μὴ δύνωμαι ὅμοια τὰ 
ἔργα καὶ σύμφωνα ἐπιδεικνύειν τοῖς λόγοις. 

9. δ0. Ὅσα προτίθεται, τούτοις ὡς νόμοις, ὡς 


1 In A alone. 


532 


ab 


THE ENCHEIRIDION OF EPICTETUS 


about like an invalid, being careful not to disturb, 
before it has grown firm, any part which is getting 
well. He has put away from himself his every desire, 
and has transferred his aversion to those things only, 
of what is under our control, which are contrary to 
nature. He exercises no pronounced choice in 
regard to anything. If he gives the appearance 
of being foolish or ignorant he does not care. In 
a word, he keeps guard against himself as though 
he were his own enemy lying in wait. 

49. When a person gives himself airs because he 
can understand and interpret the books of Chry- 
sippus, say to yourself, “If Chrysippus had not 
written obscurely, this man would have nothing 
about which to give himself airs.” 

But what is it 1 want? To learn nature and to 
follow her. I seek, therefore, someone to interpret 
her; and having heard that Chrysippus does so, 1 
gotohim. But I do not understand what he has 
written ; I seek, therefore, the person who inter- 
prets Chrysippus. And down to this point there 
is nothing to justify pride. But when I find the 
interpreter, what remains is to put his precepts into 
practice ; this is the only thing to be proud about. 
If, however, I admire the mere act of interpretation, 
what have I done but turned into a grammarian 
instead of a philosopher? The only difference, 
indeed, is that I interpret Chrysippus instead of 
Homer. Far from being proud, therefore, when 
somebody says to me, “Read me Chrysippus,” 1 
blush the rather, when I am unable to show him 
such deeds as match and harmonize with his words. 

50. Whatever principles are set before you, stand 
fast by these like laws, feeling that it would be 


. 533 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


ἀσεβήσων, ἂν παραβῆς, ἔμμενε, ὅ τι δ᾽ ἂν ἐρῇ 
τις περὶ σοῦ, μὴ ἐπιστρέφου τοῦτο γὰρ οὐκ ἔτ᾽ 
ἐστὶ σόν. 

1 oc. 51. Εἰς ποῖον ἔτι χρόνον ἀναβάλλῃ τὸ τῶν 
βελτίστων ἀξιοῦν σεαυτὸν καὶ ἐν μηδενὶ παρα- 
βαίνειν τὸν διαιροῦντα λόγον ; παρείχηφας τὰ 
θεωρήματα, οἷς ἔδει σε συμβάλλειν, καὶ συμβέ- 
βληκας. ποῖον οὖν ἔτι διδάσκαλον προσδοκᾷς, 
ἵνα εἰς ἐκεῖνον ὑπερθῇ τὴν ἐπανόρθωσιν ποιῆσαι 
τὴν σεαυτοῦ; οὐκ ἔτι εἶ μειράκιον, ἀλλὰ ἀνὴρ 
ἤδη τέλειος. ἂν νῦν ἀμελήσῃς καὶ ῥᾳθυμήσῃς 
καὶ ἀεὶ προθέσεις" ἐκ προθέσεως ποιῇ ὃ καὶ 
ἡμέρας ἄλλας ἐπ᾽ ἄλλαις ὁρίξῃς, pel as προ- 
σέξεις σεαυτῷ, λήσεις σεαυτὸν οὐ προκόψας, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἰδιώτης διατελέσεις καὶ ζῶν καὶ ἀποθνήσκων. 

9 ἤδη οὖν ἀξίωσον σεαυτὸν βιοῦν ὡς τέλειον καὶ 
προκόπτοντα' καὶ πᾶν τὸ βέλτιστον φαινόμενον 
ἔστω σοι νόμος ἀπαράβατος. κἂν ἐπίπονόν Tt 
i ἡδὺ ἢ ἢ ἔνδοξον ἡ ἣ ἄδοξον προσάγηται, μέμνησο, 
ὅτι νῦν ὁ ἀγὼν καὶ ἤδη πάρεστι τὰ Ὀλύμπια καὶ 
οὐκ ἔστιν ἀναβάλλεσθαι οὐκέτι καὶ ὅτι παρὰ 
μίαν ἡμέραν καὶ ἕν πρᾶγμαϑ καὶ ἀπόλλυται 

8 προκοπὴ καὶ" σῴξεται. Σωκράτης οὕτως ἀπε- 
τελέσθη, ἐπὶ πάντων τῶν προσαγομένων αὐτῷ " 

μηδενὶ ἄλλῳ προσέχων ἢ τῷ λόγῳ. σὺ δὲ εἰ καὶ 


μήπω εἶ i Σωκράτης, ὡς Σωκράτης γε εἶναι βουλό- 
μενος ὀφείλεις βιοῦν. 


1 Aun., Nil.: ὑπερθέσεις the other MSS. 


3 A un., Nil.: ὑπερθέσεως (—~ewv) the other MSS. 
3 Nil.: ποιῇς Ench. 


‘ C (several), Nil. : ἔτι the other MSS. 
5 ἡμέραν καὶ ἐν πρᾶγμα Simpl. : ἧτταν καὶ ἔνδοσιν Ench. 


°C un., Nil., Simpl.: ἤ the other MSS. (except in the 
second case ἢ καί B A sing.). 


534 


ιν 


THE ENCHEIRIDION OF EPICTETUS 


impiety for you to transgress them. But pay no 
attention to what somebody says about you, for this 
is, at length, not under your control. 

51. How long will you still wait to think yourself 
worthy of the best things, and in nothing to trans- 
gress against the distinctions set up by the reason? 
You have received the philosophical principles 
which you ought to accept, and you have accepted 
them. What sort of a teacher, then, do you still wait 
for, that you should put off reforming yourself until 
he arrives? You are no longer a lad, but already a 
full-grown man. If you are now neglectful and 
easy-going, and always making one delay after 
another, and fixing first one day and then another, 
after which you will pay attention to yourself, then 
without realizing it you will make no progress, but, 
living and dying, will continue to be a layman 
throughout. Make up your mind, therefore, before 
it is too late, that the fitting thing for you to do is 
to live as a mature man who is making progress, 
and let everything which seems to you to be best 
be for you a law that must not be transgressed. 
And if you meet anything that is laborious, or 
sweet, or held in high repute, or in no repute, 
remember that now is the contest, and here before 
you are the Olympic games, and that it is impossible 
to delay any longer, and that it depends on a single 
day and a single action, whether progress is lost or 
saved. This is the way Socrates became what he 
was, by paying attention to nothing but his reason 
in everything that he encountered. And even if 
you are not yet a Socrates, still you ought to live as 
one who wishes to be a Socrates. 

REA CLARO COED rd Nee τροπι en eae ete πο του ρου, 

Ἰ ray προσαγομένων αὐτῷ Meibom ; προσάγων ἑαυτόν Ench. 


535 


ARRIAN’S DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS 


1 ¢.52.‘O πρῶτος καὶ ἀναγκαιότατος τόπος 
ἐστὶν ἐν φιλοσοφίᾳ ὁ τῆς χρήσεως τῶν θεωρημά- 
τῶν, οἷον τὸ; μὴ ψεύδεσθαι" ὁ δεύτερος ὁ τῶν 
ἀποδείξεων, οἷον πόθεν ὅτι οὐ δεῖ ψεύδεσθαι; 
τρίτος ὁ αὐτῶν τούτων βεβαιωτικὸς καὶ διαρθρω- 
τικός, οἷον πόθεν ὅτι τοῦτο ἀπόδειξις; τί γάρ 
ἐστιν» ἀπόδειξις, τί ἀκολουθία, Ti μάχη, τί ἀληθές, 

2 τί ψεῦδος; οὐκοῦν ὁ μὲν τρίτος τόπος ἀναγκαῖος 
διὰ τὸν δεύτερον, ὁ δὲ δεύτερος διὰ τὸν πρῶτον" 
ὁ δὲ ἀναγκαιότατος καὶ ὅπου ἀναπαύεσθαι δεῖ, ὃ 
πρῶτος. ἡμεῖς δὲ ἔμπαλιν ποιοῦμεν" ἐν yap τῷ 
τρίτῳ τόπῳ διατρίβομεν καὶ περὶ ἐκεῖνόν ἐστιν 

ἡμῖν ἡ πᾶσα σπουδή τοῦ δὲ πρώτου παντελῶς 
ἀμελοῦμεν. τοιγαροῦν ψευδόμεθα μέν, πῶς δὲ 
ἀποδείκνυται ὅτι οὐ δεῖ ψεύδεσθαι, πρόχειρον 
ἔχομεν. 

1. 6. 53. "Earl παντὸς πρόχειρα ἑκτέον 5 ταῦτα" 
ἄγου δὲ μ᾽, ὦ Ζεῦ, καὶ σύ γ᾽ * ἡ ἸΠεπρωμένη, 
ὅποι πποθ᾽ ὑμῖν εἰμὶ διατεταγμένος" 
ὡς ἔψομαί γ᾽ ἄοκνος" ἢν δέ γε μὴ θέλω, 
κακὸς γενόμενος, οὐδὲν ἧττον ἕψομαι. 

9 “ὅστις δ᾽ ἀνάγκῃ συγκεχώρηκεν καλῶς, 
σοφὸς παρ᾽ ἡμῖν, καὶ τὰ θεῖ δ ἐπίσταται." 

8 “ἀλλ᾽, ὦ Κρίτων, εἰ ταύτῃ τοῖς θεοῖς φίλον, 

4 ταύτῃ γενέσθω." 


ζς 2 \ 


ἐμὲ 6€”Avuros καὶ Μέλητος 5 ἀποκτεῖναι μὲν 
ν᾽ ¢ 
δύνανται, βλάψαι δὲ οὔ." 


1 Cun., and perhaps Simpl.: ὃ τοῦ the other MSS. 
3 CO nonn., Par.. Simpl.: εὐκτέον the other MSS. 
* Meibom (from the Dise.): ἄγε δή με Ench. ὺ 
* Meibom (from s in three of the four quotations in the 
Dise.): καὶ A un,, and § generally. The other MSS. omit. 
. Cnonn., Plutarch: θεῖα the other MSS. * Méa:ros MSS, 
53 


THE ENCHEIRIDION OF EPICTETUS 


52. The first and most necessary division in 
philosophy is that which has to do with the appli- 
cation of the principles, as, for example, Do not 
lie. The second deals with the demonstrations, as, 
for example, How comes it that we ought not to 
lie? The third confirms and discriminates between 
these processes, as, for example, How does it come 
that this is a proof? For what is a proof, what is 
logical consequence, what contradiction, what truth, 
what falsehood? Therefore, the third division is 
necessary because of the second, and the second 
because of the first ; while the most necessary of all, 
and the one in which we ought to rest, is the first. 
But we do the opposite ; for we spend our time in 
the third division, and all our zeal is devoted to it, 
while we utterly neglect the first. Wherefore, we 
lie, indeed, but are ready with the arguments which 
prove that one ought not to lie. 

53. Upon every occasion we ought to have the 
following thoughts at our command : 


Lead thou me on, O Zeus, and Destiny, 

To that goal long ago to me assigned. 

Pll follow and not falter; if my will 

Prove weak and craven, still 111 follow on.+ 


“ Whoso has rightly with necessity complied, 
We count him wise, and skilled in things divine.” 3 


ἐς Well, O Crito, if so it is pleasing to the gods, so 
let it be.” 3 
« Anytus and Meletus can kill me, ‘but they 
cannot hurt me,” 4 
4 Vrom Cleanthes. See note on 11. 23, 42. 
* Euripides, frag. 965 Nauck. 
8 Plato, Crito, 43 D (slightly modified). 
4 Plato, Apology, 30 C-D (somewhat modified). 


537 


INDEX 


ABANDON one’s own people, 108, 509 

Aberration, 473 

Abject, 197, 203, 237-9, 261, 818, 365, 
429 


Abroad, going, 209-11, 215 
Abscess, 181 

Abstention, 85 

Abstinence, 157, 319 
Academy, 821 

Acceptance, 449 

Accident, 229 

Accusers of Socrates, 287 
Accusing, 35, 45 

Acheron, 93 

Achilles, 188, 406-9 
Acquaintances, 187, 205, 307 
Acquiescence, 233 

Acropolis, 207, 273 

Act, one’s own, 267-9 

Action, 31, 317, 329 
Activities, 433; of reason, 421 
Actor, 301, 365, 497; comic, 35, 39 
Admetus, 119 

Administration, 511 
Admiration, 199, 281, 371, 519 
Adonis, 389 

Adulterer, 31, 309, 381 
Adultery, 395 

Advancement at court, 433 
Advantage, 119-21, 265, 335, 355, 375 
Adventures, 521 

Advertising, 179 

Advice, 163 

Aduze, 377 

Aegisthus, 19 

Aeolus, 159 

Affection 203-5, 211, 307 
Agameninon, 133, 141-2, 309 
Age, proper, 129 

Aggressor, 343 

Agrippinus, 465-7 

Air, 193, 449+ airs, pubting on, 77 
Alcibiades, 344 

Alexander, 161, 207 

Aliens, 517 

Alone. See Forlorn. 


Ambassador, 275 

Ambition, 329 

Amendment, 129 

Anaxarchus, 206 

Ancestors, 247, 297 

Anchor, 475; at anchor, 489 

Andromache, 169 

Anger, 27, 79, 91, 103, 135, 429, 451, 
465, 509 

Animal, 808, 409-11, 443; caged and 
free, 251-3; rational and irrational, 
471; tame, 285, 469 

Ankle, 101, 507, 525 

Annoyance, 427, 463 

Another (= God), 21, 33, 93, 279, 497 

Antecedent, 51 

Anticipation, 451 

Autilochus, 407 

Antipater, 27, 125 

Antisthenes, 153, 205, 283, 353 

Anxiety, 897-9, 405 

Anytus, 177, 537 

Ape, 103, 509 

Apollo, 11, 73, 
Pythian, 517 

Apollonius, 87 

Appearances, 201, 339 

Appetite, 117 

Applause, 173, 197, 326 

@Apple, 339 

Application of principles, 265, 529-33, 

537 


89; Paean, 73; 


Approval, 451 
Apron, 381 

Aprulla, 290 
Apuleius, 326 
Archedemus, 27, 125 
Archelaus, 455 
Archery, 357 
Archidamus, 299 
Arethas, 150 

Argos, 189, 237 
Arguments, 293, 303, 427, 537 
Argus, 19, 167 
Aricia, 465 
Aristeides, 393 


539 


INDEX 


BT SODAS, 4173 (of Ryzantium), 


Armament, 253 


Arrian, 449, 453 
Arrogance, 85, 295 
Art and Arts, 35, 57, 125, 171, 377, 
427; small, 179 
Artaxerxes Ochus, 253 
Asclepius, 385 
Ashamed. See Shame. 
Ashes, 233 
Ass, 59, 99, 149, 309, 339. See also 
Donkey. 
Assent, 23, 29, 53, 85, 145, 167, 267, 
317, 349, 355, 397, 411, 451, 471, 529 
Assessing penalty, 205 
Assistance, 501-3 
Associates, 193 
Athena, 89 
Athenians, 161, 207, 299, 301 
Athens, 55, 149, 161, 179, 189, 197, 
208-9, 217~-9, 303, 827, 455 - 
Athlete, 101~3, 107, 119, 125, 139, 
151, 169, 225, 281, 317, 325, 509, 517 
Atoms, 441 
Attach oneself, 275-7 
Attachment, 211 
Attendant, 117, 233 
Attention, 167, 375, 423 ff., 471, 489, 
535; personal, 505 
Attire, 393 
Attractive and Attractiveness, 85, 
163, 523 
Audience, 173-5, 182-3, 457 
August (adj.), 121 
Auspices, 223 
Authority, 207, 367, 425 
Automedon, 407 
Aversion and Avoidance, 21-3, 29, 47, 
57-9, 81-7, 99, 185, 141, 145-7, 153, 
167, 173, 203, 231, 323-5, 341, 351, 
383, 399, 411, 419, 441, 471, 483-5, 
495, 513-5, 533; Treatise on, 819 
Avoidance. See Aversion. 
Awe, 147, 371 
Axe, 377 


Babble and Babbler, 197, 433-5 


Baby, 155 
Backsliding, 381 


Bad, 79, 121-3, 289, 347, 375-7, 
381; man, 245-7. See also Evil, 


540 


Bag, 467 

Bailull of the ree Cities, 49 If. 

Banishment, 219 

Banker, 29 

Banquet, 105, 401, 05, 629 

Barbarisms, 69 

Barea Soranus, 292 

Barley, 99, 271, 463; -meal, 455 

Base, the, 55, 329 

Bath and Bathing, 71, 117, 225, 2385, 
259, 317, 323, 377, 415-17, 421, 
487, 503, 529; public, 486; -tub, 156 

Battle, 91; ~field, 155 

“ Bear and Forbear,” 455 

Beard, 18, 379, 381 

Bearing grudges, 335 

Beast, 413 

Beaten (defeated), 509 

Beating, 167, 269, 369; to death, 59 

Beautiful and Beauty, 5-9, 15, 19, 21, 
175, 327, 391-3, 407, 419 

Beautifying, 525 

Bed, 48, 71, 239, 387; hard, 183; 
-fellows, 525 

Bedroom, 135; -door, 59 

Bee, 167, 273 

Beeswax, 339 


Beheading, 259, 287, 371 
Being, problem of, 441-3 
Benches, 183; the judge’s bench, 197 
Benefit, 497 
Besiegers, 341 
Best thing in the world, 49-53 
Bile, 893 
Birds, 251 
Birth, 279-81, 337 
Biting, 287 
Blackguards, 197 
Blacksmith, 171, 503 
Blame and Blaming, 77, 147, 151, 205, 
209, 288, 329, 368, 375-7, 381, 483, 
489, 618, 517 
Blessed, 121, 367~9 
err and Blinded, 139, 235, 383-5, 
Blossom, 389 
Blow the nose, 491 
Blowhard, 385 
Blows, 223 
arr and Blushing, 57, 459, 465, 523, 


INDEX 


Boar, 399 

Body, 21, 47-9, 53, 73, 77, 93, 113, 
137-9, 141-5, ‘161, 167, 207, 207 73, 
279, 283, 289, 257-801, sll, 825, 
359, 367, 4138-19, 443-5, 159, 465, 
467-9, 475, 483, 491, 497, 507, 515, 
525~7' -guard, 163-5, 275 

Bold, 453 

Bombast, 459 

Bonds, 267, 367 

Bones, 373 

Book, "159, 313-17, 325, 375, 405, 533 

Borrowing, 347 

Bow, of ship, 195 

Bowels, 393 

Boy, 33, 55, 395; 
-favoutite, 135 

Braygart, 199, 347 

Brave, 247 

Break wind, 159 

Breast, 203 

Bridle, 271, 463 

Brigand and Brigandage, 91, 193, 467 

Bronze, 141 

Brother, 23, 31, 79-81, 87-9, 115, 125, 
145, 149, 159, 165, 201, 205, 209-11, 
267, 275, 283, 343, 373, 435, 511, 

Brotherly love, 31 

Brushing teeth, 467 

Brutal and Brutality, 331 f., 335 

Builder and Building, 77, 125, 451 

Bulb, 489 

Bull, ᾿18, 133, 167, 391 

Burden, 349, 435 

Bushel-measure, 233 

Business, 321, 357, 501; one’s true, 
345, 890 

Busybody, 165 

Buying and selling, 261 


Caesar, 29, 31, δ7..9, 59, 61, 69, 91, 
103~5, 149-51, 223, 247-9, 257-9, 
263, 277, 315-17, 369, 431, 435, Bil: 
friend of, 247; household. of, $57 

Oage, 251 

Cake a 463; sweet, 507 

Calf, 133 

Oallicles, 881, 

Calling of a Oynic, 131-69 

QOalm, 359, 401-3, 459, 493, 511 

Campaign, 193-7, 249-51, 255 

Capitol, 228 

Captain, 195, 489 

Oaptives, 285 


pretty, 249; 


Oareful, 159 

Qarelessness, 881, 515 

Caring for men, 205 

Oarpenter, 137, 171, 377-81, 423, 427 

Oash, 433 

Qassiope, 50-1 

Cassius, 313 

Category, 179 

Cattle, 18, 69, 323 

Cautery, 157 

Censorious, 519 

Censure and Oensuring, 1638-5, 225, 
229, 427, 531 

Chacroneia, 139 

Chains, 285, 431 

Chamberlain, 361, 367 

Chance gift, 129 

Change, 215, 449; periodic, 187 

Chapel, 127 

Character: 309, 517 

Charm, natural, 163 

Chase, 287 

Cheerfulness, 445 

Cheese, 48-9 

Child and Ohildren, 33, 55-7, 71, 93, 
101, 105, 115-7, 128, 147, 153-9, 
165, 169, 173, 187-9, 203-5, "211-13, 
235, 267, 275, 279-83, 293, 299, 301, 
361, 369, 373, 387, 443, 445, 487-91, 
495-7, 505, 509-13; children’s 
children, 193 

Chill, 153 

Choice, 23, 57-9, 81, 85, 141, 145~7, 
167, 208, 245, 267, 275, 319, 323, 
351, 355, 367, 411, 419, 441, 447, 
471, 4838. 487, 533% of "God, 2775 
treatise on, 319 

Choke lions, 335 

Chorus, 441; singer, 96-7 

Christians, 362 

Ohronic disorders, 109 

Ohrysippus, 27, 44, 71, 125, 211, 393, 
449, 533 

Circumspection, 101-38, 509 

Circumstances, 263 

Circus, 109, 403 

Citadel, 273-5 

Cithara, 381 

Citharoede, L171, 179, 375 

Citizen (and duties of), 13, 17, 23, 49, 
55, 125, 199, 201, 221, "339, 501-3, 
Bil; of universe, "191 

Citizenship, 57, 199 

Oity, 93, 147, 155, 273, 
imperial, 198; -Btate, 201 


398; 417; 


541 


INDEX 


Ciyil strife, 343 

Clip hands, 187 

Claque, 37 

Olass-room, 109 

Olay, 145, 279 

Clean ἔχω Cleanliness, 20-1, 163, 

Oleanthes, 181, 235, 805, 327; quoted, 
165, 289, 397, 537 

Climate, 109 

Oloak, fancy, 183; little, 157; purple, 
457; rough, 13, 133, 147, 377~81, 
387, 421 

Clothes, 135, 239, 267, 398-5, 413, 
417, 463; clothing, 519. See also 
Dress, and Raiment. 

Club, 59 

Cnossos, 65 

Coal, 105 

Cobbler, 67, 199, 201, 285, 427, 503; 
~"3 apple, 338 

Oobbling, 171 

Cock, 21, 235, 287 

Cocytus, 93 

Coin and Coinage, 29-38, 337, 501 

Cold, Soaks 457, 465, 507; water, 


Oollapse of building, 451 
Colophon, 257 
Colour, 451 
Command, 197, 217, 221, 333 
Commandeering, 269 
Commander, 237 
Commanding officer, 511 
Comments, 125 
Qommerce, 401 
Common people, 167, 217; sense, 46; 
weal, and welfare, 159, 205, 401 
Communion with oneself, 89, 217 
Community of women, 461 
Companion, 93, 427, 517-9 
Company, 281 
Complaint, 195 
Complexion, 161 
Compliments, 531 
Composite judgement, 527 
Composition, 177-9 
Comprehension, 441; treatise on, 317 
Compulsion, 27, 31, 91, 185, 197, 269, 
275, 295, 825, 435, 507 
Conceit, 97-9 
Conception, 483; of fitting and help- 
ful, 447 
Concern, one’s own, 143, 
principal, 519 


542 


191; 


Conclusion, 29 

Concord, 345 

Condemnation, 118: 

Confidence, 235, 345, 437 

Conformity with nature. See Mature, 

Confound and be confounded, 431 

Confusion, 311, 381-38, 411 

Confutation, 129 

Conscience, 165 

Consent, 511 

Oonsequent, 51 

Consideration, 111 

Consistency, 317 

Consolation, 221 

Conspicuons clothing, 375 

Constancy, 209, 811 

Constraint, 207 

Consul, 33, 141, 247, 261, 295, 303, 
403, 497 


Consular, 463; rank, 99 
aortas 261, 265, 295, 331, 369, 


Consumptive, 95, 161 

Oontemptible, 447 

Contentious, 331 ff, 

Contentment, 365 

Oontest, 47, 325, 383, 497, 507, 535 

Continence, 491 

Continuity, 315 

Contradiction, 537 

Control, 31, 185, 191, 239, 265-7, 271, 
279, 289, 319, 327, 868, 397-9, 
405, 443-5, 451, 408, 471, 483-7, 
493--7, 501-3, 513-15, 533-5 

Conversation, 105-7, 217, 517, 521 

Converse, with gods, 187: with men, 
207; with oneself, 323-5 

Convincing men of things good and 
evil, 347-9; oneself, 849, 351 

eens sense-impression, 60~1, 


2 
Cook, 117; professional, 233 
Co-operation, 319 
Copulating, 527 
Coreyra, 5U 


Corinth, 17 
Corinthians, 161, 299 
Corner, 165 


Cornice, 233 

Corpse, 871, 471 
Corrector, 49 
Corruptible, 191 
Corrupting, 295 
Cosmos, 443-5, 459, 


See also Uni- 
verse, and World, 


INDEX 


Cot, 155-7 

Counsel, 515; of God, 129 

Counsellor, 433, 515 

Countenance composed, 381-3 
Sountry, 31, 119, 209, 297-0, 446, 
5UL; = the Universe, 297 

Courage, 165, 227, 234, 283 

Court, 103, το ΝΕ δ09: Uaesar’s, 435 

Ooward, 119 

Cowardive, 2 13, 231, 239, 247 
Jowardly, 281 

Orafisman, 339 

Crates, 153 

Creatures, 237 

Credentials, 59 

OCrinus, 27 

Cripple, 497 

Oriterion, 65 

Crito, 301, 537 

Crockery, "335 

Oroesus, 139 

Cross-examination, 99 

Crow, 315 

Growd, 87, 167, 183, 323 

Crowding ‘the world, 281 

Crown (as prize), 39, 201 

Crows, 187 

Crucifixion, 235 

Orystal, 71; ; goblet, 211 

ad Cuckoo,” sing, 335 

Cudgel, 117 

Gap: 155, 283 

Curator, 467 

Custom, 109 

Cynic, 83, 130-09, 385 

Cyrus, 353 


Danaus, 159 

Dance, 29, 187, 281 

Dancer, 357 

Danger, 515, 521 

Darkness, 135 

Daughter, 159, 421 

Day, §23 

Deaf, 383 

Death, 83, 41, 61, 77, 118, 121, 137 
143, "153, 193, : 205-7, 213-17, 227-9, 
239-41, 951, 263, 267, 275, 281, 
287-303, 337, 347, 361, 369-71, 
401-5, 469, 475, 485, 489, 499, 505, 
515; -bed, οὐδ᾽; defined, 865; 
when overtaken by, 41-3, 401--8 

Deceit, 473 

Deecived, 343 

Decency, 395 ᾿ 


ahr 151; behaviour, 61; speech, 
9 


Decisions of will, 448 

Deed, of purchase, 263; of sale, 247 

Deeds, 533 

ΠΡ ΠΡ, 135, 205, 519, 531; 
1 5 

Defer, 485 

Deity, 11, 149, 281, 329, 457 

Delay, 52 3, 535 

Deliberate, 473 

Deliberation, 507 

Delicacies, 233 

Deliverance, 397 

Roe, of speech, 179 

Delphi, 4 

Demeter, 127 

Demonstration, 233, 363, 537 

Demosthenes, 24 

ἜΚ Denyer, The,’ 71 

Dependable, 433 

Dependence, 193 

Deposit, 433 

Deprivation, 185 

Dervishes, 130, 133 

Design, 357 

Designation, 427 

Desire, 21-3, 29, 47, 57~9, 71, 81~7, 
95, 99, 103, 135, 141, 147, 167, 171-3; 
203, 22 1, 231, 245-7, 251, 269, 
272, 305, 815, 323-5, 341, 851, 
355, 359, 367, 383, 393, 399, 411, 
419, 435, 441, 471, 483-7, 495, 
513-5, 533; ineffectual, 153: 
treatise on, 319. See also Hanker- 
ing, and Yearning. 

Despair, 861, 395 

Despise and Despised, 339, 397 ff., 
427, 495-7, 509 

Despising the laws, 373 

Destiny, 165, 289, 327, 537 

Destruction, "218, "397 

Devoting oneself, 355 

Diadem, 385 

Dialecties. 453 

Diciiou, 103 

Diet, 74-5, 141, 169, 57 

Dificulties, 277. 433, 607 

Diftidence, 97-9 

“Diy in,’ 11, suv: digeing, 401 

Ii; gestion, 123 my dua, 959 31 

Dignity, 321 

Dining out, 259; 
persons, 347 

Dinner, 505, 525; -party, 503-5 


543 


of self, 


with distinguished 


INDEX 


τὰ Fh aad ae 174-5; the name, 


Diogenes, 12, 15, 25, 81-4, 129, 139, 
151-8, 169, 161-3, 197, 205-7, 
235, 253, 288, 297~9, 835, 370-1, 
393, 417, 495 

Director of gymnasium, 55 

Dirt and Dirty, 168, 411 f£., 519 

Disagreeable, 521 

Disagreement, 35 

Discipline, 211, 237, 241, 507; 
breach of, 165; (= study), 211 

Discontent, 315, 401 

Discouragement, 341 

Discourse, 125, 173, 177, 181-3, 
393; he Discourses of Lpictetus, 
449, 453 

Disease. See Illness. 

Disfranchisement, 263 

Disgrace, 149, 222, 229, 289, 289- 


Disgraceful, 383, 459; word 
thoughts, 393 
Dishonour, 301 
Dislocation of wrist, 101, 507 
Disloyal, 119 
Disobedience, 197, 325 
Disparagement, 357 
Dispassionateness, 121 
Dispensation, the divine 79. 
also Governance. 
Disposition, good, 121 
Disrepute, 465 
Dissatisfaction, 443 
Dissent, 29 
Dissolute, 397 
Dissolution, 187 
Dissuasion, 49 
Distance runner, 169 
Distant, equally, from God, 331 
Distinction, 3807; distinctions of 
reason, 538 
Distinguished persons, 347 
Distraction, 155 
Distress, 151, 495 
Distrust of oneself, 493 
roe and Disturbed, 79, 113, 451, 
- 
Disturbance, 153, 507 
Divination, 19, 515 
Divine, 295; beings, 449; powers, 93 
Diviner, 515-17 
Divisions of philosophy, 537 
Do good, 171, 287 


544 


and 


See 


Doctor, 469; -'s office, 129. See also 
Physician. 

Doetrings, 13-9, 91, 126, 125 

Dog, 5, 7, 13, 235, 273, 283, 287, 3915 
hunting, 21, 33, 159, 375 

Donkey, 269-71, 827. See also Ass. 

Door, 135, 201, 283, 305, 367, 387, 
§215 front, 199; -keeper, 229, 233, 
505; (of suicide), 63, 98, 143 

Downhearted, 77 

Draw water, 229-31 

Drawbacks, 509 

Dreams, 23, 137, 193 , 

Dress and Dressing, 129, 233, 285, 
See also Clothes, and Ratment. 

Drink and Drinking, 75, 95—7, 101-3, 

273 -cup, 505; heavy, 85 

Drivel, 421 

Drone, 167 

Drugs, 129; peddlers of, 211 

Drunkenness, 23, 229 

Due, one’s, 77 

Duel, 133 

Duliness, 351 

Dung, 415, 419-21; ~hill, 153, 423. 

Dust, 93 

Duty and Duties, 23, 55-7, 157, 201, 
319, 427, 511, 515; principal, 57; 
private, 155; Treatise on, 319, See 
also Citizen. 

Dwelling, 337 

Dysentery, 145, 401 

Dyspepsia and Dyspeptics, 387~—9, 401 


Harth, 98, 145-7, 189, 441-3, 449 

Earthenware, 169 

Harthgquake, 91 

Hasy-going, 535 

Hating, 75, 95, 103, 117, 125, 149, 157, 
223, 231, 235, 317, 369, 381-3, 413, 
50S, 517, 525-7, 529-31 

Eccentricity, 423 

Education, 55, 117, 129, 833, 421, 489 

Eifeminacy, 203 

Effort, 483 

Egnatins Celer, 292 


Egocentric principle. See Self. 
Elation, 489 
Elements, 365; the four, 449; 


physical, 93; of reason, 379 
Hleusis, 127 Δ 
Hlocution and Bloquent, 529 
Emancipator, 209, 282-3, 295, 367 
Embaagsy, 193 


INDEX 


Imbroidery, 108 

Himotion, 23, 285, 353, 459, 465 

Hmperor, Roman, 166 

Rnehanters, 187 

Sud in itself, 363; (s= purpose) of 
life, 459 : 

Rudowment, special, 169 

Hndurance, 383, 455, 401, 63] 

Hnemy, 1389, 277, 343, 447, 467, 483, 
518, 533 

Inergy, 167; misdirected, 45: 

Intertainment, 315, 517 

Inticement, 52: 

Inviable, 121 

Invy, 23-7, 79, 91, 135, 153, 167, 199, 
233, 947, 325, 429, 497 

ipaminondas, 159 

ipaphroditus, 295 

iphebi, 17, 55 

pictetus, 9, 13, 62~3, 67~9, 119, 131, 
181, 295~7, 311, 333, 370, 389, 400~1, 
met 413, 443, 445, 449-50, 453~8, 


picureans, 49-59, 197, 459 
picurus, 51-3, 459 
birus, 35 

pitome of all ills, 239 
guality, 433 
qguipment, 391 
yuivocal premisses, 
rror, 28, 117, 377 
scort duty, 503 
spionage, 43] 

sence, 51. See also Nature, true. 
state, 463, 497 

eocles, 843, 613 

her, 449 

ibius, 392 

logy, 465 

iphrates (philosopher), 103, 381, 581 
wipides, quoted, 336-7, 537 
irystheus, 151, 237 

racuating of the bowels, 527 

venus, 393 

‘il, or Fivils, 29, 61-3, 113-19, 139, 
(48, 185, 207, 211-13, 237, 291, 
341-3, 847-9, B81, 399, 405, 425, 
129, 441, 451, 501, 508, 513-15; 
‘ause of, 257; conduct, 301; 
doer, 303; eye, 213; Genius, 327; 
Seyrm 291; habits, 453; nature 
ἢ, 507 « 

amination, 85, 129 

ample, 195, 237, 303 

sellent, 201, 289, 489 


See Premisses, 


EPICTETUS——VOL. IT, 


Exvhange, 209, 809-13 
Excitement, 519 
Fixcuses, 200, 461 
Iixercise and Hexerecising, 61, 75, 87, 
121, 125, 151, 169, 171, 241, 259, 
317, 325, 351, 495, 527 
FExhibilion, 151, 177 
Exhortation, 183 
Hxile, 35, 137, 193, 263, 303, 343, 
365-7, 417, 465, 499, 515 
Existence, 57 
Expose, of children, 157 
Expression of face, 45, 451 
External and Externals, 31, 49, 77, 
83, 105, 203, 809, 313-~15, 348, 363, 
875-9, 387, 397, 433, 4938-5, 499, 
511, 521, 531 
External impressions. See J:npres- 
sions, and Sense-impression. τ 
hy 167, 339, 447, 459, 499; -salves, 
29 


Face, washing, 295 

Facing both ways, 307 

Faculty and Faculties, 275, 335, 363, 
375, £01, 491 

Failure, 161, 223 

Wair-mindedness, 121 

Faith, 99 

Faithful and Faithfulness, 111, 175, 
337, 397, 483-7, 501-3 

Faithlessuess, 291 

False, 29, 117-19, 145, 267, 537 

Fame, 207 

Familiar, 203 

Family, 55, 227 

Fancy, 211 

Fare badly, 287 


Farm, 29, 81, 48, 69, 267, 337, 
491 

Farmer, 29, 39, 41, 389 

Farming, 401 


Fasces, twelve, 263 

Fate, 281, 505 ᾿ 

Ῥαΐδον, 28, 31, 41, 81, 99, 111-16, 
119-21, 125, 149, 159, 185, 229, 
247, 257, 279, 348, 511, 518-5; 
(of God), 189; -in-law, 155; -land, 
125, 205 (see also Couniry). 

Fault, 461, 519 

Fault-finding, 35, 147, 167, 209, 233, 
281, 363, 483, 513, 531 

Favorinus, 453-5 

Fear, 79, 93, 137, 147, 153, 221, 223, 
227, 231-5, 247, 201, 271-3, 311, 


545 
NN 


INDEX 


841. 351, 8611, 451-3, 493; 
of death, 241; of loss, 393 

Felicio 295 

Vellow-citizens, 447;  -men, 323; 


~traveller, 03, 125, 277; -voyager, 
339; -workers, 279 

Fellowship, 279 

Felt cap, 381 

Festival, 281, 321-3; (of the paze.nt 
of life), 43 

Fever, 73~7, 91, 145, 151-3, 157, 193, 
225~9, 273-7, 315, 321, 353, 369~71 ; 
385, 393, 457, 465 

Fidelity, 31, 59, 119, 311, 503 

Field, 41; of study, 20-3, 85, 231, 401 

Fig, 71, 213-15, 369 

Fighting, 145, 195; against oneself, 
395 


447 
Flattery, 69, 79, 111, 173, 199-203, 
261, 357, 369, 373 
Flesh, 51-3, 57, 279, 301, 373 
Flight, 301 
Flogging, 149, 285-7, 303 
Flutist, 315 
Flying, 335 
Fodder, 99, 271, 463, 531 
Folly, 95 
Following, 79 
Food, 95, 227-39, 519, 531 
Fool, 161, 175, 213, 279, 293, 373, 
380, 407, 451, 493 
Foolish, 145, 191, 371 
Foolishness, 35 
Foot, 77, 413, 525 
Force, 245; forcing oneself in, 367-9 
Forlorn state, 87-93 
Fortification, 275 
Fortunate, 127, 471 
Fortune, 329 
Foul language, 329, 521 
Fox, 345 
Frankness 429 
Free and Freedom, 41, 57, 91, 103, 
137, 145-7, 161, 205-7, 215-7, 239, 


546 


241 0f., 275, 811, 325, 343, 349-51, 
363, 437, 445, 469, 478, 477, 483-5, 
405-7, 6113 free will, 311 

Free Oitica, 40 

Freedman, 249 

Friend, δῷ, 87, 153, 165, 181, 187, 189, 
198, 197, 201, 205-13, 239, 267, 275, 
297~9, 807, 433, 493, 501, 515-17; 
of Onesar, 37, 247, 257-9, 277, 315; 
of God, 811; of kings, 261 

Triendly, 307 

Frost, 889 

Trowning, 523 

Fruit, 1338, 279, 389-91 

Fun, making, 291 

Function, 1138-15, 237, 425; 
321; proper, 383, 503 

Fundamental conception, 131 

Furnishings, 69 

Furniture, 279, 387, 408 

Futile, 315; discourse, 309 

Future, 399 


of life, 


Gait, composed, 383 
Galba, 105 
Galilaeans, 363 
Gambler, 163 
Games, 17, 328, 361, 367, 371, 403, 509 
Garden of Adonis, 388~9 
Gate, 159, 203 
Gay attire, 393 
Geese, 421 
General, 165, 
(of God), 195 
General perception, 47 
Genius, 175 ! 
Gentle, 205, 339, 527; birth, 347 
Gentleness, 121, 365 
Geometrician, 171 
Geometry, 351 
Geta, 249 
Gifted men, 49, 173 
Girl, 407; pretty, 249-51, 255, 
also Maid, Wench. 
Giver (= God), 279, 331, 491 
Gladiator, 101-3, 107, 139, 509, 617 
Gladiatorial combat, 109 
Gloomy, 147 
Glory, 121 
Goblets, 69 
God, 19, 31~2, 43-5, 57, 75-9, 91, 119, 
127-9, 133-5, 147-9, 157, 163, 169, 


213, 217-19, 237; 


Bee 


INDEX 


137, 445, 467, 499; resisting, 191-3, 
279. See also Another, Captain, 
Deity, Father, General, Giver, 
Mighty, Pluywright, Zeus. 

tiold, 55, 59, 69,121, 141, 463 

Golden Verses of Pythagoras, 57, 73 

Good, 29, 81-2, 61-3, 61-3, "77-9, 
117-28, 189, 143-7, 179, 185, 201, 
211, 289, 341-3, 347-9, 359, 363, 
367-9, 375-7, 397-9, 406, 425, 437, 
441, 459, 485, 497, 501-3, 513-15, 
527: doing good, 175, 209, 213; 
faith, 431; ” fortune, 185, 223, 473; 
the good” man, 47, 235-7; the 
greatest, 291; one’s own, 313. 
Ctood and excellent, see Jfan. 

Goods, lesser, 459; of soul, 459 

Gout, 145, 167, 385 

Governance of God, 277-9, 363 

soverning principle, 41. 47, 67, 75-7, 
105, 125, 137, 143, 163, 329, 333, 
375, 511, 525 

}overnment, 59, 89~91, 199 

tovernor, 37; «Ὁ mansion, 147 

Jovernorships, 261, 369 

train, 215 

jrammarian, 533 

trandfather, 247, 263 

trandsires, 463 

trandson, 89 

trapes, 213~15 

rravity, 521 

treat, 145, 149; Great King (of 
Persia), 153, 207, 261 
‘veat-grandfather, 263 

reece, 193, 209 

reedily eati ing, 381 

reeks, 53, 148. See also Hellenes. 
reengrocer, 29. See also Vegetable- 
dealer. 

reeling, 153. See also Salutation. 
rief and Grieving, 33, 61, 79, 143, 
153, 185-7, 191, 199, 211-13, 223, 
108° 325, 351, 429, 465, 483, 489, 
49: 

roaning, 231, τ 

round, 147 

rovelling, 369 

cudge, 335 

ard, against oneselt, 533; 
195 

rardian, 467 

ards, 135, 159, 361, 365, 369-71; 
-man, 223 

lest-gifts, 403 


mount, 


Guide, 127 

Guise, 375 ff, 

Gyara, 217-21, 327 
ae 55, 81, 283; ~-colonnade, 
Gymnastic trainer, 395 


Habit, 83, 109, 225-7, 291, 428, 611 

Hales, 9 93, 227, 301 

Hair, 19, 199, 135, 141, 285, 377-9, 
419, 463 : -dress, 379; plucking, 9, 
15-17, 21 

Halt, 385 

Hampered, 483, 531 

Hand, 57, 269, 413 

Handle, 297, 327 

Handsome, 33, 393 

Hanging, 303 

Hankering, 213. 
Yearning. 

Happiness and Happy, 75, 121, 139- 
4}, 145, 153, 161, 183-5, 189-91, 
201, 221~3, 233, 257, 287, 327, 331, 
363, 387, 445, 497 

Harbour, 127 

Hardship, 158, 465 

Harm, 31, 395, 431-3, 447, 483, 511, 
531 

Harmonious, 449 

Harmony, 441; 
Nature. 

Harp, 265 

Harvesting, 215 

Hate, 513 

Hateful to God, 133 

Hatred, 221 

Head, 853; -ache, 157, 181, 225, 229, 
353, 385 : -band, 129 

Health and Healthy, 119, 223, 235, 
269, 385-7, 393, 443 

Hearing, 323, 351. See also Listening. 

Heart, 141 

Hearth, 147, 417 

Heat, 198, 305, 465, 507; scorching, 


149 
Hector, 133, 169 
Hodge-priests, 377 
Heirs, 229 
Hellenes, 59. See also Greeks. 
Helmsman, 285, 311, 425 
Help, 95, 343, 383-5, 433, 531 
Helpers, 375 
Helpful, 447 
Helplessness, 93 
Helvidius, 287 


See also Desire, and 


with nature, see 


547 


INDEX 


Hephaestus, 383 
Flera, 89 
Fferacleitus, 88, 494 
Heracles, 151, 188-9, 237, 335, 399 
Herald, 127, 155 
Herd, 167 
Termes, 19, 121 
Hides, 137 
Hicrophant, 127-9 
High brow, 499; spirit, 457 
High-minded and High-mindedness, 
638, 119, 187, 283, 368, 473, 501 
Hindrance, 31, 79, 91, 99, 185, 197, 
207, 245, 267-71, 279, 289, 313, 
325, 351-3, 363, 383, 435-7, 483, 489 
Hippias, 45 
Hive, 167 
Hog, 421 
Holiday, 279-81, 323, 3387 
Holy rites, 129 
Home, 147 
Homer, 159, 191, 409, 533; quoted, 
19, 79, 141, 155, 159, 163, 169, 189- 
93, 387, 409 
Floney, 323 
Honour, 59, 103, 115, 119, 125, 169, 
275, 295, 301, 355, 369, 501, 509; 
position of, 347 
Hope, 475, 527; give up, 465 
Horse, 5, 7, 18, 38, 43, 99, 107, 267, 
273, 283, 309, 323, 335, 415, 421, 
463, 489; ~-race, 517 
Hospital, 181 
Host, one’s, 463 
Hot weather, 389 
House, 77, 135, 153, 229, 267-9, 387, 
405, 417 : 
Household, 157, 197, 207-9, 345; 
head of, 217; of Caesar, 223; 
of one, 187 
Human being, See Jan. 
Humane, 387 
Humiliation, 185, 349 
Hunger, 75, 191, 227-9, 233, 853, 409, 
457, 463, 493 
Hunting, 33; dog, 21, 33, 159, 375 
Hurt, 841-3, 385, 447, 513, 525 
Husband, 65 
Hymn of praise, 237, 281 
Hypothesis, 29 
Hypothetical premisses, 23, 209, 319 


see 119, 203, 205, 231, 239, 291, 
é 
Ignorance and Ignorant, 343, 427 


548 


Tum, 133 

Til (evil), 409. SLY, 627 

Tiiness, 89-48, 109, 110-23, 148, 221, 
239, 257, 296, 346, 12h, 413, 484, 


ἀ 
TH-omened, 218-5 
Imagination, 219 
Imitation, 37, 509 
Immortality, 187 
Inunutability, 2381; of mature, {Ὁ 
impediment, 319, 401 
Imperishable, 341 
Impertinence, 159, 329 
Imperturbability, 317 
Impicty, 35, 113, 535 
Implement, 235 
Important things, 375 
Impossible, 191 
Impressions, external, 401, 405, 449, 
449~51, 485, 489, 491, 497-9, 523; 
intellectual, 117. See also Sense- 
impression. . 
Imprint, 337 
Imprisonment, 291 
Improvement, 519 
Impudent of speech, 453 
Impulse to act, 31 
Impunity, 285, 411 
Inattention, 311, 423 ff. 
Incantation, 213 
Incapacity, 169, 447 
Inclinations, 425 
Income, 161 
Inconsiderate, 501 
Inconstancy, 117 
Indifferent, 291 
Indigestion, 229 
Indignation, 359 
Individual, 345 
Indivisible, 441 
Indulgence, 519 
Industry, 329 
Infant, 203 
Inferior and Tuferiority, 111, 167 
Inheritance, 55, 435 
Initiates in the mysteries, 281 
Injury, 59, 61, 118~15, 335, 365 
Injustice, 237, 335 
Inn, 491 
Insatiable, 503-5 
Insensibility, 167 
Insolence and Insolent, 295, 447, 505 
Instruction, 129, 183" 
Insult, 167, 499; gesture of, 25 
Intellect, 449-5] 


INDEX 


Tnielligence, 513 

pes social, 89, 105-9, 305-9, 
Tuterest, 429; one’s, 505, 513 
Interpret nagure, 533 
Interpreter, 313, 533 
Interrogations, sophistical, 61, 127 
Interview, 201 

Intimates, 211 

Introduction, 177, 383 
Tntuition, 291 

Invalid, 95, 235, 533 
Invincibility of good man, 47 
Tnvitation, 181 

Tron, 145, 273; tool, 413 
Irrational creatures, 187 
Irreverence, 865 

Irritation, 103, 499, 509 
Isocrates, 177 

Issue, 515 

Isthmian games, 39 

Italicus, 62-3 


Jail-bird, 255 

Jar, 71, 211, 433 

Jaws, 149 

Jealousy, 23, 153, 393, 497 

Jest, 427 

Jewish literature, 150 

John the Baptist, 430 

Joints, 389-91 

Journey, 75, 89, 125, 151, 185, 193, 
495 

Joy, 465, 523 

Judge, 53-5, 59, 1138-15, 287, 367 

Judgement, 23-7, 35, 41, 65-78, 107, 
118, 117, 158, 171, 191, 908, 239, 
263, 273-5, 283, 291-8, BU3-5, 327, 
339-45, 851-3, 857, 369, 373, 377, 
391, 401, 409-11, 421, 425, 433-7, 
461, 473, 487-9, 495, 499, 529; 
composite, 527; withholding, 29 

Judging, 988 

Jug, 487 

Jumping-weights, 317 

Jaonk, 195 

Just and Justice, 31, 99, 237, 445, 
459, 473 


Keopers of doors, 387 

Kettle, 155 

Kicking, 99, 287 

Killing, 336 

Kin, Kindred, Kinship, and Kinsman, 
$1, 89, 165, 199, 205, 297-9, 343 


Kind-hearted, 205 

Kindness, 335-7 

King, 148, 147, 155-7, 163, 229, 237, 
261, 299; Great (of Persia), 153, 
207, 261; the lot of a, 353: the 
Persian, 253 

Kingdom, 153, 157, 265, 887 

Kingly manner, 129 

Kingship, 159 

Kiss, 213, 249, 399, 403, 487; the 
hand, 201, 295 

Knife, 157 

‘“* Know thyself,’’ 11, 441 

Knowledge, 117 


Labour and Laborious, 45~-7, 237, 
491, 511, 535 

Lacedaemon and Lacedaemonians, 
δῦ, 149, 299, 345, 445-7 

Lad, 179, 491, 535 

Ladies, 525 

Laius, 11 

aor and Lameness, 119, 235, 296-7, 
49 

Lamentation and Lamenting, 23, 
79, 189, 191, 199, 211, 231 

Lamprocles, 331-2, 343 

Land, 41, 283, 403 

Language, 125 

Laughing and Laughter, 499, 519- 
21; laugh at, 97, lu3, 123, 427; 
laugh at oneself, 321; laugh to 
scorn, 509 

Law, 199, 219, 299, 313, 378, 445, 
533-5; of nature, 111 

Lawful privileges, 519; striving, 75 

Lawlessness, 237, 373 

Layman, 49, 105-9, 115, 161, 445, 
497, 511, 519-21, 529-31, 535 

Lazy, 315 

Learning, 333 

Leather, 83 

Leares, 215 

Leaving home, 185-91 

Lecture, 33, 67, 123, 127, 171, 179, 
188, 221, 373, 423; -room, 107, 171 

Leg, 297, 491 

Legacy-hunters, 295 

Leisure, 27, 71, 155-7, 313, 321-5, 
375, 623 

Leon, 299, 371 

Lesbius, 123 

Letters, 193, 351 

Lettuce, 199, 201, 505 

Liar, The, 25, 71 


549 


INDEX 


Libations, 513 


Listening, 325,329. Sce also ZZearing. 
Literature, 59, 117 
Living, 265; act of, 317; being, 449 
Locking door in one’s face, 367-9 
Loggias, 603 
Logic, 45, 69 
Logical consequence, 537 
Loins, 103, 121, 149, 509 
Long Walls, the, 207 
Looking to other persons, 231 
Lord of the mansion, 133 
Loss, 277, 309, 395, 427, 491 
Love, 91, 149, 193, 203, 249, 263, 295, 
307, 345, 421; brotherly, 31; 
passionate, 157 
Lucian, 326 
Lunch and Luncheon, 29, 71, 403, 
465 
Luxury, 237, 459, 519 
Lycaeum, 209, 321 
Lycurgts, 445 
Lyre, and Lyre-player, 107 
Lysias, 177 


Madmen, 65 

Madness, 361-3, 471 

Magic wand, 121 

Maid, pretty, 225. 

Wench, 

Malice, 377 

Malignant disposition, 329 

Man, as distinct from animals, 409; 
distinct from woman, 15~7;  be- 
coming to a, 71; characteristics 
and nature of, 15, 19, 93, 99, 171, 
187, 285-7, 337-9, 5385; good, 393, 
443; good and excellent man, 21, 
26, 29, 155, 161, 191, 201, 215, 219, 
991, 333, 383, 457; a tame animal, 
335, 469; true nature of, 337, 443; 
an ungifted, 527 


05° 


See also Girl, 


Manager, 133 

Manes, 239 

Mankind, 95, L57-9, 185, 199 

Manliness, GL 

Mantle, 183 

Marble halls, 373 

Mark, 427, 507 

Market, 41; -gardener, 
-place, 211, 395 

Marriage, 55-7, 125, 153-9, 333, 10] 

““ Marvellous |’? 177 

Masks, 169 

Massage, 233-5 

Masseur, 29, 233, 

Mast, 195 

Master, 159, 227, 249, 263-5, 285, 
295-7, 337, 867, 495; = Hmperor, 
293; of oneself, 477, 497 

Masurius, 313 

Material, 137. Sec also Swbject-iatter, 

Maximus, 50-1, 53 

τὶ spirit, 213, 365; mean-spirited 
2 


Mean, the, 475 

Meaning, 461 

Measure, 525; due, 315; measuring 
and measuring instrument, 233 

Medea, 433 

Meddier, 165 

Melancholy-madness, 23 

Meletus, 177, 537 

Memory, 227 

Menander, quoted, 249-51 

Menelaus, 406 

Menoeceus, 119 

Merchant, 513 

Messenger, 139, 145, 155 

Mighty, He that is, 427 

arid command, 159; expeditions, 


Milk, 531 
Mind, 137, 449-51, 507; troubled, 493 
Mingle with men, 425 
Ministrant, 153 
Mirror, 149 
Misbehaviour, 377-9 
Misdirected energy, 453 
Miserable and Misery, 187, 191-3, 
199, 223, 335 
Misfortune, 35, 185-7, 193, 325, 473, 
485, 507 
Mistake, 225-7, 315, 324, 347 
Mob, 171 
Mocking, 123 
Moderation, 425 


43, 


199; 


Sve also Rubber, the. 


INDEX 


Modest, 393 
Moneys 31, 111, 239, 293, 309, 329, 369, 
4 


Moon, 93, 137 

Moral excellence, 301; purpose, 19, 
27, 31-5, 39, 41, 47, 51, 61, 79, 83, 
109, 115, 185, 167, 171, 187, 203, 
219, 221, 235, 273, 279, 315, 319-21, 
325, 329, 335, 841--ὅ, 849, 363, 897-.- 
9, 425-7, 435, 487, 491-8, 511 

Mortal, 185, 213, 219, 277-9 

Mortar, 83 

Mother, 43, 191, 205, 247, 257, 409 

Mottoes, clever little, 181 

Mountebanks, 81 

Mourning, 187, 191-3 

Mouse, 27 

Moustache, 419 

Mucus, 413 

Mud, 413, 421 

Multitude, 319, 345-7, 417, 427 

Murder, 395 

Music, 59, 117 

Music-hall songs, 177 

Musicians, 171, 377-81 

Musonius. See Rufus. 

Mutual affection, 89, 335 

Mycenae, 237 

Myron, 139 

Myrrhine ware, 71 

Mysteries, the, 127-9, 281 


Nail, 525 

Naked, 147 

Nations, 345 

Natural science, 441-3 

Nature (including accord with, con- 
formity with, and nature of man), 
7, 18-15, 31, 39, 41, 47, 57, 67-9, 
75, 95, 109, 139, 143, 185-7, 217, 
287, 319, 329, 333-5, 343, 349, 421, 
443, 459, 467-9, 487, 493, 511, 533; 
of birds, 251; function of, 447; 
of the good, 437; of good and evil, 
441; harmony with, 487-9, 511; 
immutability of, 449; law of, 111; 
process of, 215; rule of, 397; true 
Yiature, 53, 211, 337, 421, 443; 
will of, 505 

Nausea, 107, 393 

Necessary, 283 

Necessities of life, 227 

Necessity, 237, 449 

Neck, 121; -trappings, 99 

Need, 215-7 


Neglect, 159, 221, 233; of affairs, 493 

Neglectful, 535 

Negligence, 331 

Neighbour, 25, 58, 93, 121-5, 339, 
429-31, 467, 511, 521 

Nemean games, 39 

Nero, 141, 336~7, 339, 465 

Nests, 187 

Neutral, 29 

New Testament, 74, 150-1, 237, 322, 
430, 487 

News, 113-5, 193 

Nicoereon, 206 

Nicopolis, 50, 149, 249 

Night, 5235; -watch, 85 

Nightingale, 7 

Ninny, 161 

Nitre, 413 

Nobility, 363; of character, 283 

Noble, 31, 55-7, 247, 829, 387, 417; 
action, 309; character, 357; spirit, 
208, 448, 4738; thought, 393 

Nobody, a, 501 

Non sequitur, 529 

North wind, 153 

Nose, 339, 413; wiping, 295 

Nostrils, 413 

Notebooks, 157 

Notice, posting of, 15 

Nuisance, 195 

Numenius, 59 

Nurse, 117, 155, 203 

Nursing, 153, 239, 295 

Nut, 71, 369 

Nymphs, 173 


Oath, 517 

Obedience, 365 

Obeisance, 281, 371 

Obey, 425; the laws, 373 

Obol, 201, 455, 505 

Observing men, 315-17 

Obstacle, 425 

Occasion, 517~19, 521-3, 537 

Occupation, 171 

Odysseus, 189-91, 237, 457 

Oedipus, 10; at Colonus, 457; the 
King, 457 

Offence, 197 

Offensive, 519 

Office, 41-3, 47, 55, 59, 108, 123, 139, 
161, 169, 221~3, 229, 239, 275, 295, 
$11~18, 819-21, 325, 347, 853-5, 
865, 391-3, 438-5, 483-5, 495, 501, 
509; doctor’s, 129 


oo 


INDEX 


Officer, commanding, 195 
Official, 197, 217, 325, 497 
Oil, 77, 155, 161, 293, 405, 413, 493 
Old age, 1938, 229, 443; mau, 295, 
491; women, 295 
Olympia, 151, 201, 281, 321-2; 
crown there, 201 
Olympic, contest, 149; festival, 225, 
328; games, 39, 74, 535; training, 
-101; victory, 507 
Omen, 137, 213, 515 
One’s own, 283, 388, 403; self, 341 
Open, air, 161 
Ophellins, 139 
Ophbthalmia, 145 
Opinion, 21, 305, 451-3, 497-9, 511; 
of others, 349 
Opponent, 507 
Oppressor, 207 
Orator, 17 
Order, the, 219 
Ordinances, 221, 313 
Orphans, 189 
Ostentation, 529; avoidance of, 523 
Outcast, 457 
Outcome, 515 
Outdoor life, 137 
Outward signs, 383 
Overcoat, 387 
Ox, 13, 309 


Pack-saddle, 271 
Paean Apollo, 73 
Paeans, 321 
Pageant, 279-81 " 
Pain, 91, 147, 181, 311, 349, 353, 445 
Palace, 305, 367 
Palaestra, 285 
Pale, 457 
Palisade, 195 
Palm, setting up, 80-3 
Pan, 178 
Pancratiast, 7, 99 
Pancratium, 6, 75, 223 
Paradox, 221, 287 
Parasite, 293 
Parents, 57, 181, 229, 297-9, 355, 373 
Part and whole, 303 
Particular instances, 257 
Parturition, 155 
Passers-by, 151 
Passion, 23, 153, 311, 351; passion- 
less manner, 457 
Patience, 68, 121, 319, 491; patient 
endurance, 167 


552 


Patient, a, 179 
Patrimony, 337 
Patriot, 119 
Patroclus, 107 
Patron, 66, 69 
Pattern of life, 149 
Paying, 307 
Pax Romana. See Peace. : 
Peace, 161, 809, 318-31, 323-5, 345; 
of mind, 27, 91, 117, 125, 167, 193, 
209, 281, 403, 493; Pax Romana, 
91, 151 
Pedagogue, 135, 229 
Pedants, 293 
Peevish, 281 
Penalty, 205 
Pentathlon, 7, 169, 509 
People (as topic of conversation), 107 
Perdiccas, 207 
Perfection, 91 
Perfume, 393-5 
Peril, 451; of life, 121 
Periodic change, 187 
Perishable, 341 
Perrhaebians, 205 
Persian king, 153, 207, 253, 261 
Persians, 299 
Perturbation of spirit, 427 
Perverts, 17, 809 
Pestle, 83, 121 
(Pheres), father of Admetus, 119 
Philip of Macedon, 139, 207 
Philosopher, 9, 13, 23-5, 45, 49, 55-7, 
63, 67-9, 73-7, 81, 91, 103-7, 115, 
125, 171-83, 187, 191, 195, 229, 239, 
271, 289-93, 305, 319, 349, 359, 369, 
373-5 ff., 441, 453, 459, 465, 499, 
509, 515, 529-33 
Philosophic vein, 303 
Philosophy, 75, 85, 95, 99, 108, 211, 
231, 283, 379, 383, 387-9, 417-9, 
453, 461, 499, 511, 517, 637; 
meaning of, 73 
Physical elements, 93; science, 441-3 
Physician, 29, 75-7, 101, 109, 121, 
157, 179, 225, 295, 465-7, 507 
Physics, 453 
Physique, a particular, needed for a 
teacher, 129 
Piety, 511-18 
Pig, 413~9 
Piracy, 91 
Piraeus, 257 
Pirates, 205-7, 283 
Pitch, 435; -plasters, 135 


INDEX 


Pitied, being, 345 if. 

Pity, 185, 161, 199, 247, 295, 345-7 

Plan, 973; of life, 149, 499 

Plants, 187, 197, 889, 443 

Plate, 55-9, 69, 239, 847, 413 

Plato, 87, 314, 84}; quotations and 
references, 11, 85, 189, 165, 177-9, 
217, 284-5, 303, 321, 460-1, 463, 537 

Plausible, 85 

Play, 423, 427; a play, 101, 497, 509 

Playwright (= God), 497 

Pleading cases, 67 

Pleasant companion, 307~9 

Pleasing God, 331, 425 

Pleasure, 51-3, 83, 181, 197, 207, 459, 
518, 623 

Plectrum, 381 

Poet, the (= Homer), 19, 79 

Poison, 301 

Pole, 161 

Polemo, 8, 9, 419 

Politeness, 495 

Politics, 67, 161 

Pollution, 411 

Polus (actor), 457 

Polus (sophist), 331 

Polyneices, 848, 513 

Portent, 497 

Possessions, 118, 159-41, 145, 167, 
213; one’s own, 337, 373; own 
proper, 143, 185, 271 

Possible, 475 

Post, 499; given a, 195-7 

Postponement, 423 

Pot, 85, 288, 409 

Potsherds, 361, 369 

Poverty, 35, 43, 69, 113, 121-3, 153, 
221, 347, 353-5, 365, 425, 485 

Power, 95, 195, 207, 367, 497, 525; 
to use external impressions, 445 

teres Practising, 75, 85, 283, 

Praetor, 295, 333, 497 

Practorship, 265, 311, 369 

Praise, 171-81, 201, 237, 329, 345, 
375-9, 465, 503-5, 517, 581 

Prayer, 127, 357-9; of slave, 253; 
for success of others, 287 

Precept, 411, 533; philosophical, 211 

Precious, 145 

Precipice, 525; leaping over, 303 

Preconceived idea, See Preconception, 

Preconception, 93, 145, 257, 828, 401 

Precept, 67 

Pregnancy, 389 


Premature blooming, 389 

Premisses, 209, 265, 8378-9; equivocal, 
23, 27-9, 127, 351, 427; hypothe- 
tical, 23, 209, 319 

Preparation, 147, 325, 851, 411 

Present, the, 45-7, 155, 357 

Presents, 59, 295, 403 

Pretence, 347 

Prevented, 531 

Priam, 159 

Price, 103, 303, 403, 493, 508, 511 

Pride, 151, 295, 463, 533 

Prime, conception, 377; importance, 
53, 155-7 

Prince, 219 

Principal things and duties, 57 

Principle, 33, 55, 73, 79, 123-5, 213, 
219, 265, 325, 351, 379, 385, 425-7, 
461, 505, 525, 529~37 

Prison, 59-61, 209, 219-21, 263, 287, 
321, 327, 371, 431 

Private citizen, 217 

Proconsul, 81, 151, 275~7 

Procurator, 35-7, 105, 463, 511 

Procuratorship, 369 

Prodigy, 15 

Profession, 877-9 

Profitable, 377~9 

Progress, 23, 45-7, 85, 95, 807, 491-3, 
531, 535 


3 

Prohibitions, 217 

Prominence, 141 

Proof, 537 

Property, 47, 53-5, 207, 261-3, 271, 
275, 279, 289, 297, 311, 325, 359-61, 
367, 373, 387, 483, 495, 525, 529 

Proposition, 523 

Propriety, 83 

Prosperity, 111, 295 

Prostitution, 255 

Protagoras, 45 

Protesilaus, 407 

Proverbs, 48-9, 84-5, 120-1, 174-5, 
272-3, 345, 357, 405 

Providence, 105, 109-13, 459 

Province, 31, 265, 369 

Public, 133; interest, see Common- 
weal, and welfare; privilege, 39; 
-spirited, 447 

Pulse, 157 

Pumping water, 235 

Punishment, 59, 79, 165, 199, 233, 
285, 459, 493 

Pupil, 182, 349, 385 

Purification, 127-9 


553 


INDEX 


Purity, 129, 137, 165, 411, 515, 519 
Purple cloak, 457 

Purpose, 167, 223, 356, 411 

Pushing oneself in, 367-9 
Pyriphlegethon, 93 

Pythagoras, Golden Verses, 57, 73, 357 
Pythian games, 39 


Quadratus, 177 

Quaestor, 275 

Quails, 225 

Quarrelling, 157, 387, 471 
Queen bee, 167 

Quiet, 203 


Rabies, 321 

Race, 99; horse-race, 517 

Rack, 275, 303 

Rage, 135 

Rags 457 . 

Raiment, 93. See also Clothes, and 
Dress. 

Raisins, 215 

Random, at, 461 

Rascal, 491 

Rash and Rashness, 375, 433 

Rational animal, being, or creature, 
59, 359, 363 


Raven, 19, 187, 497 
Reading, 75, 177, 197, 217, 227, 241, 
315-19, 325, 329, 345, 351; a 


public, 171, 177-9, 521 
Reason and Reasoning, 15, 49, 69, 
85, 91, 95, 109, 177, 187, 199, 233, 
241, 279, 305, 339, 351, 363, 375, 
379, 411, 419-21, 451, 515-7, 535 
Reasonable, 447-9 
Rebuking, 129 
Recall, 93, 217, 237 
Recklessness, 331 
Reconnaissance, 195 
Red stripe in toga praeterta, 138 
Reform, 231, 397, 447, 535 
Refuge, 277 
Refusal, 23, 29, 57~9, 85, 141, 147, 323, 
411, 419, 441, 487 
Refutation, 183, 275, 3-41 
Rejection of the good, 53 
Rejoicing, 187 
Relationships, and Human and Social 
Relations and Relationships, 31, 
81, 155, 209, 319, 355, 388, 401-3, 
427, 511 
Relatives, 155, 181 
Relaxations, 219 


554 


Relaxing attention, 423 

Religion, 23 

Remedies, medical, 385-7 

Renunciation, 327-9, 8419, 373, 383, 
483. See also Body, and Property. 

Repertance, 469, 623 

Reproof, 521 

Reputation, and Repute 135, 141, 
207, 239, $11, 325, 329, 359, 425, 
483, 497, 535 

Resene, 395 

Reservations, 471, 487 

Resignation, 445 

Resisting God, 279. See 
Struggle against the Cosmos. 

Respect and Respectful, 115, 309, 
371, 395, 433-5, 521 

Responsibility, 113-17, 229, 425, 
431-8, 513 

Restraint, 27, 31, 145, 265-7 

Revenge, 457 

Revenue, 161 

Reverence, and Reverent, 57, 99, 301 

Reviling, 35-9, 85, 121, 125, 135, 
149, 159, 167, 329, 333, 343, 491, 
499, 507, 518, 523, 527 

Revolution of the universe, 279 

Reward for doing right, 201 

Rhetor and Rhetorician, 63, 67, 103—d, 
171, 509-11 

Rich, 57, 69, 111, 189, 199, 239, 277, 
293, 305, 347, 391-3, 417, 455, 459, 
529. See also Wealth and Wealthy. 

Ridicule, 499 

a a and Righteousness, 237, 
9) 


also 


Ring, 254-5; for wrestling, 385 

Rising up from sleep, 425 

Risks, 383 

Road, 93, 275 

Robbers, 89, 275-7 

Rods, 275; (= fasces), 408 

Role, 497, 511, 525 

ἘΠῚ citizens and citizenship, 199, 

0 
Romans, 68, 161 
Rome, 15, ὅδ, 638-5, 179, 193, 209, 
217-19, 287, 327, 431, 461 

Root, 389 
Rooted, 187, 197 
Royal power, 513 
Royalty, 141 
Rubber, a, 121. 
Rubbing, 169 
Rudiments, 25 


See algo Masseur, 


INDEX 


Rufus (Musonius), 49, 105, 181 

Rule, 33, 441, 485, 495, 525; of nature 
897. See also Standard. 

Runner, 7 

Running, 335, 463 

Rust, 351 


Sacred force, 129 

Sacrifice, 127-9, 223, 357, 518-15 

Saddle-cloths, 463 

Safety, 277, 473 

Sailor, 41, 195, 441, 513 

Salamis, 371 

Sale, deed of, 247 

Salutation, 58-9, 313, 327, 357, 503. 
See also Greeting. 


Satisfaction, 305 
Saturnalia, 263 

Savage men, 399 

Scales, 288 

Scare away, 163 
Scarlet, 135, 421 

Scent, 335 

Sceptre, 143, 153, 385-7 
Schiller, 123 

Scholar, 27, 75 
Scholarship, 313 

School, 38-9, 291-3 
School-room, 345 
School-teacher, 157 
Science, 427 

Scorn, laugh to, 427 
Scourging, 101, 259, 509 
Scout, 139, 145, 155 
Sea, 187, 305, 443 
Season, 138, 213, 279 
Secrets, 429, 433 
eae 75, 193, 231-3, 257-9, 315, 


Sedateness, 317 

Seduction, 53, 393 

Seed, 389 

Seemliness, 425 ; 

Self, 39 (ef. 31), 41, 231, 3315 -conceit, 
175; -control and -controlied, 247, 
897, 445, 155, 459, 473: -disparaye- 
ment, 167; -examination, 319, 347- 
9; «possession, 470: -respect, ὁ, 
135, 309-11, 316, 239, 337, 503-7, 


425, 473, 501-3, 527; -satisfaction, 
523; -sufficiency, 89 

Selling, 111 

Senate, 247, 293 

Senator, 17, 173, 197, 205, 217, 247, 
257, 497 

Sense-impression and Impression, 23~ 
5, 29, 33-5, 61, 88-7, 109, 133-5, 
139, 147, 167, 207, 213, 225, 231, 
269, 317-19, 323, 341, 355, 359, 373. 
See also Convincing Sense-impression. 

Senses, 98, 279, 401; evidence of, 291 

Sentenced, 465 

Serene and Serenity, 97, 118, 121, 
139, 145-7, 185, 231, 259, 315, 327, 
359, 363, 385-7, 417, 445, 491 

Servant, 47, 145, 159, 165, 216, 221, 
233, 237, 285, 367 

Service, 157-9, 221; of God, 155 

Servile, 483 

Sex-life, 519 

Sexual intercourse, 293; perverts, 17 

Shame, 57, 231, 459, 501 

Shameless and Shamelessness, 111, 
213, 391 ff., 429, 453, 503 

Shapely, 347 

Sharing difficulties 
433-5 

Sheep, 171, 309, 339, 489, 531 

Shell-fish, 489 

Shelter, 519 

Shepherd, 143, 531 

Sherds, 93 

Ship, 29, 61, 69, 83, 195, 285, 311, 323, 
475, 489-91 

Shipwreck, 91 

Shirt, 387 

Shoe, 199, 233, 503, 525; for a donkey 
271 


Shoemaker, 77, 137 

Shoulders, 108, 121, 125, 149, 387; 
dislocated, 181 

Shouting, 309-11, 323, 519 

Shows, 109, 519 

Shrinking, 451 


and burdens, 


, 311 
Silence, 473, 523, 529 
Silver, 31, 55-9, 69, 239, 8.17 
Simple living, 531 
Simpleton, 505 


555 


INDEX 


Sinews, 373 
Singer, 441 
Singing, 29, 307, 377-9, 423 
Sire, 99 
Skill, 285, 377 
Sky, 147, 451 
Slanderers, 343 
Slave, 37, 75, 89, 103, 145~7, 197, 205~ 
9, 225-7, 233-5, 239, 247-9, 253-5, 
259-63, 267, 283-5, 289, 295, 
308-5, 325-7, 387, 841, 347, 363, 
367-9, 4038, 495, 509, 519; -boy, 
493, 505; of things, 119 
Slavery, 161, 205, 269, 289, 295 
Slavish, 167, 191, 483 
Sleep and Sleeping, 147, 165~7, 197, 
259, 829, 383, 425 
Slovenliness, 415, 515 
Small change, 25, 41, 395 
Smell, 415 
Smiling to oneself, 353 
Smith, 357, 381~3, 413 
Smoke, 405 
Smutty talk, 809 
Snake, 287 
Snivel, 163 
Snoring, 141, 167, 407 


‘Snout, 159 

Sober, 307 

Social, feeling, 525; instinct, 409; 
intercourse, see Intercourse ; 


relationships, see Relationships. 
Society, 157, 448 
Socrates, 11-13, 48-4, 59, 85, 99, 107, 
113, 129, 189, 177-81, 197, 205, 217, 
235, 257, 287, 299-303, 321, 331-3, 
343, 371, 383, 393, 415-17, 455, 471, 
489, 515, 521, 629-81, 535 
Socratic dialogues, 44 
Soft young men, 49 
Soldiers, 195, 205, 217, 221, 235, 269, 
299, 371, 430-1, 443 
Solecisms, 69 
Solitary and Solitude, 299, 323 
Solo, 97 
Somebody, a, 109, 501 
Son, 23, 51, 87-9, 115, 125, 133, 159, 
217, 3338, 348, 855, 407, 421, 513 
Song, 177-9, 427 
Soot, 107 
Sophism, 25, 233 
Sophist, 25 
Sophistical, arguments, 331-3; inter- 
rogations, 91 
Sophron, 39 


556 


Sorrow, 25, 27, 79, 91, 211-13, 325, 
4h, £15, 499 
Soul, 25, 29, 35, 49-58, 77, 143, 161, 
397, #11, 191. 1o8-5, 159, 465, 471, 
475, 509 
Sound, 451 
Soup, 197 
Sowing, 127 
Speaker, 182; « stand, 183 
Speaking ill, 118, 519 
Spears, 275 
Spectacle, 189, 519 . 
Spectators, 87, 279-81, 325, 381 
Speech, 473; correct, 179; delivery 
of a, 175 
Spiders, 421 
Spirit, 93; low spirits, 173 
Spitting, 421 
Sponge, 235 
Spraining ankle, 507 
Springs, 455 
Sprinter, 169 
Sputum, 95 
Squalor, 147, 168 
Stability, 231 
Stadium, 317 
Staff, 133, 149-52 
Stage, tragic, 139 
Standard, 315, 355, 425-7; of be- 
haviour, 37; general and individual, 
171 


Stars, 98, 137, 443 
Start, 507 
Starving, 227-9, 251 
State, 55, 187, 201, 219, 345, 503; 
an Epicurean, 55 
Statues, 23, 67, 81, 85, 335, 531 
Steadfastness, 35, 69, 445 
Stealing, 53, 227 
Stick of wood, 27 
Stoic, Stoicism., and Stoic School, δῦ, 
115, 199, 282, 449, 459 
Stomach, a weak, 123 
Stone, 27, 49, 59, 67, 85, 117, 167, 175, 
227, 267, 335 
Stopping to think, 455 
Storms, 277 
Stow away, 149 
Straightforward, 173 
Strand, a woven, 149 
Strangers, 49, 79; in the universe, 191 
Strengthening, 221 
Strife, 35, 471 
Strigil, 413 
Striking, 335, 490 


INDEX 


Strings of lyre, 107 

Stripes, 140 

Stripping off clothes, 277 

Striving against (tod, 279 

Strolling, 75, 197, 209 

Strong, 459; the stronger, 373 

struggle against the Uosmos, {45 

Study, 219 

Stupidity, 373 

Mtyle, 175, 183 

Subject, 207, 301; uuto Cod, 205; 
-matter, 29, 39, 2385 

Submission, 425, 511 

subservient, 813 

Substance, 187 

Success, 161, 855-7 

Suffering, 227 

Sufficiency, 457 

Suicide, 68, 93, 143, 217, 308, 405 

Sun, 98, 107, 187, 163, 279, 443; 
sustenance of, 179 

Sunning onesclf, 321 

Superintendent, of Ephebi, 17, 55; 
of games, 17 

Bupenor 167, 281, 873; individuals 
1: 

Superiority, 99, 111, 529 

Supplies, 341 

Sura, 111 

Surfeit, 305 

Surgeon, 157 

Swallowing sand, 507-9 

Sweat, 413 

Sweet, 535; -cake, 85, 101, 1385, 165 

Sweetheart, 249 

Sweetness, 523 

Sword, 251, 275, 361, 367-9 

Syllogisms, 28, 47, 127, 209, 231-3 
319, 851 

Sympathy, 497 

Symphorns, 59 


Table, 133, 159 

Tablets, 157 

Tact, 97 

Tactless and Tactlessness, 149, 429 
Taking sides, 35-7 

Talent, 201, 509; natural, 103 
Talking, 175, 309, 429 ff., 517-9 
Tame animal, man, 335, 469 
Tasteless person, 347 

Tavern, 337 

Tax for mAnumission, 255 
Tax-gatherer, 105, 511 

Teacher, 129, 182, 217, 349, 535 


‘Teaching, 129, 1738, 177 

Teeth, 413, 467 

Tegea, 81 

Temple, 421, 517 

Tent, 83 

Test, 33 

Testimony, 161, 387 

Thankfulness, 3-45 

Thanks, 281, 319 

Thanksgiving, 331, 363 

Theatre, 85-9, 71, 447 

Thebans, 159 

Thebes, 189, 217 

Theft, 53, 341 

Theoretical principles, 153 

Thermopylae, 183 

Thersites, 133, 309 

Thessaly, 301 

Thief, 31, 167 

Thighs, 103, 149, 509 

Thin, 161 

Things, inspiring fear, 273 

Thinking, 203, 315, 511 

Thirst and thirsty, 75, 149, 191, 321, 
353, 393, 531 

Thoughtless, 447 

Thoughts to have ready at hand, 537 

Thrasonides, 249 

Thrasymachus, 331 

Throne, 343 

Tight-rope walking, 81 

Tile, 369~71 

Timbers, 137 

Timidity, 341 

To-day, 429 

Toga praetetta, 263 

Toil, 305, 329 

Tokens, 87 

To-morrow, 429 

Tool, 413 

Topic. See Field of study. 

Topics of conversation, 517 

Topsails, 29 

Torch, 127; -bearer, 127 

Torture, 275, 808, 434~6 

Towel, 413 

Tragedians, 375 

Tragedy, 97 

Tragic stage, 139 

Trainer, 78, 101, 285, 507 

Training, 21, 75, 81-7, 101, 148~9, 
151, 221, 271, 283, 293, 325, 395, 

27, 507 
Training partners, 317, 325 
Traits, 423 


557 


INDEX 


Tranquil and ‘Tranquillity, 41, 91-3, 
108, 125, 317, 327, 359, 385, 417, 
511 


Transformation, 449 

Trappings, alien, 197 

Travel, 91, 181, 313 

Travellers, 275, 491 

Trembling, 515 

Trench, 195 

Tribune (officer), 99; (platform), 403 

Tribuneship, 265, 911 

Triumph, 213 

Trojans, 143~5, 337 

Troops, 165 

Troubled and Troubles, 341, 365, 507 

True, 29, 147 

Trumpet, 101, 509 

Trust, 431, 435 

Truth, 197, 247, 253, 477, 537 

Tune a lyre, 107 

Tunic, 283 

Turmoil, 321-7, 349, 483 

Tyrant, 145, 168, 167, 193, 223, 229, 
239, 278-7, 289-91, 345, 361, 365, 
371, 425; the Thirty Tyrants, 
299-301 


Ugliness, 5-9, 19, 21 
Ughy-snouted, 159 
Unconstrained, 41 
Unednueated, 489 
Unfair, 365, 501 
Unfeeling, 359 
Unfortunate, 143, 343 
Unfriendly, 359 
Unhampered, 41 
Unharmed, 363 


Unhappiness and Unhappy, 79, 161, 
2U0 


Unhindered, 147 

Uninstructed, 237, 325 

Union of men, 279 

Universe, 77, 1'4, 137, 187, 191-3, 
213-15, 253, 2: /. 363-5, 443-5, 449, 


507, 511; revelution of, 279. See 
also Cosmos, and World. 

Unjust, 503 

Unmannerly, 307 

Unnatural vice, 809. See also 


Perverts. 
Unreason, 415 
Unrestrained, 247 
Unseemly, 371, 383, 898 
Unsocial, 359 
Unspoiled, 173 


558 


Uuwillingness, 196 

Upsetting, 369 

Urine, 453-6 

Use of external impressions, 
Seo also Luepressions. 

Useful, $03 

Useless, 238 


445. 


Vainglorious, 197 

Value, 303, 313, 397 ff. 

Vegetable-dealer, 67, 
Creengrocer. 

Vegetables, 45, 323 

Vertigo, 35 

Vessel, 155, 433, 453-5 

Vexation, 69, 405, 507, 521 

Vice, 168, 455, 463, 493 

Victory, 39, 101, 225, 497, 5235; at 
Olympia, 507 

Vigils, 108, 305, 408-- 509 

Vine, 285 

Vinegar, 323, 453 

Vintage, 387 

Violent, 447 

Virtues, 35, 151, 221, 301, 387, 445, 
459, 463; miserable, 107 

Vivacity, 125 

Voice, 129 

Vomit, 123-5 

Voyage, 51, 69, 75, 91, 193, 489 

Vulgarity, 459, 521 

Vulgarizing the Mysteries, 127-9 


Wages, 191 
Wailing, 203 
Walk and Walking, 169, 197, 267 
Wall, 233, 341 
Wallet, 33, 149 
Walls, 185, 387 
Wand, 121 
Want, 227; of endurance, 455; of 
self-control, 455, See also Poverty. 
War, 91,123, 161, 169 
Warden of the city, 17 
Warmth, 133 
Washing, 155, 197, 467 
Watching over, 165 
Water, 93-7, 155, 321, 393, 413, 121, 
449, 457, 489; bowl of, 35; cold, 
101, 507; -drinker, 531 
Wax, 107 
Weak, 483 * 
Wealth and Wealthy, 53, 207, 2290, 
2638-5, 313, 355, 391, 485, 495, 
See also Rich, 


201, See also 


INDEX 


Weaving, 169, 187 

Weeping, 35, 191, 203, 495 

Weighing, 233 

Wench, 135, 251, 329, 435; frail, 33; 
pretty, 25, 45, 85, 273. See also 
Girl, and Afaid. 

Wheel, 435 

Whisper, 213 

Wicked, 111, 279, 333, 459 

Wife, 58-5, 111, 145-7, 155-7, 235, 
267, 279--88, 299, 301, 333, 348, 361, 
387, 391, 487-97, 505, 513 

Wild beast, 171, 285, 339, 391 

Wilderness, 277 

Will, 275-9, 397, 448, 449-51, 473, 
483, 493; of God, and one’s own, 
367; of Zeus, 373 

Wind, 133, 153, 193, 311 

Wine, 77, 85, (97), 101, 293, 433, 493, 
507, 529 

Winter, 213, 889; -’s training, 389 

Wisdom, 95, 129 

Wise, 145, 155, 247; man, 95, 277, 


451 

Wish, 327, 491, 495 

Wit, 163 

Wither, 391 

Within you, 221 

Withholding judgement, 29 

Witness, 161, 221, 237 

Wolf, 143, 287, 835 

Woman, 15-17, 55, 159, 185, 203, 295, 
391-3, 461, 525-7; handsome, 
491; pretty, 197 

Womb, 157 

Wool, 155, 531 

Word, 127-9, 285, 461, 533; 
omen, 213—~5 

Work hard, 83, 103-5, 509 

Working together, 287 

Workmen, 235 

World, 205, 463; below (= Hades), 


of ill 


227; 4 city-state, 201; ~con- 
flagration, 89. See also Cosmos, 
and Universe. 
Worm, 298, 421 
Worthy, man, 
things, 535 
Wounding, 335 
be 7, 108, 149, 509; -’s sand, 


Wrestling, 223, 351, 395; 
panion, 119; -school, 417 
Wretch, Wretched, and Wretchedness, 
151, 187 

Wrist, 101, 507 

Writing, 197, 201, 217, 227-9, 265, 
817-19, 325, 329, 845, 851; a book, 
159; implements, 157 

Wrong, 285, 377 


Aanthippe, 331, 848 
Xenocrates, 419 
err seas 467; quoted, 176-7, 257, 


Xerxes, 183 


393; of the best 


~COm- 


Yawning, 197 

Year, 133 

Yearning, 79, 387. See also Desire, 
and Hankering. 

Young, care of, 129; men, 181, 321 

Youth, 4438, 469 


Zeal, 537 

Zeno, 129, 181, 197, 239, 304, 379, 
393, 449, 521 

Zenodotus, 18 

Zeus, 15, 31-3, 39, 59, 638, 80-1, 89, 
129, 137, 148, 151, 159, 165, 191-3, 
205, 221-3, 275, 289, 327-9, 337, 
347, 373, 385-7, 449, 537; Father 
of all, 159, 189; God of Fathers, 
81; God of Kindred, 81 


559 


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY 
Ricuarp Cray & Sons, νυ, 
BUNGAY, SUFFOLK. 


THE LOEB CLASSICAL 
LIBRARY 


VOLUMES ALREADY PUBLISHED 








Latin Authors 


APULEIUS. THE GOLDEN ASS (METAMORPHOSES). 
W. Adlington (1566). Revised by 5. Gaselee. (4¢h Jp.) 


AULUS GELLIUS. J.C. Rolfe. 3 Vols. 
AUSONIUS. H. G. Evelyn White. 2 Vols, 


BOETHIUS: TRACTS and DE CONSOLATIONE 
PHILOSOPHIAE. Rev. H. F. Stewart and E. K. Rand. 
(2nd Lip.) 


CAESAR: CIVIL WARS. A.G, Peskett. (2 γα Zw.) 
CAESAR: GALLIC WAR. H. J. Edwards. (4¢4 Jip.) 


CATULLUS. F.W. Cornish; TIBULLUS. J. B. Postgate ; 
AND PERVIGILIUM VENERIS. J. W. Mackail. (δι 
mp.) 


CICERO: DE FINIBUS. H. Rackham, (22d Juz.) 
CICERO: DE OFFICHIS. Walter Miller. (37a Zz.) 


CICERO: DE SENECTUTE, DE AMICITIA, DE 
DIVINATIONE, W. A. Falconer. (22d 7ρε.) 

CICERO: DE REPUBLICA ano DE LEGIBUS. Clinton 
Keyes. 

CICERO: LETTERS TO ATTICUS. E. O. Winstedt. 
3 Vols.. (Vol. I. 424 ρι2., Vol. II. 3rd Zvi. and III, 2nd mp.) 


CICERO: LETTERS TO HIS FRIENDS. W. Glynn 
Williams. 3 Vols. Vols. I. and ΤΙ, 


CICERO: PHILIPPICS, W.C.A. Ker. 
Ι 


CICERO: PRO ARCIITA, POST REDITUM, DE DOMO, 
etc. N. H. Watts. 


CICERO: TUSCULAN DISPUTATIONS. J. E. King. 


CICERO: PRO CAECINA, PRO LEGE MANILIA, PRO 
CLUENTIO, PRO RABIRIO. H. Grose lodge. 


CICERO: VERRINE ORATIONS. L. LI. G. Greenwood. 
2Vols. Vol. I 


CLAUDIAN. M. Platnauer. 2 Vols. 


CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTINE. W. Watts (1631). 
2 Vols. (Vol. 1. 422 Jmp., Vol. 11. 37a Lr2p.) 


FRONTINUS: STRATAGEMS ann AQUEDUCTS. Ὁ, E. 
Bennett. 


FRONTO: CORRESPONDENCE. C.R. Haines. 2 Vols, 


HORACE: ODES anp EPODES. C. E. Bennett. (774 
Imp. revised.) 


HORACE: SATIRES, EPISTLES, “ARS POETICA. 
H, R. Fairclough. 


JUVENAL anp PERSIUS. G.G. Ramsay. (4¢4 Jp.) 


LIVY. B.O, Foster. 13 Vols. Vols. I.-IV. (Vol. 1, 2a 
Lump, reviseds) 


LUCAN. J. Ὁ. Duff. 
LUCRETIUS. W.H. Ὁ. Rouse. (2nd Zan.) 
MARTIAL. W.C. A. Ker. 2 Vols. (20d Imp, revised.) 


OVID: HEROIDES anp AMORES. Grant Showerman. 
(22d 792.) 


OVID: METAMORPHOSES. F.J. Miller, 2 Vols. (Vol. 
I. 4th Lmp., Vol. 11. 37a Litp.) 
OVID: TRISTIA anp EX PONTO. A. L. Wheeler. 


PETRONIUS. M. Heseltine; SENECA: APOCOLO.- 
CYNTOSIS. W. HI. Ὁ. Rouse. (4th /uip.) 


PLAUTUS. Paul Nixon. 5 Vols. Vols. I.-III.* (Vol. 1. 
3ra Lup.) 


PLINY: LETTERS. Melmoth’s Translation revised by 
W. M. L, Hutchinson, 2 Vols. (37d Zmp.) 


2 


PROPERTIUS. H.E. Butler. (37a 2942.) 
QUINTILIAN. H. E. Butler. 4 Vols. 
SALLUST. J. C. Rolfe. 


SCRIPTORES HISTORIAE AUGUSTAE. D. Magie. 
3 Vols. Vols. I. and II. 


SENECA: EPISTULAE MORALES. R. M. Gummere, 
3 Vols. (Vol. I. 22d Lip.) 


ob MORAL ESSAYS. J. W. Basore. 3 Vols. 
ol. I. 


SENECA: TRAGEDIES. F.J. Miller. 2 Vols. (2nd 722. 
vEVISED.) 


STATIUS. J. H. Mozley. 2 Vols. 


SUETONIUS. J. C. Rolfe. 2 Vols. (Vol. 1, 4th mp. 
revised, Vol. ΤΙ. 37a lap.) 


TACITUS: DIALOGUS. Sir Wm. Peterson and AGRI- 
COLA ann GERMANIA. Maurice Hutton. (37a /mp.) 


TACITUS: HISTORIES. C. H. Moore. 2 Vols. Vol. 1. 
TERENCE. John Sargeaunt. 2 Vols. (524 Zp.) 


VELLEIUS PATERCULUS anp RES GESTAE. F. W. 
Shipley. 


VIRGIL. H. R. Fairclough. 2 Vols. (Vol. 1. 6/2 Jump. 
Vol. If, 3rd Jad.) 


Greek Authors 
ACHILLES TATIUS., 5S. Gaselee. 


AENEAS TACTICUS: ASCLEPIODOTUS anp ONA- 
SANDER. The Illinois Greek Club. 


AESCHINES, C.D. Adams. 

AESCHYLUS. H. WeirSmyth. 2 Vols. (Vol. 1. 2nd Zp.) 
APOLLODORUS. Sir James G. Fiazer. 2 Vols. 
APOLLONIUS RIIODIUS. R.C. Seaton, 43,0 7». 


THE APOSTOLIC FATHERS. Kirsopp Lake. 2 Vols. : 
(Vol. I. 422 7ρεῤ., Vol. 11. 3rd Liip.) | 


APPIAN’S ROMAN IIISTORY. TIlorace White. 4 Vols. 
(Vols. I. and IV. 22d Lup.) 


ARISTOPHANES. Benjamin Bickley Rogers. 3 Vols. 
(2nd Imp.) Verse trans. 


ARISTOTLE: THE “ART” OF RHETORIC. J. H. 
Freese. 


ARISTOTLE: THE NICOMACHEAN ETHICS. Ἢ, 
Rackham. 


ARISTOTLE: POETICS anp LONGINUS. W. Hamilton 
Fyfe; DEMETRIUS ON STYLE. W. Rhys Roberts. 


ATHENAEUS: DEIPNOSOPHISTAE. Ὁ, B. Gulick, 7 
Vols. Vols. IT and ΤΊ, 


CALLIMACHUS anp LYCOPHRON. A. W. Mair: 
ARATUS. G. ΚΕ. Mair. 


CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA, Rev. G. W. Butterworth. 


DAPHNIS anp CHLOE. Thornley’s Translation revised by 


1 ae Edmonds; AND PARTHENIUS, S.Gaselee. (222d 
Up, 


DEMOSTHENES, DE CORONA ann DE FALSA 
LEGATIONE. C. A. Vince and J. H. Vince, 

DIO CASSIUS: ROMAN HISTORY. 

DIOGENES LAERTIUS. R. Ὁ. Hicks, 

EPICTETUS. W.A. Oldfather. 2 Vols. 

EURIPIDES. A. 5. Way. 4 Vols. (Vol. 1. ard Litp., 
Vols. II. and LV. 4¢4 Zmp., Vol. III. 2nd imp.) Verse trans. 


EUSEBIUS: ECCLESIASTICAL ILISTORY. Kirsopp 
Lake. 2 Vols. Vol. I. 


4 


Εν Cary. 9 Vols, 
2 Vols. 


GALEN: ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES. A. J. 
Brock. (22d Inp.) 


THE GREEK ANTHOLOGY. W, R. Paton. 5 Vols. 
(Vol. I. 37a /mp., Vol. IL. 2zal Lmp.) 


THE GREEK BUCOLIC POETS (THEOCRITUS, 
BION, MOSCHUS). J. M. Edmonds. (5¢2 νι. revised.) 

HERODOTUS. A. Ὁ, Godley. 4 Vols. (Vols. I-III, 
2nd Lp.) 

HESIOD ann THE HOMERIC HYMNS. Ii. 6, Evelyn 

_ White. (37d Jf.) 
HIPPOCRATES. W. H. 5. Jones and Εν Τὶ Withington. 
4 Vols. Vols. 1.-111, 

HOMER: ILIAD. A. T. Murray. 2 Vols. (Vol. I. and 
imp.) 

HOMER: ODYSSEY. A. T. Murray. 2 Vols. (37d 
Lnip. ) 


ISAEUS. E. W. Forster. 

ISOCRATES. G.B. Norlin. 3 Vols. Vol. 1. 
JOSEPHUS: H. St. J. Thackeray. 8 Vols. Vols. I.-IIL 
JULIAN. Wilmer Cave Wright. 3 Vols. 


LUCIAN. A. M. Harmon. 8 Vols. Vols. I-IV. (Vol. I. 
ara linp., Vol. 11, 2nd Jp.) 


LYRA GRAECA. J. M. Edmonds. 3 Vols. (Vol. I. 2nd 
Eda.) 

MARCUS AURELIUS. C. R. Haines. (22a /n2p.) 

MENANDER. F. G. Allinson. 

OPPIAN, COLLUTHIUS, TRYPHIODORUS, A. W. Mair. 


PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE. W. Ἡ. 5. 
Jones. καὶ Vols. and Companion Vol. Vols. 1. and IT. 


PHILOSTRATUS: THE LIFE OF APOLLONIUS OF 
TYANA. F. C. Conybeare. 2 Vols. (Vol. I. 3rd Jms., 
Vol. 11. 27a 7».) 

PHILOSTRATUS ann EUNAPIUS: LIVES OF THE 
SOPHISTS. Wilmer Cave Wright. 

PINDAR, Sir]. Ἐς Sandys. (421 lms.) 

PLATO: CHARMIDES, ALCIBIADES, HIPPARCHUS 
THE LOVERS, THEAGES, MINOS anp EPINOMIS. 
W. R. M. Lamb. 


3 


PIAS, LESSER HIPPIAS. H. N. Fowler. 

PLATO: EUTHYPHRO, APOLOGY, CRITO, PHAEDO, 
PHAEDRUS, HL. N. Fowler. (6¢2 mp.) 

PLATO: LACHES, PROTAGORAS, MENO, EUTILY- 
DEMUS. W. BR. M, Lamb. 

PLATO: LAWS. Rev. R. CG. Bury. 2 Vols. 


PLATO: LYSIS, SYMPOSIUM, GORGIAS, W. RK. Μ, 
Lamb. 


PLATO: STATESMAN, PHILEBUS. Ht. N. Fowler; 
ION. W. RB, M. Lamb. 

PLATO: THEAETETUS anp SOPIIIST, II. N. Fowler. 
(22d Limp.) 


PLUTARCH: MORALIA. F. C. Babbitt. 14 Vols. Vols, 
I. and Τί, 

PLUTARCH: THE PARALLEL LIVES. B. Perrin. 11 
Vols. (Vols. I., I. and VIT. 22d Ji.) 

POLYBIUS. W.R. Paton. 6 Vols. 


PROCOPIUS: HISTORY OF THE WARS. 4H. RB. 
Dewing. 7 Vols. I-V. 


QUINTUS SMYRNAEUS. A. 9. Way. Verse trans. 
SOPHOCLES. F. Storr. 2 Vols. (Vol. I. 542 Jug., Vol. 
ΤΠ, 37a Zig.) Verse trans. 


ST. fi aa LETTERS. R. J. Deferrari. 4 Vols. Vols. I. 
and ΤΙ. 


ST. JOHN DAMASCENE: BARLAAM AND IOASAPIH. 
Rev. G. R. Woodward and Harold Mattingly. 

STRABO: GEOGRAPHY. Horace L. Jones. 8 Vols. 
Vols. τ. 

THEOPHRASTUS: ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS. Sir 
Arthur Hort, Bart. 2 Vols. 

THUCYDIDES. C. F. Smith. 4 Vols. (Vol. I. 2nd ἤριξ. 
reursea.) 


XENOPHON: CYROPAEDIA. Walter Miller. 
(Vol. I. 22d Jip.) 


XENOPHON: HELLENICA, ANABASIS, APOLOGY 


AND SYMPOSIUM. C. L. Brownson and O. J. Todd. 
3 Vols. 


XENOPHON: MEMORABILIA anp OECONOMICUS. 
E. C, Marchant. 


XENOPHON: SCRIPTA MINORA. E. C. Marchant, 
6 


2 Vols. 


IN PREPARATION 





Greek Authors 
ARISTOTLE, METAPHYSICS, H. Tredennick. 


ARISTOTLE, ON THE MOTION AND PROGRESSION 
OF ANIMALS, E. S. Forster. 


ARISTOTLE, ORGANON, W. M. L. Hutchinson. 
ARISTOTLE, PHYSICS, Rev. P. Wicksteed, 


ARISTOTLE, POLITICS ann ATHENIAN CONSTI- 
TUTION, Edward Capps. 


ARRIAN, HIST. OF ALEXANDER anp INDICA, Rev. 
E. Iliffe Robson. 2 Vols. 


DEMOSTHENES, OLYNTHIACS, PHILIPPICS, LEP- 
TINES anp MINOR SPEECHES, J. H. Vince. 


DEMOSTHENES, MEIDIAS, ANDROTION, ARISTO- 
CRATES, TIMOCRATES, J. H. Vince. 


DEMOSTHENES, PRIVATE ORATIONS, G. M. Calhoun, 
DIO CHRYSOSTOM, W. E. Waters. 


GREEK IAMBIC AND ELEGIAC POETS ΑΝῸ THE 
ANACREONTEA, J. M. Edmonds. 


LYSIAS, W. R. M. Lamb. 

PAPYRI, A. 5. Hunt. 

PHILO, F. M. Colson and Rev. G. H. Whitaker. 
PHILOSTRATUS, IMAGINES, Arthur Fairbanks. 
PLATO, REPUBLIC, Paul Shorey. 


PLATO, TIMAEUS, CRITIAS, CLITOPHO, MENEXE- 
NUS, EPISTULAE, Rev. R. G. Bury. 


SEXTUS EMPIRICUS, Rev. R. G. Bury. 


THEOPHRASTUS, CHARACTERS, J. M. Edmonds; 
HERODES; CHOLIAMBIC FRAGMENTS, etc., A. D. 
Knox. 


Latin Authors 


AMMIANUS MARCELLINUS. J. C. Rolfe. 

BEDE, ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. 

CICERO, IN CATILINAM, PRO MURENA, PRO 
SULLA. B. L. Ullmann. 

CICERO, DE NATURA DEORUM. ILE. Rackham. 


CICERO, DE ORATORE, ORATOR, BRUTUS. Charles 
Stuttaford. 

CICERO, IN PISONEM, PRO SCAURO, PRO FONTEIO, 
PRO MILONE, etc. N. H. Watts. 


CICERO, PRO QUINCTIO, PRO ROSCIO AMERINO, 
PRO ROSCIO COMOEDO, CONTRA RULLUM. J. H. 
Freese, 


CICERO, PRO SEXTIO, IN VATINIUM, PRO CAELIO, 
PRO PROVINCIIS CONSULARIBUS, PRO BALRBO. 
D. Morrah. 


CORNELIUS NEPOS. J. C. Rolfe. 


ENNTIUS, LUCILIUS and other specimens of Old Latin, 
Ἐς; H. Warmington. 


FLORUS. E. S. Forster. 
MINUCIUS FELIX. W.C. A, Ker. 


OVID: ARS AMATORIA, REMEDIA AMORIS, εἰς, 
J. H. Mozley. 


OVID, FASTI. Sir J. G. Frazer. 
PLINY, NATURAL HISTORY. W.H.S. Jones and Τὰ F, 


Newman. 
ST. AUGUSTINE, MINOR WORKS. 
SIDONIUS, LETTERS. E. V. Arnold and W. B. Anderson. 
TACITUS, ANNALS. John Jackson. 
TERTULLIAN: APOLOGY. T. R. Glover. 
VALERIUS FLACCUS, A. F. Scholfield, 
VITRUVIUS, DE ARCHITECTURA. F. Granger. 


DESCRIPTIVE PROSPECTUS ON APPLICATION 
London “ - WILLIAM HEINEMANN 


New York - - - G. PUTNAM’S SONS 
8 














